 


World; Europe
Tillerson Warns Russia that Assad Era Is ‘oming to an End’

By GARDINER HARRIS 
1,220 words
11 April 2017
13:18
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

LUCCA, Italy —ecretary of State Rex W. Tillerson said on Tuesday that President Bashar al-Assad’ reign in Syria was “oming to an end”nd warned that Russia was at risk of becoming irrelevant in the Middle East by continuing to support him.

His remarks, five days after the United States carried out missile strikes in retaliation for a chemical attack for which Washington and its allies blamed Mr. Assad, illustrated the extent to which the Trump administration has, in just one week,  substantially rethought its approach to Syria’ future.

Before the April 4 chemical attack, the administration had appeared resigned to letting Mr. Assad’ government, backed by Russia and Iran, continue gaining the upper hand in a six-year-long civil war that has claimed at least 400,000 lives. Even after the attack, Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, said the administration would look “ather silly not acknowledging the political realities”f Mr. Assad’ grip on power.

But then, late last week, Mr. Trump declared that efforts to change Mr. Assad’ behavior had “ailed very dramatically.”r. Tillerson said that Mr. Assad could no longer remain in office, and that “teps are underway”or an international effort to remove him. On Tuesday, Mr. Tillerson seemed close to embracing the very policy the Obama administration had decided on: that Mr. Assad would eventually have to cede power, though the timeline remains unclear.

Mr. Trump himself has yet to clarify a welter of mixed signals emanating from Washington.

Mr. Tillerson’ remarks did little to end uncertainty about the Trump administration’ policies, which have cycled through acceptance of Mr. Assad’ long-term hold on power, the need for his immediate removal and something in between.

The remarks at a Group of 7 foreign ministers’eeting here in the Tuscany region of Italy came just before Mr. Tillerson flew to Moscow to meet with Russia’ president, Vladimir V. Putin.

Mr. Putin, at an appearance with President Sergio Mattarella of Italy, said on Tuesday that the chemical attack was “orth investigating thoroughly,”nd said Russia would formally ask the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons for an inquiry.

But Mr. Putin showed no signs of backing away from Mr. Assad. He likened the accusations against the Assad government —ade by Britain, France and other allies, along with the Trump administration —o the flawed intelligence that President George W. Bush’ administration cited in 2003 to justify the invasion of Iraq.

Mr. Putin insisted that the chemical attack had stemmed from anti-Assad rebel units.

“e have information from various sources that similar provocations —nd I have no other word for that —re being prepared in other regions of Syria, including southern suburbs of Damascus, where they intend to plant certain substances again and accuse official Syrian authorities of using them,”e said, without providing evidence for his claims.

Russia’ increasingly close alliance with Mr. Assad has allowed it to expand its military presence in the Middle East and has contributed to what is widely viewed as a renewed relevance in the region. Mr. Tillerson’ suggestion that Russia’ ties with Mr. Assad would diminish the country’ standing contradicts Moscow’ recent experience.

With his comments, Mr. Tillerson tried to untangle the confusing mix of signals from the Trump administration over whether the United States conducted the missile strike for humanitarian or national security reasons, and whether the Trump administration seeks an immediate change of government in Syria.

“e do not want the regime’ uncontrolled stockpile of chemical weapons to fall into the hands of \b ISIS\b0  or other terrorist groups who could and want to attack the United States or our allies,”e said at a brief news conference in Lucca, referring to the Islamic State. “or can we accept the normalization of the use of chemical weapons by other actors or countries in Syria or elsewhere.”

Shortly after speaking on Tuesday, Mr. Tillerson got up from a round wooden table in the Palazzo Ducale, where he was attending a summit meeting of foreign ministers from G-7 countries, and headed to the airport.

Mr. Tillerson said that the American priority in Syria and Iraq “emains the defeat of ISIS,”nd that Mr. Assad does not have a place in Syria’ future.

“ think it is clear to all of us that the reign of the Assad family is coming to an end,”he secretary of state said. “ut the question of how that ends, and the transition itself could be very important, in our view, to the durability, the stability inside of a unified Syria.”

“e are not presupposing how that occurs,”e said, but added that Mr. Assad’ continued use of chemical weapons had ended his legitimacy.

Despite the blunt criticism from Mr. Tillerson, the Italian foreign minister, Angelino Alfano, said there was “o consensus”n whether to toughen sanctions on Russia, as sought by his British counterpart, Boris Johnson.

Mr. Alfano said that any effort to isolate Russia “ould be wrong,”dding that the dominant position at the G-7 “as dialogue with Russia, not pushing Russia into a corner.”

The Italian government has long been uneasy about punishing Russia, which faces sanctions for its actions in eastern Ukraine, because many Italian companies have significant business interests there.

“ussia has the power to put pressure on Assad,”r. Alfano said.

Mr. Tillerson’ trip to Moscow is the first by a high-level Trump administration official, and the State Department is not expecting any breakthroughs with the Russian government over the myriad issues that increasingly divide the two governments, according to a senior American official.

Rather, the purpose of the trip is to make plain the areas of disagreement, said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity in keeping with State Department practice.

Even though Mr. Tillerson received a friendship award from Mr. Putin’ government when he served as chief executive of Exxon Mobil, he has taken a tough line on Russia since joining the administration. On Tuesday, he repeated his view that Russia was either incompetent or inattentive in its failure to secure and destroy Mr. Assad’ chemical weapons stockpiles.

“ut this distinction doesn’ much matter to the dead,”e said. “e can’ let this happen again.”

Mr. Tillerson said he hoped to convince the Russians that their continued support of Mr. Assad has become embarrassing for them.

“nd now Assad has made the Russians look not so good,”r. Tillerson said.

Follow Gardiner Harris on Twitter @GardinerHarris.Oleg Matsnev and Ivan Nechepurenko contributed reporting from Moscow.

* On Trump’ Syria Strategy, One Voice Is Missing: Trump’

* Feud Over Syria Missile Strike May Have an Upside for U.S. and Russia

* Tillerson, on Eve of Russia Trip, Takes Hard Line on Syria

* Worst Chemical Attack in Years in Syria; U.S. Blames Assad

* Dozens of U.S. Missiles Hit Air Base in Syria

* Syria Strike Puts U.S. Relationship With Russia at Risk

Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson, right, at a meeting in Lucca, Italy, on Tuesday of foreign ministers from Group of 7 countries. | Max Rossi/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170411ed4b003bh



Briefing
Syria, London, United Airlines: Your Tuesday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,108 words
11 April 2017
11:32
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•yrian leadership is nearing its end, Tillerson says.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said today that President Bashar al-Assad’ government is “oming to an end.” Before traveling to Moscow, Mr. Tillerson also said Russia risked becoming irrelevant in the Middle East by continuing to support Mr. Assad.

Russia has denounced the U.S. missile strikes on a Syrian air base last week, a feud that frees Washington and Moscow from the constraints of having to act like friends.

In the days since the attack, the Trump administration has spoken with multiple voices to explain its evolving policy. One voice has not been heard: that of President Trump himself.

•udge rejects Texas voter ID law.

A federal judge ruled on Monday that the state’ voter identification measure, one of the nation’ toughest, discriminates against black and Hispanic voters.

The ruling raises the possibility that election procedures in Texas could be put back under federal oversight.

•labama’ governor resigns over sex scandal.

Facing impeachment hearings, Gov. Robert Bentley stepped down and pleaded guilty to two misdemeanor charges.

He had previously acknowledged making sexually charged remarks to a top aide.

•ttacks reveal a new strategy for ISIS.

Suicide bombings at two churches on Sunday suggest that Islamic State militants have found a new target in their sectarian war: the Christian communities of Egypt.

•hree dead in California school shooting.

Two adults and one student were killed, apparently in a murder-suicide, in an elementary school classroom in San Bernardino, Calif.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

Today’ show examines how a mild-mannered ophthalmologist became the ruler of Syria.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•Wells Fargo plans to claw back an additional $75 million in compensation from the two executives on whom it pinned most of the blame for a scandal over fraudulent accounts.

• United Airlines passenger, screaming and bloodied, was dragged off an overbooked flight in Chicago after he refused to leave the plane. Outrage ensued.

•n a sign of how the auto industry’ future is being reimagined, the electric-car maker Tesla passed General Motors as America’ most valuable automaker.

•.S. stocks were up on Monday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

•f a glass of milk is part of your morning routine, take note: Nut milks pale in comparison with cow’ milk when it comes to nutrients.

•riting a kiss-off letter to your boss may do wonders for you. But remember to press delete, not send.

•hopped parsley and mint lift this recipe for seared pork cutlets with green-garlic salsa verde.

Noteworthy

•leaning up the Chesapeake Bay.

In today’ 360 video, learn how proposed budget cuts to the cleanup effort could affect a larger ecosystem.

•ondon, an international capital in limbo.

Our reporter visited the city she called home for 15 years and found that, after the “rexit”eferendum, the British capital’ future is far from certain.

•New York Times wins three Pulitzers.

The Times collected journalism’ highest honor for breaking news photography, feature writing and international reporting. Here are the winning pieces.

The New York Daily News and ProPublica shared the prize for public service.

•artisan writing you shouldn’ miss.

Why it’ O.K. that President Trump has no “octrine,”nd the case for liberals to defend the Second Amendment. We scoured the internet for political writing from the right and the left that you might not have seen.

•an this man revive the Yankees?

Brian Cashman has led the team to four World Series titles as its general manager, but it has appeared in only one playoff game in the past four seasons. (Promisingly, the Yankeeswon Monday’ home opener.)

•est of late-night TV.

On Monday’ “Jimmy Kimmel Live,” John Stamos and Bob Saget, the former stars of “ull House,”emembered Don Rickles, the famed insult comedian who died last week.

We also look at how Stephen Colberthas made the “he Late Show”reat again.

Back Story

“ouston, we’e had a problem.”

The crew of Apollo 13, launched from Kennedy Space Center in Florida on this day in 1970, was 200,000 miles above Earth when one of the craft’ oxygen tanks exploded.

The blast either ruptured a line or caused a valve on the other tank to leak. Then the warning lights for the fuel cells began flashing, indicating that the electricity supply was in jeopardy.

The mission was supposed to be NASA’ third crewed moon landing. The “roblem”ame two days in, crippling the command module’ supply of electricity, light and water.

The three-person crew was able to make a series of decisions and improvise repairs to the carbon dioxide removal system that enabled them to use the lunar module as a “lifeboat”o safely return to Earth on April 17.

Although the mission was aborted and the crew never landed on the moon, their heroics —nd their rescue —esulted in the mission being classified as a “successful failure.”

The flight remains the record for the farthest humans have ever traveled from Earth, and the response to the near disaster was deemed “NASA’ finest hour.”

Inyoung Kang contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

A reflection of visitors on the highest viewing platform at the top of the Shard tower, overlooking London. The British capital’ future as an international hub is thrown into doubt by “rexit.” Sergey Ponomarev for The New York Times | “ have decided it is time for me to step down as Alabama’ governor,”obert Bentley announced in Montgomery on Monday. | Marvin Gentry/Reuters | A prayer service in San Bernardino, Calif., after a gunman walked into an elementary school on Monday and opened fire. | Jae C. Hong/Associated Press | Photos from a video taken by a United Airlines passenger showing another passenger being dragged off a flight. | Audra D. Bridges, via Associated Press | The Apollo 13 crew on a short parade in Manhattan, on June 3, 1970. | William E. Sauro/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170411ed4b002ut



EDITORIAL
Editorial Desk; SECTA
Not One Syria Policy but Many

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
723 words
11 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
30
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A weekend of official explanations for President Trump's airstrikes on a Syrian air base has only deepened the confusion over his intentions, next steps and the legal basis for his unilateral use of force in the middle of that complicated, intractable civil war. The administration will have to do better than this.

Presidents have an obligation to explain military operations to the American people and the world, and, when possible, most begin making their argument well before they take action. In Mr. Trump's case, the need for clarity is even greater given that the attack on Thursday, in retaliation for President Bashar al-Assad's use of chemical weapons on civilians, was a reversal of the position he campaigned on just months ago.

Now that Mr. Trump has ordered a strike against the Assad government, how far is he prepared to go to end the six-year-old civil war? What does the operation say about his willingness to use force beyond Syria? One troublesome answer may be found in Secretary of State Rex Tillerson's comments on Monday. ''We rededicate ourselves to holding to account any and all who commit crimes against the innocents anywhere in the world,'' he said on a trip to a World War II memorial in Italy, a trip aimed at rallying allies and Russia around a strategy to end the Syrian war.

His words could foreshadow an extraordinary expansion of American intervention. That would defy Mr. Trump's campaign pledge to put ''America First.''

These and other comments added to confusion over whether the administration's focus will be on ousting Mr. Assad or on sticking with Mr. Trump's stated priority of defeating the Islamic State. Mr. Tillerson, on CBS's ''Face the Nation'' on Sunday, said ''we believe that the first priority is the defeat of ISIS.'' Only after that threat is reduced or eliminated would he turn to a cease-fire process leading to elections so the Syrians could decide Mr. Assad's fate, he said.

The American ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley, suggested Mr. Assad's ouster would have to come before a political transition. ''There's not any sort of option where a political solution is going to happen with Assad at the head of the regime,'' she said on CNN. On NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' she said there could be other priorities, like getting Iran out of Syria, which would put the United States in direct conflict with one of Mr. Assad's main backers.

H. R. McMaster, the national security adviser, tried to paper over the differences on Fox News, but while he put more emphases on defeating ISIS, he also said the administration might take further action against Mr. Assad including for the use of conventional weapons.

There is also confusion over the strikes' legality. Whether they were a one-off attack designed to deter chemical weapons use or the start of a larger operation, Mr. Trump has failed to make a compelling legal case, or obtain proper international and congressional authorization, for attacking a sovereign nation.

The White House issued a statement suggesting the attack complied with international law because Mr. Assad violated an international chemical weapons treaty and caused severe humanitarian distress. But Mr. Trump did not seek authorization from the Security Council to use force, as the United Nations Charter requires, or have a valid reason for acting in self-defense.

The statement also suggested Mr. Trump's action complied with American law because of his powers under Article II of the Constitution to defend national interests by force. President Barack Obama used the same vague argument to justify the Libya intervention of 2011, though many legal experts questioned it then and still do.

Too often in recent years, presidents have taken military action without the authorization of Congress, which shares war-making responsibilities with the president. It is essential that Congress consider a new authorization for the use of military force in Syria both to demonstrate the need for legal justification for military action and to ensure a full vetting of Mr. Trump's intentions there.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170411ed4b0006b



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Iran Joins Russia in Word on Syria, but Not in Deed

By THOMAS ERDBRINK 
977 words
11 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

TEHRAN -- The punitive American missile strike on Syria for the chemical weapons attack a week ago brought Syria's most important backers, Russia and Iran, publicly closer together -- whether the Iranians want to be or not.

Far from accepting the Trump administration's version of the chemical weapons assault, the Iranians joined the Russians in rejecting it and doubling down on their expressions of support for President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.

Nonetheless, Iran and Russia do not see eye to eye on everything in a relationship shaped by mistrust, a legacy of Iranian resentment of Russia's historical expansionism and Soviet-era attempts at domination.

Iranian political analysts say there has been no sign that Iran is prepared to take one key step on Syria: granting Russia's air force full access to Iranian air bases. Such a move would greatly increase Russia's firepower and maneuvering space in Syria, and it would pose a new challenge for United States aircraft in the region.

It is impossible to know what Iranian leaders really think about who was responsible for the deadly chemical weapons assault last Tuesday in the northern Syrian town of Khan Sheikhoun, which the United States says was carried out by Syrian warplanes. As victims of such attacks during the Iran-Iraq war, the Iranians like to assert their moral authority on that subject, and they might be expected to be furious with Mr. Assad.

But like Russia, Iranian leaders are increasingly embedded with Mr. Assad, seeing him as a vital strategic ally after more than six years of defending his government in Syria's war. They also do not want to see a greater military entanglement with the United States.

So in their public reaction to the retaliatory American missile strike early Friday in Syria, Iranian leaders have done little except condemn it and join Russia in calling for an international investigation. And like Russia, they suggested that terrorist groups -- as they call Mr. Assad's opponents -- had used chemical weapons on their own people to provoke a strike by the United States.

On Monday, Russia's Foreign Ministry said in a statement that the American missile strike was an aggressive act against a sovereign state and violated international law. The statement was issued after a telephone call between Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov and his Iranian counterpart, Mohammad Javad Zarif.

But Iranian political analysts knowledgeable about government thinking are also interpreting the missile strike as only a symbolic show of force by President Trump, who often portrayed President Barack Obama as indecisive on Syria.

''Trump wants to flex his muscles and show that he is different from Obama,'' said Farshad Ghorbanpour, an analyst close to President Hassan Rouhani of Iran. ''But we don't think he will continue bombing in Syria. This is just a knee-jerk reaction.''

On his Twitter account, Mr. Zarif compared the strike to the fallacious case made by the George W. Bush administration in 2003 that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction and therefore needed to be attacked.

US aids Saddam's use of CW against Iran in 80's; then resorts to military force over bogus CW allegations: 1st in 2003 and now in Syria. 2/3 -- Javad Zarif (@JZarif) April 7, 2017

On Sunday, Mr. Zarif posted an image of a Foreign Ministry document concluding that ''extremist organizations, particularly al-Nusra and ISIS,'' are the only ones possessing chemical weapons.

Not only have those groups used such weapons in Syria and Iraq before, the document said, but ''they had a clear -- and desperate -- motive to use them, given that the tragedy in Khan Sheikhoun took place only days after the Trump administration publicly abandoned the U.S. policy of regime change in Syria.''

Using satellite tracking and other surveillance tools, the Pentagon said it had concluded that Syrian warplanes dumped outlawed chemical bombs most likely containing sarin nerve agent on Khan Sheikhoun. Acting on Mr. Trump's orders, American warships launched Tomahawk missiles that struck the Al Shayrat airfield, where the planes were based -- the first direct attack on Mr. Assad's forces by the United States since the war began.

Russia responded by suspending an agreement with the United States aimed at preventing accidental encounters between the two in aircraft missions over Syria. The missile strike also presented Iran with an opportunity to give Russia more latitude in using Iranian bases. The Iranians conspicuously said nothing about it.

Russia flies some planes out of airports in government-controlled Syria, but its long-range bombers operate out of Russia, which has limited its abilities to strike Mr. Assad's opponents.

''Whenever we deem it necessary, we will give them the use of our air bases,'' said Hamidreza Taraghi, a hard-line political analyst who has close relations with Iran's highest leaders. Iran has occasionally been granting Russia access to the Shahid Nojeh air base in Hamadan, but not unlimited use.

When Russia announced last year that it had been using the Iranian base, becoming the first foreign power since the 1979 Islamic Revolution to have a military presence in Iran, Iranian hard-liners objected on what was clearly a sensitive issue for them.

Iranians say Russia has often betrayed their country in their long history together. Use of the base is now decided case by case.

It remains unclear at best whether that will change, bringing the countries closer together and dragging them even deeper into the Syrian war.

''We are growing closer and closer to the Russians in our cooperation in fighting terrorism,'' Mr. Taraghi said. ''That's all I can say.''

Iranian worshipers chanting anti-American slogans during a prayer ceremony at the University of Tehran on Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY VAHID SALEMI/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170411ed4b00057



Editorial
Opinion
On Syria, an Administration in Disagreement With Itself

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
737 words
11 April 2017
02:45
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

A weekend of official explanations for President Trump’ airstrikes on a Syrian air base has only deepened the confusion over his intentions, next steps and the legal basis for his unilateral use of force in the middle of that complicated, intractable civil war. The administration will have to do better than this.

Presidents have an obligation to explain military operations to the American people and the world, and, when possible, most begin making their argument well before they take action. In Mr. Trump’ case, the need for clarity is even greater given that the attack on Thursday, in retaliation for President Bashar al-Assad’ use of chemical weapons on civilians, was a reversal of the position he campaigned on just months ago.

Now that Mr. Trump has ordered a strike against the Assad government, how far is he prepared to go to end the six-year-old civil war? What does the operation say about his willingness to use force beyond Syria? One troublesome answer may be found in Secretary of State Rex Tillerson’ comments on Monday. “e rededicate ourselves to holding to account any and all who commit crimes against the innocents anywhere in the world,”e said on a trip to a World War II memorial in Italy, a trip aimed at rallying allies and Russia around a strategy to end the Syrian war.

His words could foreshadow an extraordinary expansion of American intervention. That would defy Mr. Trump’ campaign pledge to put “merica First.”

These and other comments added to confusion over whether the administration’ focus will be on ousting Mr. Assad or on sticking with Mr. Trump’ stated priority of defeating the Islamic State. Mr. Tillerson, on CBS’ “ace the Nation”n Sunday, said “e believe that the first priority is the defeat of ISIS.”nly after that threat is reduced or eliminated would he turn to a cease-fire process leading to elections so the Syrians could decide Mr. Assad’ fate, he said.

The American ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley, suggested Mr. Assad’ ouster would have to come before a political transition. “here’ not any sort of option where a political solution is going to happen with Assad at the head of the regime,”he said on CNN. On NBC’ “eet the Press,”he said there could be other priorities, like getting Iran out of Syria, which would put the United States in direct conflict with one of Mr. Assad’ main backers.

H. R. McMaster, the national security adviser, tried to paper over the differences on Fox News, but while he put more emphases on defeating ISIS, he also said the administration might take further action against Mr. Assad including for the use of conventional weapons.

There is also confusion over the strikes’egality. Whether they were a one-off attack designed to deter chemical weapons use or the start of a larger operation, Mr. Trump has failed to make a compelling legal case, or obtain proper international and congressional authorization, for attacking a sovereign nation.

The White House issued a statement suggesting the attack complied with international law because Mr. Assad violated an international chemical weapons treaty and caused severe humanitarian distress. But Mr. Trump did not seek authorization from the Security Council to use force, as the United Nations Charter requires, or have a valid reason for acting in self-defense.

The statement also suggested Mr. Trump’ action complied with American law because of his powers under Article II of the Constitution to defend national interests by force. President Barack Obama used the same vague argument to justify the Libya intervention of 2011, though many legal experts questioned it then and still do.

Too often in recent years, presidents have taken military action without the authorization of Congress, which shares war-making responsibilities with the president. It is essential that Congress consider a new authorization for the use of military force in Syria both to demonstrate the need for legal justification for military action and to ensure a full vetting of Mr. Trump’ intentions there.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

President Trump on Monday at the White House. | Al Drago/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170411ed4b000p1



world
Attacks Show  ISIS ’ew Plan: Divide Egypt by Killing Christians

By DECLAN WALSH 
1,408 words
10 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

CAIRO —rief and rage flowed through Egypt ’ Christian community on Monday as tear-streaked mourners buried the victims of the coordinated Palm Sunday church bombings  that killed 45 people in two cities. The cabinet declared that a state of emergency was in effect. A newspaper was pulled off newsstands after it criticized the government.

It was just the reaction the Islamic State  wanted.

Routed from its stronghold on the coast of Libya, besieged in Iraq and wilting under intense pressure in Syria, the militant extremist group urgently needs to find a new battleground where it can start to proclaim victory again. The devastating suicide attacks on Sunday in the heart of the Middle East’ largest Christian community suggested it has found a solution: the cities of mainland Egypt .

Since December, the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0 , has signaled its intent to wage a sectarian war in Egypt by slaughtering Christians in their homes, businesses and places of worship. Several factors lie behind the vicious campaign, experts say: a desire to weaken Egypt’ authoritarian leader, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi ; a need to gain a foothold in Egypt beyond the remote Sinai deserts where jihadists have been battling the army for years; and a desire to foment a vicious sectarian conflict that would tear at Egypt’ delicate social fabric and destabilize the state.

“here’ a significant propaganda factor to this,”aid Mokhtar Awad , a militancy expert at George Washington University . “ISIS wants to show that it can attack one of the Arab world’ most populous countries.”

Few believe it can succeed. The sheer demographics of Egypt mitigate any Iraq-type success, in which the Islamic State fed off deep tensions between Sunnis and Shiites. Christians make up just 10 percent of Egypt’ people, who are mostly Sunni Muslims, and despite deep-rooted prejudices, there is no popular support for a bloody pogrom.

Yet for now, unless the Egyptian government can bridge its wide security gaps, Egypt’ Christians seem likely to bear the brunt of the Islamic State’ ambitions —nd the fight could have broader consequences for civil liberties and political freedoms in a country where both are already in short supply.

A line of wooden coffins borne by Boy Scouts, and marked with the word “artyr,”iled through the doors of an ancient monastery on the outskirts of Alexandria on Monday. A mournful drumbeat accompanied the procession. The coffins held the remains of some of the 17 people killed on Sunday in a blast at the gates of St. Mark’ Cathedral, the historic seat of Christendom in Egypt. It was perhaps the most ambitious of the two attacks because the Coptic patriarch, Tawadros II, had been inside the church at the time.

The scene also stepped up pressure on Mr. Sisi, who counts Christian leaders among his staunchest allies.

His response, the imposition of a three-month state of emergency, was met with a national shrug. Egyptians have lived under a state of emergency for 44 of the past 50 years, and Mr. Sisi already has vast powers  that have led to the imprisonment of his rivals, mass trials and unfettered surveillance of enemies.

This state of emergency, due to be approved by the rubber-stamp Parliament on Tuesday, will probably entrench his autocratic tendencies. Under the emergency law, suspected terrorists will be channeled through special courts with a low evidence threshold and no appeals process, and which operate entirely under Mr. Sisi’ control.

Additionally, the president will have the power to censor newspapers and intercept electronic communication, a provision that his supporters have suggested could be used to crack down on critics on social media, one of the last arenas of relatively unrestricted speech in Egypt.

“e’e likely to see people who tweet or use Facebook for political purposes, or to call for protests, being tried in these courts,”aid Mai El-Sadany, a nonresident fellow for legal and judicial analysis at the Tahrir Institute for Middle East Policy.

Apparently foreshadowing such a crackdown, the government on Monday blocked distribution of Al Bawaba, a normally pro-state newspaper that blamed the Interior Ministry for security lapses in the church bombings in Alexandria and Tanta, a city in the Nile Delta. Parliament approved a law tightening the criminal code, while the speaker, Ali Abdel Aal, told lawmakers that the emergency laws would be applied to media outlets and social media.

The harsh reaction is an affirmation of sorts for the Islamic State, which until recently struggled to have any impact in Egypt outside of North Sinai. There, the fight is between the army and a local, tribal-rooted militant group that affiliated with the Islamic State  in 2014. But it seems that the latest violence is being orchestrated through a separate network inside Egypt —ne with direct links to the main Islamic State hubs in Syria and Iraq.

Mr. Awad, the militancy expert, said he had found evidence that Egyptian militants in the upper echelons of the central Islamic State leadership had established the network of cells in Egypt’ main cities. “e have seen an infrastructure of cells with connections”o the Islamic State’ strongholds in Raqqa, Syria, and Mosul, Iraq, he said.

Some cells are based in Cairo, he said, but many others have fled to the relative safety of the Nile Delta, where they can more easily hide and store weapons in Egypt’ sprawling, lush agricultural heartland.

The violent campaign against Christians, Mr. Awad said, was prompted by the Islamic State’ losses elsewhere —ost notably their ouster from the Libyan city of Surt  last year, and the continuing American-backed operation in Mosul. The first salvo was a suicide bombing of a Coptic church in Cairo  in December that killed 28 people, and which was supported by slick propaganda videos distributed on the internet. Then the Islamic State’ Egyptian channels started buzzing with calls to execute Christians.

“ think it was a calculated escalation,”r. Awad said.

The Christian minority has long suffered from casual bigotry that, its members say, hinders their access to jobs and universities and has frequently erupted into mob violence in some rural areas. But concerted violence of the kind perpetrated by the Islamic State on Sunday was unknown.

Mr. Sisi has tried to reassure jittery Christians with the new emergency laws and by stepping up security at churches across the country. In a rare move, soldiers have been deployed to help the police, and armored vehicles lined the streets of Alexandria on Monday.

He also needs to move fast to prop up a modest upswing in Egypt’ battered tourist industry this year and to reassure Catholics before a planned visit by Pope Francis on April 28. On Monday, Israel closed a border crossing with Egypt, warning of an “mminent”ttack by militants based in Sinai.

Yet experts say that Mr. Sisi’ greatest problem may lie in reforming his own security agencies, which have ruthlessly stifled Egypt’ political opposition in recent years yet had limited success in penetrating the new Islamist cells that threaten Egypt’ cities —r, at least, in stopping them from carrying out coordinated attacks on churches. In Tanta, the scene of one of the two attacks on Sunday, worshipers said a bomb had been found and disabled only a week earlier.

Mr. Sisi, a former general, knows how tough such work can be: One of his last jobs before coming to power in 2013 was as the country’ military intelligence chief.

PHOTOS: A funeral procession on Monday for victims of a church bombing on Sunday in Alexandria, Egypt. The attack, in the country’ historic seat of Christendom, killed 17. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AMR ABDALLAH DALSH/REUTERS); Grief-stricken relatives and other mourners at the funeral for the victims of the Alexandria bombing. The Coptic patriarch, Tawadros II, had been inside the church when it was attacked. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALY FAHIM/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

* Egypt Declares State of Emergency, as Attacks Undercut Promise of Security 

* In a Shift, Trump Will Move Egypt’ Rights Record to the Sidelines 

* Targeted by \b ISIS\b0 , Egyptian Christians Flee Violence 

* Widening Crackdown, Egypt Shutters Group That Treats Torture Victims 

* Militants Attack Police Checkpoint in Sinai, and \b ISIS\b0  Is Suspected 

* Cathedral Bombing in Cairo Leaves Egypt Alarmed, and Its President Scrambling 

Document INHT000020170411ed4a00004



opinion
On Syria, an Administration in Disagreement With Itself; Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
724 words
10 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

A weekend of official explanations for President Trump’ airstrikes on a Syrian air base has only deepened the confusion over his intentions, next steps and the legal basis for his unilateral use of force in the middle of that complicated, intractable civil war. The administration will have to do better than this.

Presidents have an obligation to explain military operations to the American people and the world, and, when possible, most begin making their argument well before they take action. In Mr. Trump’ case, the need for clarity is even greater given that the attack on Thursday, in retaliation for President Bashar al-Assad’ use of chemical weapons on civilians, was a reversal of the position he campaigned on just months ago.

Now that Mr. Trump has ordered a strike against the Assad government, how far is he prepared to go to end the six-year-old civil war? What does the operation say about his willingness to use force beyond Syria? One troublesome answer may be found in Secretary of State Rex Tillerson’ comments on Monday. “e rededicate ourselves to holding to account any and all who commit crimes against the innocents anywhere in the world,”e said on a trip to a World War II memorial in Italy, a trip aimed at rallying allies and Russia around a strategy to end the Syrian war.

His words could foreshadow an extraordinary expansion of American intervention. That would defy Mr. Trump’ campaign pledge to put “merica First.”

These and other comments added to confusion over whether the administration’ focus will be on ousting Mr. Assad or on sticking with Mr. Trump’ stated priority of defeating the Islamic State. Mr. Tillerson, on CBS’ “ace the Nation”n Sunday, said “e believe that the first priority is the defeat of ISIS.”nly after that threat is reduced or eliminated would he turn to a cease-fire process leading to elections so the Syrians could decide Mr. Assad’ fate, he said.

The American ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley, suggested Mr. Assad’ ouster would have to come before a political transition. “here’ not any sort of option where a political solution is going to happen with Assad at the head of the regime,”he said on CNN. On NBC’ “eet the Press,”he said there could be other priorities, like getting Iran out of Syria, which would put the United States in direct conflict with one of Mr. Assad’ main backers.

H. R. McMaster, the national security adviser, tried to paper over the differences on Fox News, but while he put more emphases on defeating ISIS, he also said the administration might take further action against Mr. Assad including for the use of conventional weapons.

There is also confusion over the strikes’egality. Whether they were a one-off attack designed to deter chemical weapons use or the start of a larger operation, Mr. Trump has failed to make a compelling legal case, or obtain proper international and congressional authorization, for attacking a sovereign nation.

The White House issued a statement suggesting the attack complied with international law because Mr. Assad violated an international chemical weapons treaty and caused severe humanitarian distress. But Mr. Trump did not seek authorization from the Security Council to use force, as the United Nations Charter requires, or have a valid reason for acting in self-defense.

The statement also suggested Mr. Trump’ action complied with American law because of his powers under Article II of the Constitution to defend national interests by force. President Barack Obama used the same vague argument to justify the Libya intervention of 2011, though many legal experts questioned it then and still do.

Too often in recent years, presidents have taken military action without the authorization of Congress, which shares war-making responsibilities with the president. It is essential that Congress consider a new authorization for the use of military force in Syria both to demonstrate the need for legal justification for military action and to ensure a full vetting of Mr. Trump’ intentions there.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document INHT000020170411ed4a0000k



World; Middle East
Iran Joins Russia in Denouncing U.S. Strike on Syria, but Stops There

By THOMAS ERDBRINK 
982 words
10 April 2017
23:13
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

TEHRAN —he punitive American missile strike on  Syria for the chemical weapons attack a week ago brought Syria’ most important backers, Russia and Iran, publicly closer together —hether the Iranians want to be or not.

Far from accepting the Trump administration’ version of the chemical weapons assault, the Iranians joined the Russians in rejecting it and doubling down on their expressions of support for President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.

Nonetheless, Iran and Russia do not see eye to eye on everything in a relationship shaped by mistrust, a legacy of Iranian resentment of Russia’ historical expansionism and Soviet-era attempts at domination.

Iranian political analysts say there has been no sign that Iran is prepared to take one key step on Syria: granting Russia’ air force full access to Iranian air bases. Such a move would greatly increase Russia’ firepower and maneuvering space in Syria, and it would pose a new challenge for United States aircraft in the region.

It is impossible to know what Iranian leaders really think about who was responsible for the deadly chemical weapons assault last Tuesday in the northern Syrian town of Khan Sheikhoun, which the United States says was carried out by Syrian warplanes. As victims of such attacks during the Iran-Iraq war, the Iranians like to assert their moral authority on that subject, and they might be expected to be furious with Mr. Assad.

But like Russia, Iranian leaders are increasingly embedded with Mr. Assad, seeing him as a vital strategic ally after more than six years of defending his government in Syria’ war. They also do not want to see a greater military entanglement with the United States.

So in their public reaction to the retaliatory American missile strike early Friday in Syria, Iranian leaders have done little except condemn it and join Russia in calling for an international investigation. And like Russia, they suggested that terrorist groups —s they call Mr. Assad’ opponents —ad used chemical weapons on their own people to provoke a strike by the United States.

On Monday, Russia’ Foreign Ministry said in a statement that the American missile strike was an aggressive act against a sovereign state and violated international law. The statement was issued after a telephone call between Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov of Russia and his Iranian counterpart, Mohammad Javad Zarif.

But Iranian political analysts knowledgeable about government thinking are also interpreting the missile strike as only a symbolic show of force by Mr. Trump, who often portrayed President Barack Obama as indecisive on Syria.

“rump wants to flex his muscles and show that he is different from Obama,”aid Farshad Ghorbanpour, an analyst close to President Hassan Rouhani of Iran. “ut we don’ think he will continue bombing in Syria. This is just a knee-jerk reaction.”

On his Twitter account, Mr. Zarif compared the strike to the fallacious case made by the George W. Bush administration in 2003 that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction and therefore needed to be attacked.

US aids Saddam's use of CW against Iran in 80's; then resorts to military force over bogus CW allegations: 1st in 2003 and now in Syria. 2/3 —avad Zarif (@JZarif) April 7, 2017

On Sunday, Mr. Zarif posted an image of a Foreign Ministry document concluding that “xtremist organizations, particularly al-Nusra and ISIS,”re the only ones possessing chemical weapons.

Not only have those groups used such weapons in Syria and Iraq before, the document said, but “hey had a clear —nd desperate —otive to use them, given that the tragedy in Khan Sheikhoun took place only days after the Trump administration publicly abandoned the U.S. policy of regime change in Syria.”

Using satellite tracking and other surveillance tools, the Pentagon said it had concluded that Syrian warplanes dumped outlawed chemical bombs most likely containing sarin nerve agent on Khan Sheikhoun. Acting on Mr. Trump’ orders, American warships launched Tomahawk missiles that struck the Al Shayrat airfield, where the warplanes were based —he first direct attack on Mr. Assad’ forces by the United States since the war began.

Russia responded by suspending an agreement with the United States aimed at preventing accidental encounters between the two in aircraft missions over Syria. The missile strike also presented Iran with an opportunity to give Russia more latitude in using Iranian bases. The Iranians conspicuously said nothing about it.

Russia flies some planes out of airports in government-controlled Syria, but its long-range bombers operate out of Russia, a disadvantage that has limited its abilities to strike Mr. Assad’ opponents.

“henever we deem it necessary, we will give them the use of our air bases,”aid Hamidreza Taraghi, a hard-line political analyst who has close relations with Iran’ highest leaders. Iran has occasionally been granting Russia access to the Shahid Nojeh air base in Hamadan, but not unlimited use.

When Russia announced last year that it had been using the Iranian base, becoming the first foreign power since the 1979 Islamic Revolution to have a military presence in Iran, Iranian hard-liners objected on what was clearly a sensitive issue for them.

Iranians say Russia has often betrayed their country in their long history together. Use of the base is now decided case by case.

It remains unclear at best whether that will change, bringing the countries closer together and dragging them even deeper into the Syrian war.

“e are growing closer and closer to the Russians in our cooperation in fighting terrorism,”r. Taraghi said. “hat’ all I can say.”

Iranian worshipers chanting anti-American slogans during a prayer ceremony at the University of Tehran campus on Friday. | Vahid Salemi/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170410ed4a007vd



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Deal on Syria's Chemical Weapons Comes Back to Haunt Obama

By PETER BAKER 
1,440 words
10 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- When it came time to make his case for the judgment of history, President Barack Obama had a ready rebuttal to one of the most cutting critiques of his time in office.

Although friends and foes alike faulted him for not following through on his threat to retaliate when Syria gassed its own people in 2013, Mr. Obama would counter that he had actually achieved a better result through an agreement with President Bashar al-Assad to surrender all of his chemical weapons.

After last week, even former Obama aides assume that he will have to rethink that passage in his memoir. More than 80 civilians were killed in what Western analysts called a sarin attack by Syrian forces -- a chilling demonstration that the agreement did not succeed. In recent days, former aides have lamented what they considered one of the worst moments of the Obama presidency and privately conceded that his legacy would suffer.

''If the Syrian government carried out the attack and the agent was sarin, then clearly the 2013 agreement didn't succeed in its objective of eliminating Bashar's C.W.,'' or chemical weapons, said Robert Einhorn, who was the State Department special adviser for nonproliferation and arms control under Mr. Obama before the agreement. ''Either he didn't declare all his C.W. and kept some hidden in reserve, or he illegally produced some sarin after his stock was eliminated -- most likely the former.''

Other former Obama advisers questioned the wisdom of negotiating with Mr. Assad and said last week's attack illustrated the flaws in the deal, which was brokered by President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia as a way to prevent the United States from using force.

''For me, this tragedy underscores the dangers of trying to do deals with dictators without a comprehensive, invasive and permanent inspection regime,'' said Michael McFaul, who was Mr. Obama's ambassador to Russia. ''It also shows the limits of doing deals with Putin. Surely, the Russians must have known about these C.W.''

Putting the best face on it, former Obama advisers said it was better to have removed 1,300 tons of chemical weapons from Syria even if Mr. Assad cheated and kept some, or later developed more. ''Imagine what Syria would look like without that deal,'' said Antony J. Blinken, a former deputy secretary of state. ''It would be awash in chemical weapons, which would fall into the hands of ISIS, Al Nusra or other groups.''

Still, the administration knew all along that it had probably not gotten all of the chemical weapons, and tried to get Russia to help press Syria, without success. ''We always knew we had not gotten everything, that the Syrians had not been fully forthcoming in their declaration,'' Mr. Blinken said.

Even before last week's chemical attack, many veterans of Mr. Obama's team considered his handling of Syria his biggest failing and expressed regret that their administration did not stop a war that has left more than 400,000 dead and millions displaced.

Many of them even praised President Trump for taking the very action that Mr. Obama refused to take four years ago, by ordering a cruise missile strike against Syria. ''Donald Trump has done the right thing on Syria,'' Anne-Marie Slaughter, the director of policy planning in Mr. Obama's State Department, wrote on Twitter. ''Finally!! After years of useless handwringing in the face of hideous atrocities.''

Tom Malinowski, an assistant secretary of state for human rights for Mr. Obama, wrote in The Atlantic, ''The lesson I would draw from that experience is that when dealing with mass killing by unconventional or conventional means, deterrence is more effective than disarmament.''

Mr. Obama grappled with Syria for much of his tenure but resisted being directly drawn in, for fear of thrusting America into another Middle East quagmire without solving the problem. The most searing moment came in 2013, when Mr. Assad's forces killed 1,400 civilians with chemical weapons, brazenly crossing what Mr. Obama had said would be his ''red line.''

Mr. Obama prepared a military strike to retaliate, but hesitated amid domestic opposition in both parties and asked Congress to decide whether to proceed. When it became clear that Congress would not give its approval, he grabbed onto a political lifeline from Mr. Putin, who proposed a deal in which Mr. Assad would give up his chemical weapons arsenal.

Under the deal, Syria joined the Chemical Weapons Convention, and over the next nine months, vast stores of lethal poisons were removed and ultimately destroyed. In June 2014, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons certified that all of Syria's declared weapons had been removed.

Two months later, when the last chemicals were destroyed, Mr. Obama celebrated. ''Today we mark an important achievement in our ongoing effort to counter the spread of weapons of mass destruction by eliminating Syria's declared chemical weapons stockpile,'' he said in a statement.

In the months to come, Mr. Obama and his aides pointed to that agreement in response to criticism that he had failed to enforce his red line. ''Well, it turns out we're getting chemical weapons out of Syria without having initiated a strike,'' Mr. Obama said in April 2014. ''So what else are you talking about?''

Three months later, Secretary of State John Kerry said, ''With respect to Syria, we struck a deal where we got 100 percent of the chemical weapons out.'' And three months after that, Mr. Kerry said Mr. Obama's threat of force had made it possible to ''cut the deal that got 100 percent of the declared chemical weapons out of Syria, and people nevertheless have been critical -- one day of bombing versus the virtue of getting 100 percent of the chemical weapons out of Syria.''

As late as this January, Susan E. Rice, Mr. Obama's national security adviser, said on NPR: ''We were able to find a solution that didn't necessitate the use of force that actually removed the chemical weapons that were known from Syria in a way that the use of force would never have accomplished. We were able to get the Syrian government to voluntarily and verifiably give up its chemical weapons stockpile.''

Publicly, Mr. Obama's advisers sometimes referred to ''known'' or ''declared'' stockpiles to qualify their claims, and sometimes did not. But from the start of the deal, there were discrepancies in Mr. Assad's weapons declarations.

In February 2016, James R. Clapper Jr., the national intelligence director, told Congress that ''we assess that Syria has not declared all the elements of its chemical weapons program.'' Moreover, Mr. Assad's forces resorted to makeshift chlorine bombs, using a chemical that was not covered by the agreement and is not barred by international law, though its use as a weapon of war is.

Mr. Blinken said the Obama administration had pressed the United Nations to respond, but Russia blocked such efforts.

Critics say Mr. Obama oversold the agreement with Russia. ''The defense was that he got all the C.W. out, and now that defense is shown to be plain false,'' said Elliott Abrams, a deputy national security adviser to President George W. Bush. ''If Obama administration officials knew that at the time, they were deliberately misstating the facts. I think Obama will never live this down, nor should he.''

Frederic C. Hof, who worked on Syria policy at the State Department under Mr. Obama before leaving and becoming a sharp critic of the administration, said the agreement remained defensible because it took weapons out of Mr. Assad's hands.

But Mr. Hof noted that Mr. Assad was still left ''free to perform mass homicide by other means,'' and that neither Mr. Obama's deal nor Mr. Trump's missile strike would stop him.

''He now counts on the West again to leave him free to kill as long as he does so without chemicals,'' Mr. Hof said. ''If this is what happens, the U.S. airstrikes of April 7 will go down in history as a one-off, one-time, fire-and-forget gesture that did nothing to counter violent extremism, stop mass homicide or restore the reputation of the U.S.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Peter Baker at @peterbakernyt

President Barack Obama with John A. Boehner and Nancy Pelosi in September 2013, days after Syria gassed its own people. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTOPHER GREGORY/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170410ed4a00050



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Soldier Killed in Mission Against  ISIS  in Afghanistan

By MUJIB MASHAL and FAHIM ABED 
471 words
10 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan -- An American Special Forces soldier was killed in eastern Afghanistan during a joint operation with Afghan forces against affiliates of the Islamic State, officials said on Sunday.

''The soldier was mortally wounded late Saturday during an operation in Nangarhar Province,'' Capt. Bill Salvin, a spokesman for the American forces in Afghanistan, said.

The death was the first American casualty in Afghanistan from hostile fire since the beginning of the year, according to a tally kept by the website iCasualties. Last year, 13 American soldiers died in the country, 10 because of enemy fire. In total, 2,217 American soldiers have died in Afghanistan since the invasion in 2001 and another 20,000 have been wounded, according to the Pentagon.

About 8,400 American soldiers remain in Afghanistan, carrying out two missions -- one under NATO's mission to train and assist Afghan forces, and a second counterterrorism mission focused on Al Qaeda and affiliates of the Islamic State. The United States commander in Afghanistan, Gen. John W. Nicholson, has expressed the need for thousands more American soldiers ahead of what is expected to be a tough fighting season.

Saturday's operation happened in the Achin district, which has remained the hotbed of an Islamic State affiliate even as operations by Afghan and American forces have struck heavy blows to the group in neighboring areas.

Jawid Salim, a spokesman for the Afghan commando forces, said the American soldier was accompanying Afghan special forces in an operation in Shadal Bazaar and he was mortally wounded by a roadside bomb. ''The soldier was on foot,'' he said.

Malik Kamin, a tribal elder in Shadal Bazaar, said the area had been the front line of fighting, but the Islamic State-affiliated fighters had been pushed back about six miles during operations in the past two weeks.

''We didn't see American soldiers in Achin and Shadal Bazaar before, but 15 days ago when the anti-I.S. operation started Americans also came here and they are helping Afghan forces,'' Mr. Kamin said. ''There is constant heavy fighting and airstrikes and drones.''

In a news conference last week, Captain Salvin said the goal of the United States counterterrorism mission in Afghanistan for 2017 was to eliminate the remaining Islamic State-affiliated pockets. To that end, the mission had carried out an intense campaign of airstrikes against the Islamic State affiliates, as well as the remnants of Al Qaeda, with about 560 strikes in the first months of the year so far, more than a hundred of those since the beginning of April. He said the Islamic State-affiliated group had lost two-thirds of its territory and about half of its fighters over the past year.

Document NYTF000020170410ed4a0003p



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
War as Political Weapon

By CHARLES M. BLOW 
983 words
10 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
21
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Donald Trump has turned his back on pretty much everything he has ever said about United States military involvement in Syria and launched nearly 60 missiles at an air base in the country.

Trump's official statement claimed that the strikes were in response to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's monstrous chemical weapons attack against his own people. But the statement also went further into the fiction of fear often touted to buttress humanitarian missions: ''It is in this vital national security interest of the United States to prevent and deter the spread and use of deadly chemical weapons.''

This has echoes of the George W. Bush warning about Saddam Hussein's ''weapons of mass destruction,'' a lie that led us into a near decade-long war.

Not to be indelicate here, but atrocities happen in the world all the time (and have happened on an even larger scale before in Syria). Humans are capable of unimaginable cruelty. Sometimes the victims die quickly and are made visible by media for the world to see. Other times, they die in slow motion, out of sight and out of mind. Sometimes banned weapons are used; sometimes conventional weapons; sometimes, neglect, isolation and starvation.

And the world in general, and America in particular, has a way of being wishy-washy about which atrocities deserve responses and which ones don't. These decisions can be capricious at best and calculated camouflages for ulterior motives at worst.

Indeed, the motivations for military action needn't be singular at all, but are often multiple, tucked one inside the other like nesting dolls.

Acts of war can themselves be used as political weapons. They can distract attention, quell acrimony, increase appetite for military spending and give a boost to sagging approval ratings.

This ''rally-around-the-flag'' (or ''rally'') effect is well documented by pollsters.

As Gallup wrote in 2001 after the attack of 9/11: ''In the wake of the terrorist attacks Tuesday, American approval of the way President George W. Bush is handling his job has surged to 86 percent, the fourth highest approval rating ever measured by Gallup in the six decades it has been asking Americans to make that evaluation. Only Presidents George H. W. Bush and Harry Truman received higher ratings -- the elder Bush twice during the Gulf War, with 89 percent (the highest ever) and 87 percent ratings, and Truman with 87 percent just after the Germans surrendered in World War II.''

It's easy to sell the heroism of a humanitarian mission or the fear of terror or the two in tandem, as Trump attempted in this case.

The temptation to unleash America's massive war machine is seductive and also addictive. Put that power in the hands of a man like Trump, who operates more on impulse and intuition than intellect, and the world should shiver.

The problem comes when the initial glow dims and darkness descends. We punch holes in some place on the other side of the world and the war hawks -- many beholden to the military-industrial complex -- squawk and parade about with chests swollen.

But, feeding the beast of war only amplifies its appetite. Market Watch reported last week, ''It could cost about $60 million to replace the cruise missiles that the U.S. military rained on Syrian targets Thursday night,'' but Fortune reported that shares of weapons manufacturers, as soon as they began trading Friday, were ''collectively gaining nearly $5 billion in market value.''

War is a business, a lucrative one.

Americans, who rightly are appalled by the images of dead children, applaud. They feel proud to slap the hand of a villain without risking American bodies. But now American might is irrevocably engaged. Our thumb is on the scale, and our reputation on the line.

Often, action begets more action, as unintended consequences sprout like weeds.

In the most extreme cases, we take down a bad leader in some poor country. In theory, this helps the citizens of that country. But in the complex reality that we have had to keep learning over and over in recent history, it often creates a vacuum where one bad man can be replaced by even worse men.

We are then already in waist-deep. We have to make an impossible choice: stay and try to fix what we broke or abandon it and watch our nightmares multiply.

Nobility of the crusade is consumed by the quagmire.

This is why we would all do well to temper the self-congratulatory war speeches and thrusting of pom-poms of our politicians and pundits, some of whom hypocritically opposed the use of military force by President Obama following an even worse chemical attack in Syria in 2013.

As righteous as we may feel about punishing Assad, Syria is a hornet's nest of forces hostile to America: Assad, Russia, and Iran on one flank and ISIS on another. You can't afflict one faction without assisting the other. In this way, Syria is a nearly unwinnable state.

We've been down this road before. Just over the horizon is a hill: Steep and greased with political motives, military ambitions, American blood and squandered treasury.

Being weary here isn't a sign of weakness; to the contrary, it's a display of hard-won wisdom.

I invite you to join me on Facebook and follow me on Twitter (@CharlesMBlow), or email me at chblow@nytimes.com.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

CHART: Americans on Syria Last February: Do you see the conflict in Syria as a critical threat, an important but not critical threat, or not an important threat at all? (Source: Gallup poll of 1,021 adults, conducted Feb. 3-7, 2016.) 

Document NYTF000020170410ed4a0003t



Op-Ed Columnist
Opinion
War as Political Weapon

By CHARLES M. BLOW 
950 words
10 April 2017
09:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Donald Trump has turned his back on pretty much everything he has ever said about United States military involvement in Syria and launched nearly 60 missiles at an air base in the country.

Trump’ official statement claimed that the strikes were in response to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’ monstrous chemical weapons attack against his own people. But the statement also went further into the fiction of fear often touted to buttress humanitarian missions: “t is in this vital national security interest of the United States to prevent and deter the spread and use of deadly chemical weapons.”

This has echoes of the George W. Bush warning about Saddam Hussein’ “eapons of mass destruction,” lie that led us into a near decade-long war.

Not to be indelicate here, but atrocities happen in the world all the time (and have happened on an even larger scale before in Syria). Humans are capable of unimaginable cruelty. Sometimes the victims die quickly and are made visible by media for the world to see. Other times, they die in slow motion, out of sight and out of mind. Sometimes banned weapons are used; sometimes conventional weapons; sometimes, neglect, isolation and starvation.

And the world in general, and America in particular, has a way of being wishy-washy about which atrocities deserve responses and which ones don’. These decisions can be capricious at best and calculated camouflages for ulterior motives at worst.

Indeed, the motivations for military action needn’ be singular at all, but are often multiple, tucked one inside the other like nesting dolls.

Acts of war can themselves be used as political weapons. They can distract attention, quell acrimony, increase appetite for military spending and give a boost to sagging approval ratings.

This “ally-around-the-flag”or “ally” effect is well documented by pollsters.

As Gallup wrote in 2001 after the attack of 9/11: “n the wake of the terrorist attacks Tuesday, American approval of the way President George W. Bush is handling his job has surged to 86 percent, the fourth highest approval rating ever measured by Gallup in the six decades it has been asking Americans to make that evaluation. Only Presidents George H. W. Bush and Harry Truman received higher ratings —he elder Bush twice during the Gulf War, with 89 percent (the highest ever) and 87 percent ratings, and Truman with 87 percent just after the Germans surrendered in World War II.”

It’ easy to sell the heroism of a humanitarian mission or the fear of terror or the two in tandem, as Trump attempted in this case.

The temptation to unleash America’ massive war machine is seductive and also addictive. Put that power in the hands of a man like Trump, who operates more on impulse and intuition than intellect, and the world should shiver.

The problem comes when the initial glow dims and darkness descends. We punch holes in some place on the other side of the world and the war hawks —any beholden to the military-industrial complex —quawk and parade about with chests swollen.

But, feeding the beast of war only amplifies its appetite. Market Watch reported last week, “t could cost about $60 million to replace the cruise missiles that the U.S. military rained on Syrian targets Thursday night,”ut Fortune reported that shares of weapons manufacturers, as soon as they began trading Friday, were “ollectively gaining nearly $5 billion in market value.”

War is a business, a lucrative one.

Americans, who rightly are appalled by the images of dead children, applaud. They feel proud to slap the hand of a villain without risking American bodies. But now American might is irrevocably engaged. Our thumb is on the scale, and our reputation on the line.

Often, action begets more action, as unintended consequences sprout like weeds.

In the most extreme cases, we take down a bad leader in some poor country. In theory, this helps the citizens of that country. But in the complex reality that we have had to keep learning over and over in recent history, it often creates a vacuum where one bad man can be replaced by even worse men.

We are then already in waist-deep. We have to make an impossible choice: stay and try to fix what we broke or abandon it and watch our nightmares multiply.

Nobility of the crusade is consumed by the quagmire.

This is why we would all do well to temper the self-congratulatory war speeches and thrusting of pom-poms of our politicians and pundits, some of whom hypocritically opposed the use of military force by President Obama following an even worse chemical attack in Syria in 2013.

As righteous as we may feel about punishing Assad, Syria is a hornet’ nest of forces hostile to America: Assad, Russia, and Iran on one flank and ISIS on another. You can’ afflict one faction without assisting the other. In this way, Syria is a nearly unwinnable state.

We’e been down this road before. Just over the horizon is a hill: Steep and greased with political motives, military ambitions, American blood and squandered treasury.

Being weary here isn’ a sign of weakness; to the contrary, it’ a display of hard-won wisdom.

I invite you to join me on Facebook and follow me on Twitter (@CharlesMBlow), or email me at chblow@nytimes.com.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Demonstrators outside the White House on Friday. | Eric Thayer/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170410ed4a001xr



NEWS ANALYSIS
Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Attack on Syria Cements Kremlin's Embrace of Assad

By NEIL MacFARQUHAR; Oleg Matsnev and Ivan Nechepurenko contributed reporting. 
1,390 words
9 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
12
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MOSCOW -- If Russia once maintained at least a semblance of distance from President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, it rushed to his defense after the American missile strike ordered by President Trump on Thursday. The attack cemented Moscow more closely than ever to the notorious Syrian autocrat.

Even as the United States condemned Mr. Assad for gassing his own citizens and held Russia partly responsible, given its 2013 promise to rid Syria of chemical weapons, the Kremlin kept denying that Syria had any such capability.

By championing Mr. Assad and condemning American ''aggression,'' President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia seemed to be burying the idea that he could somehow cooperate with the Trump administration to end the conflict on his terms.

The solidarity with Damascus is likely to cause problems for Russia in the long run, analysts said, although Mr. Putin probably cannot be persuaded to loosen his embrace any time soon.

The Russian government often takes its time to react to major world events, but the Kremlin issued a prompt statement early Friday castigating the United States for the missile strike on Al Shayrat airfield in retaliation for Syria's chemical weapons attack.

The Russian Ministry of Defense vowed to strengthen Syria's air defense systems, sent a frigate on a port call and froze an agreement with the United States to coordinate activity in Syrian air space.

''Putin made a choice -- to underline that Assad is his ally,'' said Aleksandr Morozov, an independent political analyst. ''This will lead to Russia's further isolation, but Putin will stand his ground.''

Mr. Morozov and other analysts consider the policy problematic for various reasons.

Russia Partly to Blame

First, Mr. Trump and his secretary of state, Rex W. Tillerson , have painted Russia as at least partially responsible for the carnage among civilians that was fomented by the Assad government.

''Moscow's main problem is not that the U.S. made a strike but that Trump and Tillerson have toughened their rhetoric on Syria and Assad,'' said Vladimir Frolov, a foreign affairs analyst and columnist for Republic.ru.

He added, ''They have said that Russia is responsible for Assad's actions and that it didn't fulfill its responsibilities in terms of chemical weapons disarmament.''

The chemical attack in the Syrian town of Khan Sheikhoun on Tuesday killed more than 80 people and afflicted hundreds more. Turkey said on Thursday that sarin, a banned nerve agent, had been used.

The United States responded by firing almost 60 cruise missiles at the air base, which housed the warplanes used in the chemical attack. The local governor said five military men and two civilians died.

Winning at Any Cost?

Second, in continuing deadly attacks on civilians, Mr. Assad seems to want to pursue a military victory at any cost, putting a lie to Russia's statements that a negotiated settlement is the sole solution.

That risks dragging out a war that Mr. Putin has depicted at home as quick, cheap and easy at a time when many Russians have been struggling economically. Trying to keep the length and cost of the war down is a crucial reason that the Russians will avoid escalating any conflict with the United States, analysts said.

''Russia wants to end the conflict and to diminish its military and economic presence,'' said Andrei Frolov, a defense analyst and the managing editor of the Moscow Defense Brief.

With the next Russian presidential campaign scheduled to start by the end of the year, he said, ''there is no need to continue a war outside the country with a weak explanation for the Russian people why Russia is staying there.''

A poll by the independent Levada center in March found that almost 20 percent of Russians already believed that the country's military involvement in Syria made no sense.

Dangerous Alliance

Third, the Assad alliance could undermine one of Mr. Putin's main goals for entering the war: to try to make Russia a player on the world stage again as the indispensable broker in the Middle East.

Protecting Mr. Assad could further repulse countries that Moscow has been courting, like Turkey and Israel, analysts said -- not to mention much of the world.

In the months immediately after Russia deployed its military in Syria, Maria Zakharova , the spokeswoman for the Foreign Ministry, used to say things like, ''We don't support Assad; what is important for us is to preserve Syrian statehood.''

After the attack, the ministry cranked out a statement lauding Syria for its ''fierce battle'' against ''international terrorism.''

Aleksei V. Makarkin, the deputy head of the Center for Political Technologies, a think tank based in Moscow, said, ''The longer Russia supports Assad, the more dependent it is on him.''

''At the beginning, there was some talk about replacing him, even if gradually,'' he said, but that talk has evaporated.

The ostensible reason that Mr. Putin deployed his military in Syria in September 2015 was to fight terrorism, but that is often dismissed as the sound-bite logic. Other goals, especially shoring up Mr. Assad, proved more important.

Mr. Putin wanted to resurrect Moscow's old Soviet reputation as a global military power. Syria proved a showcase for new Russian weapons, and Russia has established two rare overseas bases there.

''Russia will continue to support Assad because he is the only guarantor of Russia's military presence in Syria and hence of Russia's military presence in the Middle East over all,'' Mr. Makarkin said.

In addition, Mr. Putin was appalled by the way Western leaders had abandoned former allies like President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and Col. Muammar Qadhafi of Libya.

Mr. Putin was determined to prove that Russia would stick by its friends and oppose ''regime change'' rooted in outside intervention.

Russia faults the United States for destabilizing countries like Iraq and Libya -- which some think has provided an opening for Islamic extremists -- a scenario Mr. Putin was determined to avoid in Syria.

Sanctions and Isolation

Finally, of course, Syria presented Russia with an opportunity to break out of the isolation that resulted from sanctions imposed by the West for its 2014 annexation of Crimea and destabilization of Ukraine.

The Kremlin thought that forging an alliance with the West on Syria would render illogical the idea of maintaining the economic sanctions.

Mr. Trump, during his campaign, seemed to champion the idea, as well, questioning the need for sanctions, suggesting that Crimea probably did belong to Russia and repeatedly praising Mr. Putin as a strong leader. He endorsed the idea that the two countries together fight the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS.

While that raised suspicions in the United States of collusion, it was welcomed in Russia as a new dawn in relations.

The illusions began fading as Mr. Trump or his allies reversed many of those positions one by one, and the attack on Syria pretty much buried them.

On Friday, the rubric on Rossiya 24, the state satellite news channel, for some of the coverage of the attack was ''Kaptain Amerika'' imposed over a zombielike figure with dead eyes.

''The rest of the pre-election fog has melted away,'' Dmitri Medvedev, Russia's prime minister, wrote on his Facebook page. ''Instead of the mass-circulated narrative about a joint fight against our main enemy, ISIL, the Trump administration has demonstrated that it will be fiercely fighting the legitimate government of Syria.''

(That Mr. Medvedev responded publicly, but not Mr. Putin, seemed to indicate moderate anger.)

The first consequence on the ground, analysts said, is that Syria and the Russian military will feel less restricted than ever in attacking forces they think are aligned with the West and that they have accused of being terrorists.

Some Syrian rebel groups subsidized by the United States and its regional allies have formed battlefield alliances with fighters from Al Nusra, the affiliate of Al Qaeda in Syria .

''Now Russia in Syria can oppress and destroy opposition forces without regard to the United States and its position,'' Mr. Frolov, the defense analyst, said.

President Bashar al-Assad of Syria speaking with President Vladimir V. Putin in October 2015. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEXEY DRUZHININ/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170409ed4900091



us
For Obama, Syria Chemical Attack Shows Risk of ‘eals With Dictators’

By PETER BAKER 
1,453 words
9 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —hen it came time to make his case for the judgment of history, President Barack Obama had a ready rebuttal to one of the most cutting critiques of his time in office.

Although friends and foes alike faulted him for not following through on his threat to retaliate when Syria gassed its own people in 2013, Mr. Obama would counter that he had actually achieved a better result through an agreement with President Bashar al-Assad to surrender all of his chemical weapons.

After last week, even former Obama aides assume that he will have to rethink that passage in his memoir. More than 80 civilians were killed in what Western analysts called a sarin attack by Syrian forces — chilling demonstration that the agreement did not succeed. In recent days, former aides have lamented what they considered one of the worst moments of the Obama presidency and privately conceded that his legacy would suffer.

“f the Syrian government carried out the attack and the agent was sarin, then clearly the 2013 agreement didn’ succeed in its objective of eliminating Bashar’ C.W.,”r chemical weapons, said Robert Einhorn, who was the State Department special adviser for nonproliferation and arms control under Mr. Obama before the agreement. “ither he didn’ declare all his C.W. and kept some hidden in reserve, or he illegally produced some sarin after his stock was eliminated —ost likely the former.”

Other former Obama advisers questioned the wisdom of negotiating with Mr. Assad and said last week’ attack illustrated the flaws in the deal, which was brokered by President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia as a way to prevent the United States from using force.

“or me, this tragedy underscores the dangers of trying to do deals with dictators without a comprehensive, invasive and permanent inspection regime,”aid Michael McFaul, who was Mr. Obama’ ambassador to Russia. “t also shows the limits of doing deals with Putin. Surely, the Russians must have known about these C.W.”

Putting the best face on it, former Obama advisers said it was better to have removed 1,300 tons of chemical weapons from Syria even if Mr. Assad cheated and kept some, or later developed more. “magine what Syria would look like without that deal,”aid Antony J. Blinken, a former deputy secretary of state. “t would be awash in chemical weapons, which would fall into the hands of ISIS, Al Nusra or other groups.”

Still, the administration knew all along that it had probably not gotten all of the chemical weapons, and tried to get Russia to help press Syria, without success. “e always knew we had not gotten everything, that the Syrians had not been fully forthcoming in their declaration,”r. Blinken said.

Even before last week’ chemical attack, many veterans of Mr. Obama’ team considered his handling of Syria his biggest failing and expressed regret that their administration did not stop a war that has left more than 400,000 dead and millions displaced.

Many of them even praised President Trump for taking the very action that Mr. Obama refused to take four years ago, by ordering a cruise missile strike against Syria. “Donald Trump has done the right thing on Syria,”Anne-Marie Slaughter, the director of policy planning in Mr. Obama’ State Department, wrote on Twitter. “inally!! After years of useless handwringing in the face of hideous atrocities.”

Tom Malinowski, an assistant secretary of state for human rights for Mr. Obama, wrote in The Atlantic, “he lesson I would draw from that experience is that when dealing with mass killing by unconventional or conventional means, deterrence is more effective than disarmament.”

Mr. Obama grappled with Syria for much of his tenure but resisted being directly drawn in, for fear of thrusting America into another Middle East quagmire without solving the problem. The most searing moment came in 2013, when Mr. Assad’ forces killed 1,400 civilians with chemical weapons, brazenly crossing what Mr. Obama had said would be his “ed line.”

Mr. Obama prepared a military strike to retaliate, but hesitated amid domestic opposition in both parties and asked Congress to decide whether to proceed. When it became clear that Congress would not give its approval, he grabbed onto a political lifeline from Mr. Putin, who proposed a deal in which Mr. Assad would give up his chemical weapons arsenal.

Under the deal, Syria joined the Chemical Weapons Convention, and over the next nine months, vast stores of lethal poisons were removed and ultimately destroyed. In June 2014, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons certified that all of Syria’ declared weapons had been removed.

Two months later, when the last chemicals were destroyed, Mr. Obama celebrated. “oday we mark an important achievement in our ongoing effort to counter the spread of weapons of mass destruction by eliminating Syria’ declared chemical weapons stockpile,”e said in a statement.

In the months to come, Mr. Obama and his aides pointed to that agreement in response to criticism that he had failed to enforce his red line. “ell, it turns out we’e getting chemical weapons out of Syria without having initiated a strike,”r. Obama said in April 2014. “o what else are you talking about?”

Three months later, Secretary of State John Kerry said, “ith respect to Syria, we struck a deal where we got 100 percent of the chemical weapons out.”nd three months after that, Mr. Kerry said Mr. Obama’ threat of force had made it possible to “cut the deal that got 100 percent of the declared chemical weapons out of Syria, and people nevertheless have been critical —ne day of bombing versus the virtue of getting 100 percent of the chemical weapons out of Syria.”

As late as this January, Susan E. Rice, Mr. Obama’ national security adviser, said on NPR: “e were able to find a solution that didn’ necessitate the use of force that actually removed the chemical weapons that were known from Syria in a way that the use of force would never have accomplished. We were able to get the Syrian government to voluntarily and verifiably give up its chemical weapons stockpile.”

Publicly, Mr. Obama’ advisers sometimes referred to “nown”r “eclared”tockpiles to qualify their claims, and sometimes did not. But from the start of the deal, there were discrepancies in Mr. Assad’ weapons declarations.

In February 2016, James R. Clapper Jr., the national intelligence director, told Congress that “e assess that Syria has not declared all the elements of its chemical weapons program.”oreover, Mr. Assad’ forces resorted to makeshift chlorine bombs, using a chemical that was not covered by the agreement and is not barred by international law, though its use as a weapon of war is.

Mr. Blinken said the Obama administration had pressed the United Nations to respond, but Russia blocked such efforts.

Critics say Mr. Obama oversold the agreement with Russia. “he defense was that he got all the C.W. out, and now that defense is shown to be plain false,”aid Elliott Abrams, a deputy national security adviser to President George W. Bush. “f Obama administration officials knew that at the time, they were deliberately misstating the facts. I think Obama will never live this down, nor should he.”

Frederic C. Hof, who worked on Syria policy at the State Department under Mr. Obama before leaving and becoming a sharp critic of the administration, said the agreement remained defensible because it took weapons out of Mr. Assad’ hands.

But Mr. Hof noted that Mr. Assad was still left “ree to perform mass homicide by other means,”nd that neither Mr. Obama’ deal nor Mr. Trump’ missile strike would stop him.

“e now counts on the West again to leave him free to kill as long as he does so without chemicals,”r. Hof said. “f this is what happens, the U.S. airstrikes of April 7 will go down in history as a one-off, one-time, fire-and-forget gesture that did nothing to counter violent extremism, stop mass homicide or restore the reputation of the U.S.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Peter Baker at @peterbakernyt

PHOTO: President Barack Obama with John A. Boehner and Nancy Pelosi in September 2013, days after Syria gassed its own people. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTOPHER GREGORY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

* U.S. Strike on Syria Brings Fleeting Hope to Those Caught in Brutal Conflict

Document INHT000020170410ed490000e



U.S.; Politics
For Obama, Syria Chemical Attack Shows Risk of ‘eals With Dictators’

By PETER BAKER 
1,457 words
9 April 2017
19:27
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —hen it came time to make his case for the judgment of history, President Barack Obama had a ready rebuttal to one of the most cutting critiques of his time in office.

Although friends and foes alike faulted him for not following through on his threat to retaliate when Syria gassed its own people in 2013, Mr. Obama would counter that he had actually achieved a better result through an agreement with President Bashar al-Assad to surrender all of his chemical weapons.

After last week, even former Obama aides assume that he will have to rethink that passage in his memoir. More than 80 civilians were killed in what Western analysts called a sarin attack by Syrian forces — chilling demonstration that the agreement did not succeed. In recent days, former aides have lamented what they considered one of the worst moments of the Obama presidency and privately conceded that his legacy would suffer.

“f the Syrian government carried out the attack and the agent was sarin, then clearly the 2013 agreement didn’ succeed in its objective of eliminating Bashar’ C.W.,”r chemical weapons, said Robert Einhorn, who was the State Department special adviser for nonproliferation and arms control under Mr. Obama before the agreement. “ither he didn’ declare all his C.W. and kept some hidden in reserve, or he illegally produced some sarin after his stock was eliminated —ost likely the former.”

Other former advisers to Mr. Obama questioned the wisdom of negotiating with Mr. Assad and said last week’ attack illustrated the flaws in the agreement, which was brokered by President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia as a way to prevent the United States from using force.

“or me, this tragedy underscores the dangers of trying to do deals with dictators without a comprehensive, invasive and permanent inspection regime,”aid Michael McFaul, who was Mr. Obama’ ambassador to Russia. “t also shows the limits of doing deals with Putin. Surely, the Russians must have known about these C.W.”

Putting the best face on it, former Obama advisers argued that it was still better to have removed 1,300 tons of chemical weapons from Syria even if Mr. Assad cheated and kept some, or later developed more. “magine what Syria would look like without that deal,”aid Antony J. Blinken, a former deputy secretary of state. “t would be awash in chemical weapons which would fall into the hands of ISIS, Al Nusra or other groups.”

Still, the administration knew all along that it had probably not gotten all of the chemical weapons. Sometimes Mr. Obama’ advisers referred to “nown”r “eclared”tockpiles to qualify their claims, and sometimes they did not. “e always knew we had not gotten everything, that the Syrians had not been fully forthcoming in their declaration,”r. Blinken said.

Even before last week’ chemical attack, many veterans of Mr. Obama’ team considered his handling of Syria his biggest failing and expressed regret that their administration could not stop a civil war that has left more than 400,000 dead and millions displaced.

Many of them even praised President Trump for taking the very action that Mr. Obama refused to take four years ago, by ordering a cruise missile strike against Syria. “Donald Trump has done the right thing on Syria,”Anne-Marie Slaughter, the director of policy planning in Mr. Obama’ State Department, wrote on Twitter. “inally!! After years of useless hand-wringing in the face of hideous atrocities.”

Tom Malinowski, an assistant secretary of state for human rights for Mr. Obama, wrote in The Atlantic, “he lesson I would draw from that experience is that when dealing with mass killing by unconventional or conventional means, deterrence is more effective than disarmament.”

Mr. Obama spent much of his tenure grappling with Syria but resisted being directly drawn in, for fear of thrusting America into another Middle East quagmire without solving the problem. The most searing moment came in 2013, when Mr. Assad’ forces killed 1,400 civilians with chemical weapons, brazenly crossing what Mr. Obama had said would be his “ed line.”

Mr. Obama prepared a military strike to retaliate, but hesitated amid domestic opposition in both parties and asked Congress to decide whether to proceed. When it became clear that Congress would not give its approval, he grabbed onto a political lifeline from Mr. Putin, who proposed a deal in which Mr. Assad would give up his chemical weapons arsenal.

Under the deal, Syria joined the Chemical Weapons Convention, and over the next nine months, vast stores of lethal poisons were removed and ultimately destroyed. In June 2014, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons certified that all of Syria’ declared weapons had been removed.

Two months later, when the last chemicals were destroyed, Mr. Obama celebrated. “oday we mark an important achievement in our ongoing effort to counter the spread of weapons of mass destruction by eliminating Syria’ declared chemical weapons stockpile,”e said in a statement.

In the months to come, Mr. Obama and his aides pointed to that agreement in response to criticism that he had failed to enforce his red line. “ell, it turns out we’e getting chemical weapons out of Syria without having initiated a strike,”r. Obama said in April 2014. “o what else are you talking about?”

Three months later, Secretary of State John Kerry said, “ith respect to Syria, we struck a deal where we got 100 percent of the chemical weapons out.”nd three months after that, Mr. Kerry said Mr. Obama’ threat of force had made it possible to “cut the deal that got 100 percent of the declared chemical weapons out of Syria, and people nevertheless have been critical —ne day of bombing versus the virtue of getting 100 percent of the chemical weapons out of Syria.”

As late as January, just days before Mr. Obama left office, Susan E. Rice, his national security adviser, said on NPR: “e were able to find a solution that didn’ necessitate the use of force that actually removed the chemical weapons that were known from Syria in a way that the use of force would never have accomplished. We were able to get the Syrian government to voluntarily and verifiably give up its chemical weapons stockpile.”

But from the start of the agreement, there were discrepancies in Mr. Assad’ declarations of his weapons. In February 2016, James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national intelligence, told Congress that “e assess that Syria has not declared all the elements of its chemical weapons program.”oreover, Mr. Assad’ forces resorted to makeshift chlorine bombs, using a chemical that was not covered by the agreement and is not barred by international law, though its use as a weapon of war is.

Mr. Blinken said the Obama administration had pressed the United Nations to respond, but Russia blocked such efforts.

Critics say Mr. Obama oversold the agreement with Russia. “he defense was that he got all the C.W. out, and now that defense is shown to be plain false,”aid Elliott Abrams, a deputy national security adviser to President George W. Bush. “f Obama administration officials knew that at the time, they were deliberately misstating the facts. I think Obama will never live this down, nor should he.”

Frederic C. Hof, who worked on Syria policy at the State Department under Mr. Obama before leaving and becoming a sharp critic of the administration, said the agreement remained defensible because it took weapons of slaughter out of Mr. Assad’ hands.

But Mr. Hof noted that Mr. Assad was still left “ree to perform mass homicide by other means,”nd that neither Mr. Obama’ deal nor Mr. Trump’ missile strike would stop him.

“e now counts on the West again to leave him free to kill as long as he does so without chemicals,”r. Hof said. “f this is what happens, the U.S. airstrikes of April 7 will go down in history as a one-off, one-time, fire-and-forget gesture that did nothing to counter violent extremism, stop mass homicide or restore the reputation of the U.S.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Peter Baker at @peterbakernyt

* U.S. Strike on Syria Brings Fleeting Hope to Those Caught in Brutal Conflict

President Barack Obama addressed Syria’ use of chemical weapons in a televised speech from the White House on Sept. 10, 2013. | Pool photo by Evan Vucci 

Document NYTFEED020170409ed49002bd



NYT Now
Syria, Trump Doctrine, Masters: Your Weekend Briefing

By RICK ROJAS and ANDREW HINDERAKER 
1,211 words
9 April 2017
12:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Here are the week’ top stories, and a look ahead.

1. President Trump’ missile strike against a Syrian air base brought a glimmer of hope to some of the Syrians trapped, displaced or exiled in six years of brutal war —nd set off a geopolitical shock wave.

The strike, in response to a lethal chemical attack, found support among some of his toughest critics, including Senators John McCain and Lindsey Graham and drew criticism from some of his strongest right-wing and conservative supporters.

The U.S.-led forces battling the Islamic State in Syria have sharply reduced airstrikes, and are awaiting signals of whether Russian or Syrian government forces will respond.

_____

2. President Trump had argued against intervening in the Syrian civil war, pushed for stronger ties with Russia and called China an “nemy.”

Then last week happened.

Mr. Trump has demonstrated a “ighly improvisational and situational approach,”ur chief White House correspondent writes. “o the extent that a Trump Doctrine is emerging, it seems to be this: Don’ get roped in by doctrine.”

In another show of U.S. military readiness, a naval strike group is moving toward the Korean Peninsula.

_____

3. Judge Neil Gorsuch will be sworn in Monday to the Supreme Court, filling the seat left vacant by the death of Antonin Scalia.

That simple sentence is the culmination of a year of partisan scuffling that erupted into a game-changing showdown in the Senate, and a definitive win for the Republicans and for Mr. Trump.

Judge Gorsuch is 49, and could serve on the court for 30 years or more.

_____

4 . B omb s struck two Coptic Christian churches in Egypt, killing at least 40 during Palm Sunday services. The attacks came just weeks before Pope Francis is scheduled to visit country.

The Islamic State claimed responsibility.

And in Sweden, the authorities identified the suspect in an attack using a stolen beer truck as a 39-year-old Uzbek asylum seeker with ISIS sympathies who had been ordered to leave the country.

_____

5. White House infighting reached such a peak that President Trump admonished the warring factions to “ork this out” and, according to insiders, is said to be considering a shake-up of his senior staff.

Stephen Bannon, the president’ chief strategist, has had a series of dust-ups with Jared Kushner, the president’ son-in-law and senior adviser, and has become increasingly isolated.

He was removed last week from a privileged seat at the National Security Council.

_____

6. “oved the part about how to treat women! This guy’ the worst!”

That Amazon reviewer, commenting on Bill O’eilly’ No. 1 new best seller, captured the feel of public backlash after our report that  the talk-show host and Fox News had paid a total of $13 million to settle claims of sexual harassment or verbal abuse. Dozens of companies have pulled their ads from his show.

Some of his fans say they’e troubled, but still trust him.

_____

7. It’ official.

Gov. Jerry Brown of California lifted the drought emergency that was called more than three years ago after a water shortage was erased by a very wet winter.

But he had a caveat: “he next drought could be around the corner. Conservation must remain a way of life.”

_____

8. A “olden age”f space exploration: Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon, shared his vision as he showed off a rocket booster and a full-scale mock capsule designed to take tourists into space for panoramic views of Earth.

He said that he was selling about $1 billion a year in Amazon stock to finance his rocket company, Blue Origin, with the goal of enabling people to live and work in space —n ambition shared by his fellow technology titan, Elon Musk of SpaceX.

In other business news, the U.S. employers added 98,000 jobs in March, fewer than half the monthly number for January and February.

_____

9. Who will take home the green jacket?

The world’ top professional golfers head into their final round at Augusta National Golf Club for the 2017 Masters. (2 p.m. Eastern, CBS)

Sergio Garcia finished Saturday tied with Justin Rose. He has performed well despite a long history of struggling at the tournament. Our golf writer called Augusta his “ersonal torture chamber.”

And Wednesday is the final day of the N.B.A. regular season.

_____

10. New Mexico has a new law against so-called lunch shaming, or practices that embarrass children who don’ have money to pay for a meal.

It’ believed to be the first of its kind. Elsewhere, cafeteria workers are instructed to take away a children’ meals if they can’ pay, force them to clean tables in front of classmates or have “ Need Lunch Money”tamped on their arm.

_____

11. “e left us in stitches.”

That’ one of our editors recalling the lacerating comments the comedian Don Rickles would make on visits to Elaine’, the long-gone celebrity hangout in Manhattan, telling jokes off the clock.

Mr. Rickles, the comedian known for hurling insults at audience members (they could be tourists or Frank Sinatra), died  Thursday at  age  90.

_____

12. Binge watchers, get comfortable.

You have plenty to choose from this month, including the return of the “reaking Bad”pinoff “etter Call Saul”Monday on AMC) and “ystery Science Theater 3000”Friday on Netflix). Here are some other coming options. Above, “rockmire.”

And shorter term, here’ what to cook, watch, listen to and more to ride out the weekend.

_____

13. In uplifting news, your best work may be ahead of you. Way ahead of you.

Consider the case of John Goodenough, a 94-year-old professor at the University of Texas at Austin who, with his team, recently filed a patent application for “ new kind of battery that, if it works as promised, would be so cheap, lightweight and safe that it would revolutionize electric cars.”

His age and life experience, he argued, only helped him. “’ old enough to know you can’ close your mind to new ideas.”

Have a great week.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Weekend Briefing is published Sundays at 6 a.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Evening Briefing, weeknights at 6 p.m. Eastern.

Want to look back? Here’ Friday’ Evening Briefing.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

* Syria, Neil Gorsuch, Stockholm: Your Friday Evening Briefing

Robert S. Price/U.S. Navy | Doug Mills/The New York Times | Eric Thayer for The New York Times | Khaled Elfiqi/European Pressphoto Agency | Doug Mills/The New York Times | Hilary Swift for The New York Times | Monica Almeida/The New York Times | Nick Cote for The New York Times | David Cannon/Getty Images | Chang W. Lee/The New York Times | Leigh Weiner/ABC-TV | Erika Doss/IFC | Kayana Szymczak for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170409ed49001md



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Cuts Back on Attacking  ISIS  in Syria After Airstrike

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT; Michael R. Gordon reported from Washington and Eric Schmitt from Richland, Wash. 
1,039 words
9 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
14
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The American-led task force that is battling the Islamic State has sharply reduced airstrikes against the militants in Syria as commanders assess whether Syrian government forces or their Russian allies plan to respond to the United States' cruise missile strike on a Syrian airfield this past week, American officials said.

The precautionary move, revealed in statistics made public by the command on Saturday, was taken as Russian officials have threatened to suspend the communication line the American and Russian militaries use to notify each other about air operations in Syria.

So far, the Russian military does not appear to have taken any threatening actions, such as directing its battlefield radar or air defense systems to confront the Americans, or carrying out aggressive actions in the skies, United States officials said.

But officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal planning said the commanders needed time to determine whether the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, and the Russian military would treat the American cruise missile strike as a one-time operation that they would not respond to militarily. As a precaution, the Pentagon is flying patrols in Syrian skies with F-22 jets, the Air Force's most advanced air-to-air fighter.

If it becomes clear that the Syrians and Russians will not follow their sharp criticism of the operation with significant military action, the pace of American airstrikes against Islamic State forces in Syria can be quickly increased.

Over the last two years, American and allied warplanes striking Islamic State targets in Syria have had to fly among formidable Syrian and Russian-supplied air defenses. While there have been a few close calls between Russian and American jets, some of them unintentional, the American-led air campaign has for the most part proceeded without interference from Russian or Syrian fighters or air defenses.

Publicly, American officials had little to say about the reduction in strikes against the militants. ''We are using resources as appropriate to the commander's priorities and as the situation dictates,'' a military official said.

On Friday in Syria, the day the United States fired 59 cruise missiles around 3:40 a.m. local time against Al Shayrat airfield, the American-led coalition carried out just seven airstrikes against Islamic State targets in Syria, according to the command. All the airstrikes were near Tabqah, where Syrian fighters and American advisers are trying to take the town and a nearby dam, a move that would cut off the western approaches to Raqqa, the Islamic State's self-styled capital.

By contrast, on Tuesday the American-led command carried out twice as many strikes in Syria against the Islamic State, and against a broader array of targets. On March 27, the command conducted 19 strikes in Syria against Islamic State militants.

In the Raqqa mission, United States Special Operations forces assisting Syrian Kurdish and Arab fighters in their encirclement of the city, in eastern Syria, have also taken unspecified precautions against possible retaliatory attacks, military officials said. The United States struck the airfield in response to a deadly chemical weapons attack by the Syrian government.

American officials have said that the purpose of the airfield attack was to dissuade Mr. Assad from using chemical weapons again and that it was not intended to be part of a broader military effort to undermine the Syrian leader's hold on power.

As long as Mr. Assad refrains from using chemical weapons again, the officials have said, the United States does not plan to carry out further attacks on his forces.

Some American and other Western counterterrorism officials have said the missile strike could nonetheless make the fight against the Islamic State in Syria more difficult.

''It seems clear that the strikes will complicate our efforts to pursue our counter-ISIS campaign in Syria,'' said Matthew Olsen, a former director of the National Counterterrorism Center. ''In particular, the ability to carry out U.S. airstrikes in Syria in support of the coalition against ISIS requires some degree of cooperation with Russia, which is now in serious jeopardy.''

Other security experts said that much depended on the Trump administration's next steps, and how the Assad government and its Russian patrons responded.

''U.S. aircraft operating over Al-Tabqah are already ostensibly in range of the Russian S-400 system at the Humaymin Air Base, and we might see Russia deploy more air defense assets to Syria,'' Jeremy Binnie, the Middle East editor of Jane's Defense Weekly, said in an email. ''But if the U.S. makes no moves to threaten Assad's position, then they may well accept the punishment and move on.''

William McCants, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and the author of ''The ISIS Apocalypse,'' offered a similar assessment.

If the strikes are limited to what took place this past week, ''then they don't change much,'' Mr. McCants said. ''They won't help jihadists propagandize against the U.S., because the missiles targeted the hated Assad regime. Russia wasn't doing much against ISIS, so Russian anger at the strikes won't affect the coalition effort against the group.''

But Mr. McCants added: ''If the United States continues to degrade Assad's air force, it will be a boon to all the rebel groups, including the non-ISIS jihadists who have been targeted by the regime. They will begin to recapture some of the territory they have lost.''

Russia sent warplanes to Syria in 2015 in a successful effort to help Mr. Assad maintain his hold on power and expand the territory under his control. The Russians began their first airstrikes in late September of that year.

American officials have frequently complained that most of the Russian airstrikes have been directed not against the Islamic State but against rebels fighting Mr. Assad's forces, including the moderate opposition that has been trained and equipped covertly by the C.I.A.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020170409ed4900080



FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The Secularist

By ROBERT F. WORTH 
8,104 words
9 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
33
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Gilles Kepel, a French political scientist, was at home in Paris brushing his teeth one morning last June when his cellphone rattled on the sink. It was a text from a journalist he knew: ''I'm sorry to tell you this, but you're on the death list.'' Kepel turned toward his TV, which was already on, and the top story eliminated any confusion. A French-born jihadi named Larossi Abballa had murdered a police officer and his wife in a town west of Paris and then delivered a macabre speech on Facebook Live -- with the couple's 3-year-old child cowering nearby -- in which he called for the killing of seven public figures. The French media omitted the details, but an Interior Ministry official soon called with confirmation: Kepel's name was near the top of the list. His initial feeling, he later told me, was ''as if the subject I've been studying for 35 years had turned around to strike at me.'' Within hours, he had a government security team assigned to guard him 24 hours a day.

 A similar death warrant was issued against him later that summer, elevating the sense of danger.

The threats came at an unusual turn in Kepel's career. He has long been a prominent figure in the French intellectual world, a scholar whose face -- a distinctive, narrow-eyed mask of polished sobriety -- is often seen on TV news shows. But recently he has assumed a far more combative stance. Kepel has argued that much of France's left-leaning intelligentsia fails to understand the nature of the threat the country faces -- not just from foreign terrorists but also from the Islamist provocateurs in its exurban ghettos, the banlieues. Unlike the Islam-bashing polemicists who haunt French opinion pages, Kepel brings a lifetime of scholarship to this argument. He has always been careful to distinguish mainstream Islam from the hard-line Islamist ideologues of the banlieues, who have no real equivalent in the United States. He has long been a man of the left; his wife's family is from North Africa, and he has no sympathy for the xenophobia of the right-wing National Front. But he believes that radical Islamists are trying to shred France's social fabric and foster a civil war, and that many leftists are unwittingly playing into their hands. This view has made him a target for almost everyone.

Kepel's assault against what he calls ''Islamo-gauchism'' has earned him an unusual role during a French presidential campaign that has seemed, at times, to be a referendum on the country's tortured relationship with its Muslim immigrants and with Islam writ large. The string of terrorist attacks that intensified two years ago in Paris has fed a current of national anxiety, and it has only grown worse with the recognition that hundreds of French citizens fighting alongside ISIS -- more than those from any other European country -- will be trickling homeward from Syria and Iraq, many of them to French prisons that are widely considered to be incubators for terror plots. The National Front candidate, Marine Le Pen, has called for drastic reductions in immigration and the expulsion of all illegal immigrants, in terms that have been echoed by the Trump administration. She regularly invokes radical Islam and globalization as two linked evils threatening France. The mainstream right-wing candidate, Françis Fillon, published a book late last year titled ''Defeating Islamic Totalitarianism.'' On the left, the candidates have issued a confused mix of panicky alarms about terrorism and denunciations of racism and Islamophobia. At times, the candidates seem to suggest that France's very identity is at stake. The elder statesman Jean-Pierre Chevèement, in a recent book, wrote of the attacks and their aftermath: ''Isn't the essence of the matter that we don't know today who we are or what we want to do?'' The cover shows a storm-tossed ship flying le tricolor.

Some of Kepel's fellow intellectuals contend that the election should be an opportunity to look inward instead of blaming Islamists. The political scientist Olivier Roy argues that France's rigorously secular government and society have helped create an airless environment that has allowed jihadism to thrive. Roy and others on the left appear to believe that the terrorist violence of the past two years has illuminated fatal flaws at the heart of French political culture: too rigid, too hierarchical, too insistent on imposing cultural conformity on an increasingly diverse population. This critique is sometimes echoed by critics in Britain and the United States, who say France needs to get over its horror of communautarisme -- the formation of ethnic and social enclaves -- and loosen the sense of what it means to be authentically French. In other words, France would be better off adopting a more hands-off, multiculturalist approach to the head scarf and other Islamic cultural symbols.

Kepel scoffs at this argument, and sometimes derides its proponents as naïs or even Islamist fellow-travelers. He is more than an observer to this debate: Kepel was a member of the commission that helped create France's controversial 2004 law banning Islamic head scarves and other religious symbols and clothing in public schools, and remains proud of that role. He believes that eroding French state secularism, known as laïité would lead to a ''Balkanization of Europe along religious and ethnic lines,'' with a Muslim voting bloc, Muslim schools and a hardening of quasi-separatist communities of various religions. With his career coming to an end -- he is 61 -- he is making these arguments with ever-greater urgency. He has repeatedly dismissed claims of widespread Islamophobia in French society as fraudulent, saying the word has become little more than a rhetorical club used by Islamists to rally their base.

Kepel's term for this cultural malaise -- and the title of his latest book -- is la fracture. When I saw him recently in his spare office at the Paris Institute of Political Studies, commonly known as Sciences Po, a copy was on the table: The cover is a color portrait of his face against a black background, staring at the viewer with an expression of almost morbid gravitas. I had not seen it before and was taken aback, as much by the egotism of the gesture as by its tacit acknowledgment of the death threat. He had set another copy of the book on a pile of boxes in an alcove, flanked above and below by two reproductions of one of the Fayum mummy portraits made for funeral sites nearly 2,000 years ago. It was his own kitschy little death shrine. Kepel told me he would have to be more careful if the book was as successful as he hoped. ''This is why I put my face on the cover: If you want to kill me, kill me,'' he said, with a twinkle in his eye. ''This is resistance.''

France's standoff with its Muslim immigrants evokes such wrenching anxiety in part because it touches on what was once a source of great national pride. For much of the 20th century, France was the country of immigration par excellence. This was true despite France's demanding approach to immigration, requiring newcomers to surrender their old identity completely and forget where they had come from. They could keep their religion, but it had to remain entirely private. In exchange, they could in principle become as French as anyone else, or even more so (Yves Montand, the great French actor and singer, was a poor migrant from Italy). Most of the immigrants were European Catholics, with fairly compatible heritage, but not all: More than 100,000 Indochinese refugees came in the decades after World War II, and they assimilated easily, too. French politicians boasted of their country's universal values as the beacon to these immigrant hordes. And French laïitéas seen as one of those values: People who had been in thrall to church dogma in other places would breathe more freely in France, where Enlightenment principles prevailed.

By the time Kepel was born in 1955, that happy era of successful immigration was coming to an end. The years that followed saw a brutal war in Algeria and other struggles in France's former North African territories. At the same time, millions of Muslim immigrants began arriving in the concrete high-rises of the French banlieues, French cities, with a culture less amenable to the kind of assimilation France had always preached.

Kepel grew up in Paris, the son of an immigrant playwright and actor who translated Vaclav Havel's plays into French. As a young man, he hoped to become a classics scholar, but he was captivated by Syria during a summer excursion through the Arab world with a friend. When he got back to Paris, he started studying Arabic, and eventually entered a graduate program at Sciences Po (where he now teaches). Like most students of the Arab world, Kepel immersed himself in Arab culture, living in Damascus and then Cairo. But in 1982, his academic adviser told him he had seen something unusual back home in France: striking workers prostrating themselves in the direction of Mecca. Five years later, Kepel published ''Les Banlieues de l'Islam,'' a sympathetic and detailed study of France's Muslim community that is still considered a landmark. At the time, anti-Arab racism was mostly seen as a social issue in France, not a religious one; Islam scarcely registered as a domestic phenomenon. Kepel spent much of the following two decades writing about the Middle East. His books on political Islam and the Arab world, authoritative but accessible, were valuable primers for many of the journalists (including me) who began writing about these issues in the wake of the 9/11 attacks.

In 2010, Kepel returned to the banlieues, and he found them vastly changed. Years of worsening joblessness and unrest had helped to fuel the spread of a militant and often rejectionist Muslim identity, especially among the young. He was most concerned about the rising prevalence of Salafism, a puritanical Islamic current that is the typical gateway to jihadist violence (though most of its practitioners, it must be emphasized, are peaceful). Kepel published two volumes about the state of the banlieues in 2012, and the title of the second book, ''Ninety-Three,'' is deliberately -- some said excessively -- ominous. It is the government designation for the Seine-St. Denis district, but it is also an allusion to Victor Hugo's novel about the Terror of 1793, heyday of the guillotine.

The Paris terrorist attacks of January 2015 made Kepel's emphasis look not alarmist but prophetic. In their aftermath, he quickly completed ''Terror in France,'' which outlines three generations of jihadism, starting in the 1980s and culminating in the newly decentralized attacks associated with ISIS across Europe. It was on the verge of publication when the second and far more deadly Paris attacks took place, on Nov. 13 of that year, helping to turn it into a best seller.

About a week later, Olivier Roy, who teaches at the European University Institute in Florence, Italy, wrote an essay for Le Monde that challenged one of Kepel's core ideas. Roy argued that the issue was not the radicalization of Islam but ''the Islamization of radicalism'' -- a phrase that quickly caught on. For Roy, the terrorists, mostly second-generation immigrants, were caught between the tradition-bound world of their parents and the secularism of their French contemporaries. Unable to find a place, they adopted a nihilistic rejection of society, expressing it not in the Marxist language of the 1960s and '70s but in its current equivalent: Islam. The same logic could explain why so many white Catholic French kids had become jihadis.

Kepel responded quickly and forcefully, accusing Roy, who does not speak Arabic, of cooking up a thesis that suited his own ignorance: If Islam is incidental, no need to listen to the Friday sermons or read the theological debates online. Roy's argument was also a salve to the liberal conscience, Kepel added, allowing people to believe that the state of contemporary Islam had little or nothing to do with the violence. Roy, clearly stung, responded, and the argument went on for months, fueled by frequent stories in the French press. Other intellectuals joined in, notably the academic Françis Burgat, who argued that both Roy and Kepel failed to adequately recognize the role of France's colonial history and current foreign policies in shaping the younger generation's anger. But it remained primarily a two-man fight.

When I met Roy in November, he told me over a lunch of Breton oysters and Muscadet that he had not wanted a feud. ''He attacked me -- I had to respond,'' Roy said, squeezing his lips out in a Gallic expression of disdain. ''He's someone who needs enemies. He's like an academic version of Sarkozy.'' Roy made clear that he respects Kepel's erudition but believes he is projecting his own obsession with jihadism onto the more nuanced political realities of a hybrid France. The two men form a striking contrast. Roy is a bit paunchy and disheveled, with an amiable, jowly face; he has the air of a college professor who likes taking students out for a drink. Kepel teaches class in elegantly tailored suits, and his manners are more formal. He has a volatile streak; he has feuded in public with several peers and former students. He is also more visibly interested in power. He makes no secret of his membership in the Sièle club, a quintessentially French institution that gathers much of the nation's political and social elite for a formal dinner on the last Wednesday of every month, in an 18th-century mansion near the presidential palace. In an article last year, Roy referred to Kepel cuttingly as a ''professional Rastignac,'' an allusion to a socially ambitious character in the novels of Balzac.

Roy told me he believed that France's political culture had become too hostile to religion, and that laïité- originally created as a way to keep the state neutral -- had become ''eradicatory'' in its application. It would be healthier for France to give more space to all religious discourse. ''You have a whole generation of politicians here who do not know how to talk to religious people,'' he said. When I asked Roy how France should handle the jihadist challenge, he said: ''Isolate the radicals and saturate the religious space.'' In other words, the way to counter violent Islamists is to open our arms to Islam in other ways -- including, presumably, to peaceful Islamists.

This may sound reasonable in the abstract. But it is uncomfortably close to the pressure tactics I often heard from Salafists and Muslim Brothers during my years as a correspondent in the Arab world. (''If society were more Islamic, Al Qaeda would have no foothold.'') Roy is no Islamist, but I couldn't help wondering if his sympathy for Muslims, who are disproportionately poor and unemployed in France, had made him a little too sanguine. Terrorism aside, a distressingly large number of Muslims are in open revolt against French cultural and political norms. In September, a landmark survey commissioned by the Montaigne Institute found that 28 percent of French Muslims had adopted values ''clearly opposed to the values of the republic,'' with a mix of ''authoritarian'' and ''secessionist'' views, including support for polygamy and the niqab, or full-face veil, and opposition to laws enforcing secularism. These attitudes reinforce anti-Muslim sentiment, in a spiral of crispations identitaires (''identitarian fist-clenching'') that is a boon to the anti-immigrant National Front.

Kepel's fracture is nowhere more evident than in the hometown of Larossi Abballa, the man who condemned him to death. Mantes-la-Jolie is an old industrial town in the far western suburbs of Paris. Its downtown resembles many others in northern France: a prim cluster of gray, Norman-style buildings that are home to shops, restaurants and bakeries. As you drive west, the landscape quickly changes to ugly block towers, vacant lots and mosques. The neighborhood known as Val-Fourré wedged between a highway and a bend in the Seine river, is populated almost entirely by Arab and African immigrants, living in one of France's highest concentrations of subsidized housing. On Fridays, after the weekly prayer sermon in the local mosques, the crowded market stalls around the high-rise tower known as la Centrale look like a scene from an Arab city. The women are in long black abayas and veils; many of the men wear traditional Malian garb or North African-style djellabas. The white neighborhood that borders Val-Fourréas turned into a bastion of National Front supporters.

The first person I met in Val-Fourréas a burly man in Afghan-style dress, with the scraggly beard favored by Salafi Muslims. He preferred not to give his name. After chatting for a few minutes, I brought up Abballa and the killings in June. ''That was just a matter of revenge,'' he said dismissively. ''It had nothing to do with Islam.'' I asked what Abballa was taking revenge for, and he gave me an incredulous look. ''Why? The cops had probably beat him up,'' he said. ''They stop you, they harass you, they come to your house. It's the same for all of us.'' A few minutes later I asked him about the word ''radicalization.'' He said: ''What does 'radicalization' mean? What does 'fundamentalism' mean? It means what's fundamental, the basis of the religion. This is what they don't like. They keep pressuring us, but we will not give up our religion. And if it leads to a clash. ... ''

He seemed uneasy talking to me and turned to say goodbye. He probably would not have spoken to me at all if I hadn't been introduced by a 31-year-old local blogger named Aboubakry N'diaye, who had offered to be my guide for the day. Hatred of the police is rampant in the French banlieues, and journalists are mostly assumed to be working with the cops.

One after another, the young men I met that afternoon said the same thing, in almost exactly the same words: It had nothing to do with Islam, and revenge against the police is perfectly natural. None of them admitted to having known Abballa, though some insisted that he was an ''ordinary guy.''

In a sense, Abballa's very ordinariness, his invisibility, is the most sinister aspect of the younger generation of French jihadists. They leave no trace, and that is partly because the banlieues now provide both isolation and camouflage. Neighborhoods like Val-Foureéere once full of youth associations -- many formed by the Communist Party -- but those have slowly disintegrated over the years, along with the jobs once provided by local car factories. (Local youth unemployment is said to be at least 30 percent.) ''That social tissue was necessary, but there are so many fewer associations now, and people are more isolated,'' I was told by Yasser Amri, a political consultant who grew up in Mantes and worked as an adviser to a French lawmaker for the area. ''They stay at home with a laptop, the internet takes over and they are vulnerable to ISIS.'' Abballa may also have learned -- or have been taught -- to keep a low profile. In any case, his jihadist sympathies would have raised little suspicion in an environment where Salafism and hatred of the state have become norms.

Abballa's life, at least early on, seems to bear out some of the arguments Olivier Roy makes about the second-generation immigrant's sense of dislocation, and the hunger for an identity. His father was a laborer from southern Morocco who arrived in France five years before Larossi was born, the last child in a family of five. Abballa spent his early life in Les Mureaux, a town 12 miles away from Mantes with a very similar mix of poor immigrants and a reputation for riots. Abballa knew little about Islam -- at least at first, according to the co-conspirators in his first terror plot, in 2011. At the same time, he told them he was ''thirsty for blood,'' court documents show. He was first arrested at 18 on theft charges, and seems to have fallen into jihad the same way he fell into petty delinquency.

Abballa's first dip into jihad was almost comical. At 19, he joined a group of other young banlieue men in a park east of Paris, where they beheaded rabbits in preparation for murdering human captives. His plan to join the jihad in Pakistan were thwarted soon afterward, and police officers found terrorist propaganda in Abballa's home and those of other plotters, court documents show. They also had an academic volume co-written by Kepel, called ''Al Qaeda in Its Own Words'': apparently they saw it as a handbook.

But it was the next phase that turned Abballa into a real jihadist, and it is hard to avoid the conclusion that his path conforms closely to the stages Kepel identifies with the third generation of European jihadism. Abballa spent almost three years behind bars, and was moved among jails several times because he was proselytizing for jihad. Later, he made direct contact with a member of ISIS in Syria who had helped direct terrorist attacks in France. By the time Abballa died, his religious devotion was unmistakable. The final video he made is a long sermon about Islam, and it includes a citation from a relatively obscure 11th century Islamic jurist. He was anything but a nihilist -- the word Roy often uses to describe these young men.

After his release from prison, Abballa maintained a facade of normalcy, starting a one-man business delivering sandwiches and burgers. His Facebook feed is full of images of fast food and happy clients. Even the girlfriend he saw for years before his prison term claims she had no idea he had become radical. ''After me, there was religion,'' she said, in a short interview she gave on French radio just after the murders. ''All he said was that he'd like it if one day I became like him, and wore a veil. But not once did he judge me or refuse to talk to me because I wasn't veiled, or was wearing ripped jeans or leather. Not once.'' Abballa's family appears to have been the one group from whom he could not hide his new allegiances. On the night of Nov. 13, 2015, after the news of the Paris terrorist attacks spread, one of his sisters became terrified that he was among the attackers, according to an article in Le Monde. She called the house and asked another member of the family to pull up Abballa's duvet and make sure he was safely in bed.

Exactly seven months later, on a balmy June evening, Abballa drove the 10 minutes to Magnanville, where Jean-Baptiste Salvaing lived. It is still not clear how he chose Salvaing, a midlevel career police officer who focused on local delinquency. What is clear, according to local news stories sourced to the police, is that Abballa had planned his attack carefully. He knew when Salvaing would be returning from work and hid behind a gate, where he sprang out and stabbed Salvaing repeatedly, piercing his heart. He then went into the house and cut the throat of Salvaing's companion, Jessica Schneider, and used his cellphone to conduct the broadcast on Facebook Live.

Watching the video is a profoundly unnerving experience. Abballa is seen from below, his long face distorted and lengthened by the angle. A patch of colored cloth can be seen hanging on the wall by his head, conveying an eerie hint of private domesticity; this room was clearly a place of comfort and happiness to the two people he had just murdered. Abballa does not look angry or upset. He sniffles frequently during his speech -- a cold -- and at one point says, ''Pardon me.'' Every now and then you can see and hear the shuffling of the paper from which he is reading. Abballa speaks for 12 minutes, mixing his French with bits of Quranic Arabic, pledging his allegiance to the leader of ISIS, calling for mass murder and predicting a new age of Islamic conquest. After the police SWAT team burst into the apartment and killed him, they found the couple's 3-year-old child unharmed, in a state of shock.

The day before Salvaing was murdered, according to the Le Monde article, he attended a training session at his Police Headquarters, which abuts a mosque. The subject of the session was ''radicalization.''

One of the most common critiques of Kepel is that his relentless focus on Islam casts a shadow of suspicion onto all French Muslims. As Roy put it to me, ''If you say it's a religious issue, then the extremists are seen as the avant-garde of the whole Muslim population.'' Jean-Pierre Filiu, another prominent French scholar of the Islamic world, pointed out that several thousand Muslims marched for peace in Mantes-la-Jolie after the Abballa murders, many of them bearing pictures of the murdered couple and posters denouncing terrorism, and laid wreaths on the steps of the local Police Headquarters. There was no one there to greet them, and not much news coverage. ''The jihadis want to blur the lines, but the lines should be clear,'' Filiu told me. ''It's not the Salafis who are against us, and not the Muslims. It's the jihadis.''

These are generous sentiments, and no doubt many French Muslims appreciate them. Kepel would say they seem less aimed at truth than tact, the idea that hurting Muslim feelings will poison the atmosphere further. At its extreme, this view risks its own form of condescension: Be nice to Muslims or they will turn into suicide bombers.

Kepel has argued in his recent books that the French Muslim community, once guided by the paternalist figures from the old country known as darons, is now increasingly under the sway of younger and far more confrontational Islamists. These ideologists, Kepel believes, have fostered a rupture with French values that nourishes the ISIS narrative. Yet some French intellectuals naïely disregard or even embrace these figures in the hopes of ''isolating the radicals.'' In other words, Kepel turns the accusation of Filiu and Roy -- that his own emphasis on Islam is unwittingly doing the work of ISIS -- against them. Kepel likes to cite ISIS propaganda urging its followers in Europe to hide behind the language of victimhood, including one document shared among ISIS sympathizers titled ''How to Survive in the West,'' which includes the following lines: ''A real war is heating up in the heart of Europe. ... The leaders of disbelief repeatedly lie in the media and say that we Muslims are all terrorists, while we denied it and wanted to be peaceful citizens. But they have cornered us and forced us into becoming radicalized.''

This kind of mutual accusation defines much of the past decade's debate on Islamic symbols. Roy and other leftists tend to see the 2004 law banning the head scarf as an unnecessary provocation that has played into the hands of extremists. Kepel, who helped guide the law, says it was the rising prevalence of head scarves in schools that was sowing division and bias, and the ban has put an end to that. Each camp has Muslims supporting them. Surveys suggest that the French public overwhelmingly supports the ban, and my conversations with a dozen schoolteachers who work in the banlieues reinforced that conclusion.

The struggle over the head scarf is part of a broader effort by the French state, which harbors a quaint ambition to reach some sort of grand bargain with Islam as it did with the Catholic Church in 1905. That arrangement nowhere mentioned the word laïité but it reset the boundaries between church and state, reining in church influence in the public sphere and appropriating most ecclesiastical property. This is far more difficult to do with Muslims in France, who are extremely diverse, with no equivalent to the Catholic hierarchy. The fact that many mosques in France were built and supplied with imams by foreign organizations and governments, notably Morocco and Turkey, is another obstacle. The French Council of the Muslim Faith, created by the government in 2003, has periodically issued calls for a reform of this system, with few results.

Although France's Muslim community is leaderless, one man has assumed an increasingly prominent and confrontational role, and has become Kepel's chief example of the Islamist fellow-traveler. Marwan Muhammad is executive director of the Collective Against Islamophobia in France, or C.C.I.F. Under his direction, the C.C.I.F. has raised its profile, filing frequent lawsuits and publicizing episodes of what it sees as anti-Muslim bias. Muhammad, a slight-figured man with a piercing gaze and a prayer bruise on his bald forehead, is 38, a former trader whose gifts as a speaker and promoter are indisputable. When I met him, in a cafe outside his offices in the Stade de France, just north of Paris, he said he saw his own work as comparable to the American civil rights movement. Speaking an impressively fast and American-accented English, he said that he had no trouble with French laws on laïité but that they had been ''recoded'' by racists who shielded themselves behind secularism. The 2004 law on the head scarf in schools, he said, had been ''the mother of all tensions,'' and the antiterrorism campaign had become an excuse for attacking Muslims. The root of the problem, he said, was that France was still locked in a racist, colonialist mind-set and could not see Muslims as equals. When I raised the question of Islamist militancy in towns like Mantes-la-Jolie, he suggested it was an emotional reaction to racism, but also asserted the rights of Muslims to dress and behave as they liked.

Last summer, Muhammad gained new prominence by helping to shape public perceptions of the Burkini affair. It happened in August, when a number of French seaside towns enacted bans on the full-body swimsuit, designed to respect Muslim modesty codes for women. The French police then began forcing women in Burkinis to take them off, pay a fine or face arrest. The story became a global sensation, with the French government coming off in most accounts as petty, Islamophobic and hypocritical. The Burkini, the garment's supporters said, was an instrument not of repression but of liberation: a way for conservative women, who might otherwise be trapped inside, to enjoy themselves. All this took place just a month after the terrorist carnage in Nice, where a man plowed a truck through a crowd of pedestrians on a seaside boulevard, killing 86 and wounding many more. For some observers, the Burkini affair may have suggested an unspoken corollary: Perhaps the French are helping to bring this terrorist hatred on themselves.

For Kepel, the lesson of the Burkini was entirely different. He did not deny that arresting the women was an appallingly clumsy (and self-defeating) thing to do. But he also saw yet another effort by Islamists -- and their left-wing fellow-travelers -- to turn France from the victim of terrorist atrocity into the aggressor. He pointed out that the international press coverage mostly ignored the rise of Salafist-style Islam as a context for the Burkini. In other words, many Frenchwomen in Burkinis might have been wearing bikinis a few years ago. The Burkini episode helped furnish what has become a dominant theme of his ongoing public dispute with the left. His new book, published in France in November, includes his most ferocious polemic yet against the ''delusion'' of Islamophobia. It also features an acidic portrayal of Marwan Muhammad, whom he portrays as an opportunist serving the interests of jihadis.

Kepel's recent work on the rise of jihadism in France's prisons and the banlieues -- much of it carried out by a dedicated band of student researchers -- is rooted in a set of alarming numbers. As of late March, there were 421 ''Islamic terrorists'' in France's jails and prisons and 1,224 people who had been identified as ''radicalized,'' according to France's Justice Ministry. Many of these are in prison for minor or nonterrorist offenses and will soon be released. Each attack worsens the cycle of mistrust between Françis de souche -- the phrase means ''French from the roots,'' and refers to white Christians -- and their Muslim compatriots. To address this fear, a dubious new cottage industry has grown up over the past two years. Government grants for privately run ''de-radicalization'' programs have been easy money, with scores of new outfits and self-proclaimed gurus trumpeting their claims of success.

''Everyone is groping -- no one knows what to do,'' I was told by Adeline Hazan, who leads a government watchdog agency for the nation's prisons. It does not help that about half of France's prisoners are Muslim (though Muslims make up less than 10 percent of the French population). In some overcrowded jails, the percentage is much higher. Hazan's group released a report last summer excoriating the government's new effort to segregate jihadi prisoners, saying the plan threatened to make matters worse. The segregation scheme originated just after the Paris attacks in January 2015, when public attention was focused on the prison system's reputation as a factory for terrorists. But the proposed remedy may have been worse than the disease. The newly isolated jihadis were in a better position to reinforce one another's beliefs; and the government's plans for de-radicalization -- which included ''therapeutic fencing'' classes -- seemed little more than a joke. In September, an inmate in one of the segregated units stabbed a guard and almost killed him. A month later, France's justice minister, Jean-Jacques Urvoas, canceled the segregation scheme. When I met Urvoas at the ministry, I asked him what the word ''radicalization'' meant. He replied: ''I don't know. And I am going to stop using it.''

Whatever word you use, French prosecutors and judges now struggle daily with the mystery of how terrorists are made. A year ago, one of France's top prosecutors dealing with terrorism began convening a panel of academic experts once a month in her office at the Palais de Justice in Paris. It is the first effort of its kind. In December, I attended one of these meetings and listened for two hours as a dozen political scientists, sociologists and psychologists dissected the life and psyche of M., a young convict who'd grown up in a banlieue and joined ISIS. The participants argued about the same question that divides Kepel and Roy: Did everything come back to Islam, or was that just a pretext? ''What's more important, the search or the response?'' one person said.

The discussion ranged widely, but returned again and again to the question of ''how one lives as a Muslim in France while integrating.'' One participant said, ''I find him to be a psychopath,'' prompting a burst of laughter; another said he found M. ''typical in many ways.''

At 9 o'clock, the prosecutor brought the discussion to a close, and her assistants poured Champagne and provided a round of amuse-bouches and pastries. I asked the prosecutor if she had found the session useful, despite the disagreements. She said it had shed light on the most difficult questions she must assess: the convict's ''capacity for dissimulation'' and his degree of dangerousness.

The number of people who require this kind of exhausting scrutiny is daunting: Some 700 French citizens are with ISIS in Iraq and Syria, and as the terrorist group loses ground, more of them will return home. I watched three of these returnees standing in the defendant's dock during their trial in Paris in December. One of them had been transferred from jail, and appeared in a box to the side of the courtroom, flanked by guards. The others, who were at liberty, stood next to their lawyers, facing a panel of judges. The three men started out as friends in Roubaix, a town in northern France that has gained some notoriety as an Islamist stronghold. All of them ended up in Syria fighting for Islamist militias and eventually found their way back to France. The president of the judicial panel, a balding man with a scholarly mien, questioned them closely about their mind-set and beliefs and returned again and again to the question of Islam. ''Today, would you say you're a republican Muslim?'' he asked one of them. The accused, a white convert to Islam identified as Pierre T., mumbled ''Ah, that's a tough one,'' and added that he preferred ''normal Muslim.'' Later, the judge asked if he could practice his form of Islam and continue to work.

Another defendant, identified as Mehdi K., who had served in the French military before deserting and traveling to Syria, was pressed to describe his future plans. ''I see myself living in France with my wife and children,'' he replied. ''I am still Muslim, rigorous toward myself.'' The judge seemed unsatisfied with the response, and at one point he said something about the danger of Islam's being turned into a political ideology. As the session ended, the prosecutor demanded the maximum penalty for Mehdi K., saying that his radical convictions were deep-rooted and that he posed a ''manifest danger.'' Mehdi K.'s lawyer protested, saying the prosecutor was asking the judge to determine the sentence ''not for what he has done, but for the potential risk that he poses.'' It struck me as an odd objection to make. The judge had made very clear that he was far more worried about Mehdi K.'s future than his past.

With all this attention focused on them, many jihadis are now adapting, and have become far better at disguising their beliefs. Farhad Khosrokhavar, a sociologist who has spent many years researching Muslims in the French prison system, told me it has become almost impossible to get honest testimony out of the inmates. Many of them shave their beards, Khosrokhavar said, and adopt a mild demeanor, and sometimes they even stop praying and fasting during Ramadan, all so as to deceive the authorities and, presumably, get out of prison faster.

On a brisk morning in December, Kepel arrived at the gate of Villepinte prison, northeast of Paris. It is a sprawling, high-walled compound, with huge square guard towers overlooking a grim landscape of highways, power lines and vacant fields. The prison is notorious for its overcrowded conditions; its administrator recently wrote an unusual letter of protest to a French magistrate saying that it was so far over capacity that it could not accept a single inmate more. It also hosts about 20 men accused of terrorist offenses, mostly hardened jihadis who have fought with ISIS in Syria.

Emerging from his car, Kepel was greeted by the prison administrator, a dark-haired woman in her 40s, and escorted inside, where two inmates were waiting in a spare room near the prison library. One was a thief, a svelte man with long hair and a beard; the other was a thickset North African who was in for nine years. The two inmates -- who asked not to have their names disclosed -- met Kepel on a previous visit and seemed delighted to see him again. Both were Muslim, and both were vehemently opposed to ISIS. By their account, Kepel's first visit to the prison, in which he delivered a lecture on Islam and jihadism, had humiliated the prison's tight-knit group of unrepentant ISIS members by knocking down their arguments with deft quotes from the Quran. ''God is sovereign in his orders,'' he recited in Arabic at the close of a tense, angry debate, ''but most people do not know it.''

The visit, along with group discussions, they said, had pushed the jihadist contingent to be more communicative. They had kept to themselves before the debate, their lives and rap sheets a mystery. ''Now we begin to understand a bit more,'' the North African told me. One of the jihadis ''had a breakup, others had family problems.'' Some of them, he added, had begun to talk a bit differently about their prospects after swapping stories with other inmates doing longer sentences. ''They had this idea that we're fiche S'' -- the designation used for monitoring potential terrorists -- so ''there's no future. Now they seem to understand there is a future. They talk about having jobs, marriage, kids. There's a positive evolution.''

But when the two inmates talked about life outside prison, their own optimism faded. France, they said, seemed to be building toward a confrontation with Islam. It was the same in all of Europe, they said, and even in the United States (they made clear that they spent much of their time watching TV news). For young men from the French banlieues, assimilation and radicalization appeared to be two sides of a coin that never fell in their favor. ''All the profiling, the discrimination, it adds up,'' the North African said. He continued, referring to the numeric code for France's most notorious banlieue: ''Ninety-three -- if that's on your C.V., it's hard to get a job. There's frustration among the young. That becomes hate, and hate becomes radicalism.''

Just before we left, I asked the North African whether he expected the recent wave of terrorist attacks in France to continue. This was just after the arrest of several terrorist cells, and two months before a machete-wielding jihadist attacked guards near the Louvre. He gave me a somber look. ''This is just the beginning,'' he said.

Many French Muslims, even in the banlieues, seem to agree with Kepel that the core problem is the spread of more aggressive forms of Islam. In Mantes-la-Jolie, I met a 50-year-old shop owner who told me he believed that by the 1990s, the situation was improving, and ''France was ready to assimilate its Maghrebins,'' or North Africans. What changed, he said, was not primarily the advances of the racist National Front, but the spread of Gulf-sponsored Salafism. The man described this phenomenon in terms almost identical to Kepel's. He told me he had been shaken by some of his encounters with young local men, many of them poorly educated and delinquent but full of religious rage. Sometimes, he said, men came into the shop and called him an infidel, in front of other customers. The shopkeeper asked me not to use his name, because he feared reprisals from the Salafis. ''Now, people seem almost not to want assimilation,'' he said. ''They have taken on a religion that has nothing to do with their own origins. It's a lost generation.''

Naima M'Faddel, who is one of France's relatively few Muslim elected officials as a deputy mayor in Dreaux, told me she remembered the exact moment when she became aware of Salafism. As a girl in the 1980s, she once answered the door to find herself facing a bearded man in a djellaba, who quickly turned his gaze to the ground so as to avoid the sin of looking at an unveiled female. ''Is the master of the house here?'' he said. She replied that he was not. The man said, ''Tell him he should go to the mosque.'' M'Faddel, who grew up in a mixed neighborhood of European and North African immigrants, said her family witnessed the Islamist influence becoming dominant as the demography shifted. ''My impression is that the majority of Arab Muslims in the banlieues have been penetrated by Salafist thinking,'' she told me. M'Faddel said French racism and elitism were certainly problems, but she also placed a lot of blame on the political left for ''infantilizing'' Muslims and not trying hard enough to integrate them as citizens.

Another passionate enemy of the Islamist trend is France's most distinguished Islamic intellectual, the Moroccan-born thinker Tareq Oubrou. Oubrou leads a mosque in Bordeaux and promotes a discreet practice of religion that is fully consistent with laïité He says beards, head scarves and other public displays of religiosity are incidental to Islam. We spoke in the library of his home, with high shelves of Arabic and French scholarship above us. Oubrou told me cheerfully that political Islam had been a ''total failure'' and that Islam in general was in need of a fundamental rethinking, so that people could stop ''trying to turn themselves into seventh-century Arabs.'' The Quran, he said, was a ''point of departure and not a point of arrival.'' His mosque, a few blocks from the train station in downtown Bordeaux, is so discreet that I almost missed it. There are no minarets, no grand entrance. The only giveaway was the group of gun-toting French soldiers who stand guard at prayer times. Oubrou's opinions have earned him repeated death threats.

I recently spoke with a young, highly trained French Muslim doctor, who wears a head scarf and who was deeply frustrated that she could not do so at the public hospital where she worked in France. She told me she went to Oubrou to seek his advice. He asked her about the nature of her work in the hospital, and she described it to him. He then gave her his counsel: Her work in the hospital appeared to be saving lives, which was far more important -- and indeed, more Islamic -- than anything she might want to wear on her head. I found this answer impressive, but the doctor was not convinced. She decided soon afterward to move to Britain, where she now works in a hospital that allows her to wear the head scarf wherever she likes.

The Muslim doctor's choice suggests a tacit critique of France, and it squares with something I heard from many young French people of North African background: France is simply out of step with a more globalized world. Some academics agree. ''It is not France's traditions that caused this problem, and France's traditions may not be the answer,'' says David Bell, a historian at Princeton. ''Laïitéay not be the best basis for integrating these very different populations. The debates there are dominated by intellectuals who are overly attached to their own history.''

When I last saw Kepel in his office, I asked him about the accusation that he had become a kind of neo-Gaullist defender of French traditions. He scoffed a bit, saying it was the circumstances that had changed, not him. ''The big issue is to think about what has happened to the country -- 239 dead in 18 months,'' he said, using his own count. ''It is unprecedented on French soil.'' He said he saw his role as offering facts about what led to those tragedies, not offering solutions. Some of those facts were uncomfortable, and some people -- including officials in places like Mantes-la-Jolie and Trappes, with their hard-core Islamist enclaves -- were unwilling to face them. It was up to other people, he said, to find ways to heal France's wounds. Kepel reminded me that his career was mostly behind him and that he had nothing to lose. ''It may be that I'm influenced by my background as the grandson of an assimilated Frenchman,'' he added. ''But basically, I'm just an Orientalist with cold blood and thick skin.''

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Robert F. Worth is a contributing writer for the magazine and the author of ''A Rage for Order: The Middle East in Turmoil From Tahrir Square to ISIS,'' which won the 2017 Lionel Gelber prize.

GILLES KEPEL EN ROUTE TO A MEETING AT VILLEPINTE PRISON, OUTSIDE PARIS, IN DECEMBER. (MM32-MM33); THE FRIDAY MARKET IN VAL-FOURRÉ ONE OF THE BANLIEUES, OR EXURBAN IMMIGRANT GHETTOS, OF FRANCE. (MM35); MUSLIM MEN GATHER FOR PRAYER IN VAL-FOURRÉ (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JÉÔE SESSINI/MAGNUM, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM38) 

Document NYTF000020170409ed490007e



News Analysis
World; Europe
U.S. Attack on Syria Cements Kremlin’ Embrace of Assad

By NEIL MacFARQUHAR 
1,471 words
8 April 2017
16:05
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSCOW —f Russia   once maintained at least a semblance of distance from President Bashar al-Assad   of Syria  , it rushed to his defense after the American missile  , it rushed to his defense after the strikes   ordered by President Trump on Thursday. The attack cemented Moscow more closely than ever to the notorious Syrian autocrat.

Even as the United States condemned Mr. Assad for gassing his own citizens and held Russia partly responsible, given its 2013 promise to rid Syria of chemical weapons, the Kremlin kept denying that Syria had any such capability.

By championing Mr. Assad and condemning American “ggression,”resident %20title="More%20articles%20about%20Vladimir%20V.%20Putin.">Vladimir V. Putin   of Russia seemed to be burying the idea that he could somehow cooperate with the Trump administration to end the conflict on his terms.

The solidarity with Damascus is likely to cause problems for Russia in the long run, analysts said, although Mr. Putin probably cannot be persuaded to loosen his embrace any time soon.

The Russian government often takes its time to react to major world events, but the Kremlin issued a prompt statement early Friday castigating the United States   for the missile strikes on Al Shayrat airfield in retaliation for Syria’ chemical weapons attack  .

The Russian Ministry of Defense vowed to strengthen Syria’ air defense systems, sent a frigate on a port call and froze an agreement  with the United States to coordinate activity in Syrian air space.

“utin made a choice —o underline that Assad is his ally,”aid Aleksandr Morozov, an independent political analyst. “his will lead to Russia’ further isolation, but Putin will stand his ground.”

Mr. Morozov and other analysts consider the policy problematic for various reasons.

Russia Partly to Blame

First, Mr. Trump and his secretary of state, Rex W. Tillerson  , have painted Russia as at least partly responsible for the carnage among civilians that was fomented by the Assad government.

“oscow’ main problem is not that the U.S. made a strike but that Trump and Tillerson have toughened their rhetoric on Syria and Assad,”aid Vladimir Frolov, a foreign affairs analyst and columnist for Republic.ru.  

He added, “hey have said that Russia is responsible for Assad’ actions and that it didn’ fulfill its responsibilities in terms of chemical weapons disarmament.”

The  chemical attack   in the Syrian town of Khan Sheikhoun on Tuesday killed more than 80 people and afflicted hundreds more. Turkey said on Thursday that sarin, a banned nerve agent, had been used.

The United States responded by firing almost 60 cruise missiles at the air base, which housed the warplanes used in the chemical attack. The local governor said five military men and two civilians died.

Winning at Any Cost?

Second, in continuing deadly attacks on civilians, Mr. Assad seems to want to pursue a military victory at any cost  , putting a lie to Russia’ statements that a negotiated settlement is the sole solution.

That risks dragging out a war that Mr. Putin has depicted at home as quick, cheap and easy at a time when many Russians have been struggling economically. Trying to keep the length and cost of the war down is a crucial reason that the Russians will avoid escalating any conflict with the United States, analysts said.

“ussia wants to end the conflict and to diminish its military and economic presence,”aid Andrei Frolov, a defense analyst and the managing editor of the Moscow Defense Brief.

With the next Russian presidential campaign scheduled to start by the end of the year, he said, “here is no need to continue a war outside the country with a weak explanation for the Russian people why Russia is staying there.”

A poll by the independent Levada center in March found that almost 20 percent of Russians already believed that the country’ military involvement in Syria made no sense.

Dangerous Alliance

Third, the Assad alliance could undermine one of Mr. Putin’ main goals for entering the war: to try to make Russia a player on the world stage again as the indispensable broker in the Middle East.

Protecting Mr. Assad could further repulse countries Moscow has been courting, like Turkey and Israel, analysts said —ot to mention much of the world.

In the months immediately after Russia deployed its military in Syria, Maria Zakharova , the spokeswoman for the Foreign Ministry, used to say things like, “e don’ support Assad; what is important for us is to preserve Syrian statehood.”

After the attack, the ministry cranked out a statement lauding Syria for its “ierce battle”gainst “nternational terrorism.”

Aleksei V. Makarkin, the deputy head of the Center for Political Technologies, a think tank based in Moscow, said, “he longer Russia supports Assad, the more dependent it is on him.”

“t the beginning, there was some talk about replacing him, even if gradually,”e said, but that talk has evaporated.

The ostensible reason Mr. Putin deployed his military in Syria in September 2015 was to fight terrorism, but that is often dismissed as the sound-bite logic. Other goals, especially shoring up Mr. Assad, proved more important.

Mr. Putin wanted to resurrect Moscow’ old Soviet reputation as a global military power. Syria proved a showcase for new Russian weapons, and Russia has established two rare overseas bases there.

“ussia will continue to support Assad because he is the only guarantor of Russia’ military presence in Syria and hence of Russia’ military presence in the Middle East over all,”r. Makarkin said.

In addition, Mr. Putin was appalled by the way Western leaders had abandoned former allies like President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and Col. Muammar Qadhafi of Libya.

Mr. Putin was determined to prove that Russia would stick by its friends and oppose “egime change”ooted in outside intervention.

Russia faults the United States for destabilizing countries like Iraq and Libya —hich some think has provided an opening for Islamic extremists — scenario Mr. Putin was determined to avoid in Syria.

Sanctions and Isolation

Finally, of course, Syria presented Russia with an opportunity to break out of the isolation that resulted from sanctions imposed by the West for its 2014 annexation of Crimea and destabilization of Ukraine.

The Kremlin thought that forging an alliance with the West on Syria would render illogical the idea of maintaining the economic sanctions.

Mr. Trump, during his campaign, seemed to champion the idea, as well, questioning the need for sanctions, suggesting that Crimea probably did belong to Russia and repeatedly praising Mr. Putin as a strong leader. He endorsed the idea that the two countries together fight the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS.

While that raised suspicions in the United States of collusion, it was welcomed in Russia as a new dawn in relations.

The illusions began fading as Mr. Trump or his allies reversed many of those positions one by one, and the attack on Syria pretty much buried them.

On Friday, the rubric on Rossiya 24, the state satellite news channel, for some of the coverage of the attack was “aptain Amerika”mposed over a zombielike figure with dead eyes.

“he rest of the pre-election fog has melted away,”mitri Medvedev, Russia’ prime minister, wrote on his Facebook page. “nstead of the mass-circulated narrative about a joint fight against our main enemy, ISIL, the Trump administration has demonstrated that it will be fiercely fighting the legitimate government of Syria.”

(That Mr. Medvedev responded publicly, but not Mr. Putin, seemed to indicate moderate anger.)

The first consequence on the ground, analysts said, is that Syria and the Russian military will feel less restricted than ever in attacking forces they think are aligned with the West and that they have accused of being terrorists.

Some Syrian rebel groups subsidized by the United States and its regional allies have formed battlefield alliances with fighters from Al Nusra, the affiliate of Al Qaeda in Syria .

“ow Russia in Syria can oppress and destroy opposition forces without regard to the United States and its position,”r. Frolov, the defense analyst, said.

Oleg Matsnev and Ivan Nechepurenko contributed reporting from Moscow.

* Dozens of U.S. Missiles Hit Air Base in Syria  

* Russia Suspends Cooperation With U.S. in Syria After Missile Strikes  

* Syria Strike Puts U.S. Relationship With Russia at Risk  

* Weren’ Syria’ Chemical Weapons Destroyed? It’ Complicated  

* Acting on Instinct, Trump Upends His Own Foreign Policy  

* Syria’ ‘onundrum’ Limited Strikes Risk Entrenching Assad’ Strategy  

President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia seems to be burying the idea that he can somehow cooperate with the Trump administration to end the conflict in Syria. | Pool photo by Dmitri Lovetsky.. 

Document NYTFEED020170408ed4800335



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Trump's View of Syria: How It Evolved, in Tweets

By NICHOLAS FANDOS 
1,433 words
8 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Donald J. Trump had a blunt warning for his predecessor.

''We should stay the hell out of Syria,'' he wrote on Twitter in June 2013, after President Barack Obama directed American forces to increase support to Syrian rebels in the wake of a deadly chemical weapons attack by that country's government.

We should stay the hell out of Syria, the "rebels" are just as bad as the current regime. WHAT WILL WE GET FOR OUR LIVES AND $ BILLIONS?ZERO -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 16, 2013

Nearly four years later, now president himself and grappling with how to respond to another chemical weapons attack by the Syrian government, Mr. Trump ignored his own warnings and did what Mr. Obama threatened but never carried out: order a missile strike targeting assets of President Bashar al-Assad.

To understand the magnitude of Mr. Trump's reversal and the history of his public stances on one of the world's bloodiest civil wars, one need look no further than the president's Twitter account.

Mr. Trump posted dozens of tweets about the conflict in the years before he declared his candidacy for the White House, and frequently did so during the campaign as well. Channeling the same bluntness that helped fuel his political rise, he carved out a staunchly noninterventionist stance on the conflict and criticized as plodding Mr. Obama's approach.

But he also made one thing clear: If he was in charge, any action would be swift and secretive to catch Mr. Assad off guard.

We have sifted through Mr. Trump's account for the highlights:

2011-2012: Syria enters his radar screen

It was several months after it began before the growing conflict in Syria appears to have attracted Mr. Trump's attention, and, even then, it was only a blip. Mr. Trump, at the time best known as a reality television personality, first weighed in on Syria in October 2011 to criticize the United Nations for its inaction after China and Russia had successfully blocked sanctions against the Assad government.

Why is the UN condemning @Israel and doing nothing about Syria? What a disgrace. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) October 6, 2011

Nearly a year later, in the summer of 2012, Mr. Trump wrote again, this time aiming his criticism squarely at Mr. Obama for letting Russia begin to gain a foothold in the country -- a mistake he said Mr. Obama's Republican challenger at the time, Mitt Romney, would not have made.

Russia's recent actions in Syria have proven @MittRomney right. @BarackObama offers Putin "flexibility." @MittRomney will exert influence. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 18, 2012

August 2013: A chemical attack and warning on airstrikes

Late the next summer, as evidence began to emerge of a deadly chemical weapons attack on rebel-held suburbs of Damascus, the country's capital, the Obama administration began to debate military retaliation. And Mr. Trump unleashed a torrent of criticism.

In dozens of tweets, he warned Mr. Obama to ''stay out'' of Syria and focus on problems at home. Intervention, he said, would only risk hurting civilians and empowering would-be terrorists.

Remember, all these 'freedom fighters' in Syria want to fly planes into our buildings. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 28, 2013

Let the Arab League take care of Syria. Why are these rich Arab countries not paying us for the tremendous cost of such an attack? -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 29, 2013

If Obama attacks Syria and innocent civilians are hurt and killed, he and the U.S. will look very bad! -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 30, 2013

Despite his opposition to intervention, Mr. Trump repeatedly urged Mr. Obama to seek congressional approval to carry out punitive strikes against the Assad regime, warning that Mr. Obama would be making a ''big mistake'' if he failed to do so.

What will we get for bombing Syria besides more debt and a possible long term conflict? Obama needs Congressional approval. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 29, 2013

The President must get Congressional approval before attacking Syria-big mistake if he does not! -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 30, 2013

August 2013: 'SHOOT FIRST AND TALK LATER'

At the same time he was tweeting his thoughts on how Washington should handle the crisis, Mr. Trump maintained the effort had already been sabotaged by too much ''talk.''

If we are going to continue to be stupid and go into Syria (watch Russia), as they say in the movies, SHOOT FIRST AND TALK LATER! -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 29, 2013

We have given Syria so much time and information-there has never been such an instance in wartime history. Syria is now fully prepared! -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 2, 2013

Mr. Trump said he would have done things differently had he been in charge. It was an argument he would later repeat as a candidate, and as president.

@walaa_3ssaf No, dopey, I would not go into Syria, but if I did it would be by surprise and not blurted all over the media like fools. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 29, 2013

September 2013: Debating Obama's 'Red Line'

The debate over intervention centered in large part around a statement Mr. Obama made in 2012. The use of chemical weapons by Mr. Assad, he said, would cross a ''red line'' that would change the president's calculus and have ''enormous consequences'' for the Syrian government.

As he would do frequently during his campaign for president two years later, Mr. Trump used Twitter to repeatedly ridicule Mr. Obama's line as ''very dumb.''

President Obama put himself in a very bad position when he talked about Syria crossing the RED LINE. Amazingly, now he denies he said that! -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 5, 2013

The only reason President Obama wants to attack Syria is to save face over his very dumb RED LINE statement. Do NOT attack Syria,fix U.S.A. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 5, 2013

Facing stiff opposition in Congress, Mr. Obama unexpectedly said he would hold off on military action to instead pursue an international agreement to destroy Syria's stockpile of chemical weapons. Mr. Trump dismissed the proposal as a ''red line 2,'' and said it strengthened Mr. Assad.

Now Obama has set red line 2 with demand that Assad hands over Syria's chemical weapons or it will face an attack. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 9, 2013

Bashar Assad is stronger today than he was before Obama threatened military action. Obama really bungled this. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 16, 2013

2015-2016: A growing refugee crisis

As the conflict receded from the public spotlight, Mr. Trump turned to other subjects. Aside from a couple of stray mentions of the country in connection with the allied campaign against the Islamic State, Mr. Trump did not take it up again until late 2015 -- after he had become a Republican candidate for president.

He again warned about getting involved with Syria, and also cast suspicion upon refugees, whose flight out of the war-torn nation had prompted an international crisis.

Refugees from Syria are now pouring into our great country. Who knows who they are - some could be ISIS. Is our president insane? -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 17, 2015

Europe and the U.S. must immediately stop taking in people from Syria. This will be the destruction of civilization as we know it! So sad! -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 24, 2016

Campaign 2016: Pinning Syria's woes on Clinton

Mr. Trump reiterated many of his older positions in the run-up to last fall's election. This time, he focused on tying American policy -- which he termed a disaster created by Mr. Obama -- to Hillary Clinton, the former secretary of state and his Democratic opponent.

CLINTON'S FLAILING SYRIA POLICY WAS JUDGED A FAILURE: https://t.co/ICZxn7Q3vZ   #VPDebate -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) October 5, 2016

FACT check on ''red line'' in Syria: HRC "I wasn't there." Fact: line drawn in Aug '12. HRC Secy of State til Feb '13. https://t.co/4yZjH3TR5B   -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) October 10, 2016

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020170408ed4800069



U.S.; Politics
U.S.-Led Force Reduces Attacks on  ISIS  in Syria After Airstrike

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT 
989 words
8 April 2017
20:03
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —he American-led task force that is battling the Islamic State has sharply reduced airstrikes against the militants in Syria as commanders assess whether Syrian government forces or their Russian allies plan to respond to the United States’ruise missile strike on a Syrian airfield on Thursday, American officials said.

The precautionary move, revealed in statistics made public by the command on Saturday, was taken as Russian officials have threatened to suspend the communication line the American and Russian militaries use to notify each other about air operations in Syria.

So far, the Russian military does not appear to have taken any threatening actions, such as directing its battlefield radar or air defense systems to confront the Americans, or carrying out aggressive actions in the skies, United States officials said.

But officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal planning said the commanders needed time to determine whether the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, and the Russian military would treat the American cruise missile strike as a one-time operation that they would not respond to militarily.

If it becomes clear that the Syrians and Russians will not follow their sharp criticism of the operation with significant military action, the pace of American airstrikes against Islamic State forces in Syria can be quickly increased.

Over the last two years, American and allied warplanes striking Islamic State targets in Syria have had to fly among formidable Syrian and Russian-supplied air defenses. While there have been a few close calls between Russian and American jets, some of them unintentional, the American-led air campaign has for the most part proceeded without interference from Russian or Syrian fighters or air defenses.

Publicly, American officials had little to say about the reduction in strikes against the militants. “e are using resources as appropriate to the commander’ priorities and as the situation dictates,” military official said.

On Friday in Syria, the day the United States fired 59 cruise missiles around 3:40 a.m. local time against Al Shayrat airfield in response to a deadly chemical weapons attack by the Syrian government, the American-led coalition carried out just seven airstrikes against Islamic State targets in Syria, according to the command. All the airstrikes were near Tabqah, where Syrian fighters and American advisers are trying to take the town and a nearby dam, a move that would cut off the western approaches to Raqqa, the Islamic State’ self-styled capital.

By contrast, on Tuesday the American-led command carried out twice as many strikes in Syria against the Islamic State, and against a broader array of targets. On March 27, the command conducted 19 strikes in Syria against Islamic State militants.

United States Special Operations forces assisting Syrian Kurdish and Arab fighters in their encirclement of Raqqa, in eastern Syria, have also taken unspecified precautions against possible retaliatory attacks, military officials said.

American officials have said that the purpose of the attack on the Syrian airfield was to dissuade Mr. Assad from using chemical weapons again and that it was not intended to be part of a broader military effort to undermine the Syrian leader’ hold on power.

As long as Mr. Assad refrains from using chemical weapons again, the officials have said, the United States does not plan to carry out further attacks on his forces.

Some American and other Western counterterrorism officials have said the missile strike could nonetheless make the fight against the Islamic State in Syria more difficult.

“t seems clear that the strikes will complicate our efforts to pursue our counter-ISIS campaign in Syria,”aid Matthew Olsen, a former director of the National Counterterrorism Center. “n particular, the ability to carry out U.S. airstrikes in Syria in support of the coalition against ISIS requires some degree of cooperation with Russia, which is now in serious jeopardy.”

Other security experts said that much depended on the Trump administration’ next steps, and how the Assad government and its Russian patrons responded.

“.S. aircraft operating over Al-Tabqah are already ostensibly in range of the Russian S-400 system at the Humaymin Air Base, and we might see Russia deploy more air defense assets to Syria,”eremy Binnie, the Middle East editor of Jane’ Defense Weekly, said in an email. “ut if the U.S. makes no moves to threaten Assad’ position, then they may well accept the punishment and move on.”

William McCants, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and the author of “he ISIS Apocalypse,”ffered a similar assessment.

If the strikes are limited to what took place on Thursday, “hen they don’ change much,”r. McCants said. “hey won’ help jihadists propagandize against the U.S., because the missiles targeted the hated Assad regime. Russia wasn’ doing much against ISIS, so Russian anger at the strikes won’ affect the coalition effort against the group.”

But Mr. McCants added: “f the United States continues to degrade Assad’ air force, it will be a boon to all the rebel groups, including the non-ISIS jihadists who have been targeted by the regime. They will begin to recapture some of the territory they have lost.”

Russia sent warplanes to Syria in 2015 in a successful effort to help Mr. Assad maintain his hold on power and expand the territory under his control. The Russians began their first airstrikes in late September of that year.

American officials have frequently complained that most of the Russian airstrikes have been directed not against the Islamic State but against rebels fighting Mr. Assad’ forces, including the moderate opposition that has been trained and equipped covertly by the C.I.A.

Michael R. Gordon reported from Washington and Eric Schmitt from Richland, Wash.

Document NYTFEED020170408ed4800565



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Asking if U.S. Remarks Helped Embolden Assad

By HELENE COOPER; Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting. 
909 words
8 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
14
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- On March 30, Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson and United Nations Ambassador Nikki R. Haley, in separate appearances, reversed American foreign policy and said the Trump administration was not focused on getting rid of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.

The next day, the White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, backed them up, and spoke of a ''political reality that we have to accept in terms of where we are right now.''

Four days later, on April 4, Mr. Assad launched the deadliest chemical attacks since 2013, dropping the nerve agent sarin in a dawn strike that drew condemnation from around the world and prompted the first American military strikes against the Syrian regime, and the first national security crisis of President Trump's term.

At the Pentagon and in national security circles, the lightning series of events has raised a sharp question: Did the Haley-Tillerson-Spicer remarks embolden Mr. Assad to believe that he could get away with the chemical weapons attack?

''The close proximity of Haley and Tillerson's comments may have given Assad the assurance that he could do this,'' said Linda Robinson, a senior international policy analyst at RAND Corporation who traveled to the region in February with Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the commander of the United States Central Command.

In an interview earlier this week with AM Tampa Bay, Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, accused Mr. Tillerson of ''in essence, almost nodding to the idea that Assad was going to get to stay in some capacity.'' He added, ''I don't think it's a coincidence that a few days later we see this.''

People at the Pentagon -- where Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, along with the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, and General Votel, quickly came up with a retaliatory military plan -- have also questioned why Mr. Assad would risk his gains in the six-year civil war with a chemical attack. The generals appear to have brought Mr. Trump, Mr. Tillerson and Ms. Haley back to the former American frame of mind that ''Assad must go.''

''Whatever clumsiness the secretary of state and U.N. ambassador committed in the last week, nobody but Bashar al-Assad is responsible for the chemical weapons attack, and we should not blur the morality of who is to blame,'' said Kori Schake, a Hoover Institution fellow who edited the book ''Warriors and Citizens: American Views of Our Military'' with Mr. Mattis.

But, Ms. Schake added, ''The president's indiscipline will result in a lot of the kinds of reversals we just saw on Syria, and the thoughtful people in the cabinet will have to figure out a way to meet the country's strategic objectives.''

The need for the Pentagon to educate civilians in the Trump administration also featured in the decision by Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to take Mr. Trump's son-in-law and senior adviser, Jared Kushner, to Baghdad this week to meet with Iraqi authorities and American military officials in Iraq.

Pentagon officials said Mr. Assad's decision to drop chemical weapons on Idlib most likely included anxiety over the Syrian government's losses of military gains made in the past two years. But several officials said the remarks by Ms. Haley, Mr. Tillerson and Mr. Spicer could have emboldened Mr. Assad into believing that there would be no retaliation.

At the very least, the Trump administration has been sending mixed messages to Mr. Assad -- and to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia -- on its intentions in Syria. Just days after winning the presidential election in November, Mr. Trump signaled in an interview with The Wall Street Journal that in Syria, he would focus solely on bombing the Islamic State. ''My attitude was, you're fighting Syria, Syria is fighting ISIS, and you have to get rid of ISIS,'' Mr. Trump said.

Just days after that, Mr. Assad seemed to take those comments to heart, and publicly called Mr. Trump a potential ''natural ally'' in the fight against terrorism.

''The Syrians can argue that they felt they were given a green light, with the U.S. sending very inconsistent messages,'' said Kathleen Hicks, director of the international security program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.

Mr. Mattis and other military officials in the Trump administration were quick to urge their national security counterparts to respond forcefully to the chemical weapons attack. Over two days, the Pentagon drew up a list of options for responding that was whittled down to one -- launching cruise missiles at the Syrian air base of Al Shayrat. Intelligence officials had determined, with a high degree of confidence, that Syrian fighter jets took off from there in launching the chemical attack on Idlib.

Once he was presented with the cruise missile response, administration officials said Mr. Trump -- who said he was appalled by the television images of Syrian children killed or injured in the attack -- instantly approved the plan presented by Mr. Mattis and General McMaster.

And by Thursday, Mr. Tillerson had returned to the standard American foreign policy playbook on Mr. Assad. At the United Nations, Ms. Haley was also back on board.

''The moral stain of the Assad regime could no longer go unanswered,'' she declared to the Security Council on Friday.

Document NYTF000020170408ed480005b



ASK A SHOWRUNNER
The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECT
This Season of 'Homeland' Was Written in Something Like Real Time

By JUDITH WARNER 
1,631 words
8 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

When Season 6 began this past January, it seemed that the writers of ''Homeland'' had miscalculated. Just five days before the real-life spectacle of a Trump inauguration, ''Homeland'' featured a female president-elect, whose transition team was preparing to take power.

But as the episodes unfolded, art met life to an uncanny degree, sometimes with real-time precision. Fiction and fact converged in story lines around an elaborate web of fake news, the machinations of a powerful ''deep state,'' and the unprecedented sight of a new president at war with the United States intelligence community.

Were the creators of ''Homeland'' supernaturally prescient, or did some fevered rewriting take place in the weeks and months following the November election? Reached by phone this week on a break from adding the finishing touches to the finale on Sunday night, Alex Gansa, the showrunner of ''Homeland,'' said the answer was a little bit of both.

Here's how it happened. (This interview contains spoilers for the first 11 episodes, and has been edited for length and clarity.)

Walk me through how this season came into being.

We began plotting this season almost 14 months ago -- long before the world changed, or at least the United States changed on Election Day. We were hearing from our intelligence community consultants [in Washington, D.C.] that fake news was being propagated in Russia; that these big entities there were putting out stories that were supportive of the Putin regime, and that there was a big social media campaign to influence public opinion -- in Russia and in Western democracies in Europe.

[Read the ''Homeland'' recaps by Judith Warner.]

It hadn't dawned on anyone yet that it was actually happening around the election [in the United States]. Or at least we weren't told at that point by our intelligence people that it was happening. However, it felt like a very ripe idea and we ran with it, to figure out how our deep state/permanent government might go about influencing a recalcitrant president-elect. And we wanted to bring in a president-elect who was at odds with the past 20 or 30 or 40 years of American intelligence work around the world.

That was the seminal idea of the season: what do you do in a transition period when a president-elect finds herself in an adversarial relationship with her intelligence community? Miraculously, that's exactly what happened with the Trump administration.

What's funny is that if Hillary Clinton had been president, she would likely not have been at odds with the intelligence community, right?

That's exactly correct. Her transition would have been one of the smoothest in a long time because she was so involved in the Obama administration in all these various issues.

So these things always turn out in crazy ways. I just remember on Election Day, first of all, not being a Trump supporter, I was a little afraid of what was in store for the country, but I was also afraid that ''Homeland'' had just become irrelevant overnight. And it turned out to be quite the opposite.

First of all, I could never anticipate Trump's antipathy toward the intelligence community. And second of all, it was such a wild card. What began to happen in real life felt in some ways so much more dramatic and so much more terrifying than what we were dramatizing on television. So all those things became concerns to us in the story room.

But with only nine weeks or so to go before the start of the season, you couldn't exactly get a do-over. What did you do?

We had already written Episode 8 (''Alt. Truth'') by the time Election Day occurred, and we had shot through episode 5 or 6. So a considerable amount stayed the same for the first eight episodes -- it was a process of retrofitting some stories into earlier episodes, which obviously hadn't been finished or aired yet.

But from Episode 8 on to the finale, we really did do some gymnastics to change the story and to focus more on the fake news, on the sock puppets, on this battle between the president-elect and the powers that be.

For example, we introduced the character of [the alt-right media personality] Brett O'Keefe earlier than we had anticipated. We went back and retrofitted him into Episode 2. At first, at the beginning of that episode, he was just an angry, indistinct voice coming from downstairs [in Carrie's brownstone].

We went back and we reshot Rupert sitting on the bed with a strained and strange expression on his face as he listens to the actual voice of this new character.

After the election we decided to turn him into not only a creator of fake news but also an online and on-air personality.

He was more of a James O'Keefe figure beforehand, and more of an Alex Jones figure after the election. We always had the idea that the behind-the-scenes character would find Elizabeth Keane's Achilles' heel, which was the memory and love of her son. We turned him into somebody who could verbally attack her on air. And it was really fun to write those rants, I have to say.

The entire idea of a propaganda boiler room was always part of the story, but it assumed a much more prominent place as the election happened, and then as the revelations came out during the transition period. And that's, interestingly enough, when we all sat up a little straighter in the story room. Because we found ourselves in this sort of privileged position of being able to comment on what was actually happening contemporaneously in the world, and that felt energizing to us as storytellers.

The detail about Dar's background with Quinn, which some of us interpreted as some kind of predatory sexual behavior, was that always there from the start?

Well, you know, it was intimated at the end of last season, too. In that scene where Quinn was comatose, and Carrie and Dar were having a conversation by his bedside about how Quinn was originally recruited into the Central Intelligence Agency. But I really prefer to interpret those scenes in a slightly different way. There may have been some predatory behavior, but whether there were actual sexual acts that took place -- look, that's up for interpretation.

In your mind, was there or wasn't there?

You know, I'd rather not say.

The politics of the show feel different this season, and from the start, not just in the later changed episodes. Carrie's personal position has changed a great deal. It feels like Saul's has too. And I'm wondering if that has anything to do with past criticism -- like the ''Homeland is racist'' graffiti that showed up on the wall of the refugee camp in Season 5. It seems like your own personal politics have probably been at odds with the way some people interpret your work.

I will take great issue with the notion that suddenly ''Homeland'' has become politically correct this year. Or that we have somehow changed our politics. I just find that to be a specious argument.

From the very first, ''Homeland,'' Season 1, we had a subversive agenda to put our audience on the side of a Muslim terrorist -- admittedly, an American who had been turned overseas -- but we wanted the audience at the end of that season to root for him to push the button. We wanted to show the other side. We wanted to see what people were thinking and fearing on the other side of the fear equation.

So from the get-go we were very cognizant of what we were doing. And as you watch Carrie Mathison over the seasons, she was the most intense of patriots at the beginning, and she became disillusioned over six seasons with the way America projected its power overseas.

It's not for me to dictate how people respond to the show, but you have to look at season after season, and especially Season 5 when she dropped out of the intelligence business altogether. So that arc has been happening and we have been following our character grow disillusioned with how the war on terror was being waged. And Season 6 was just the last iteration of that journey.

Did the Sekou story line change after the November election?

It didn't. One thing that we were told over and over when we were in D.C. -- and this was from all the military people we talked to, from the all the intelligence people, from all the State Department people, from all the White House staffers -- everybody kept saying that there are no coordinated ISIS or Al Qaeda terror cells in the United States like there are in Europe.

Knowing we were coming back to the United States to tell a story here, we made a very firm determination not to dramatize anything on ''Homeland'' that wasn't an actual threat to this country.

So it left us in an interesting position of where do we find our villain? We're a show about counterterrorism, and where do we find our threat? And so we found our threat in the deep state, in the permanent government.

And that was also something we were nervous about this season. If you purport to be a thriller at some level, how do you engage an audience at that level, that visceral level? So I leave it to our audience to tell us whether we succeeded or not.

Document NYTF000020170408ed480004h



U.S.; Politics
After Chemical Attack, Asking if U.S. Remarks Emboldened Assad

By HELENE COOPER 
948 words
8 April 2017
02:36
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —n March 30, Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson and United Nations Ambassador Nikki R. Haley, in separate appearances, reversed American foreign policy and said the Trump administration was not focused on getting rid of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.

The next day, the White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, backed them up, and spoke of a “olitical reality that we have to accept in terms of where we are right now.”

Four days later, on April 4, Mr. Assad launched the deadliest chemical attacks since 2013, dropping the nerve agent sarin in a dawn strike that drew condemnation from around the world and prompted the first American military strikes against the Syrian regime, and the first national security crisis of President Trump’ term.

At the Pentagon and in national security circles, the lightning series of events has raised a sharp question: Did the Haley-Tillerson-Spicer remarks embolden Mr. Assad to believe that he could get away with the chemical weapons attack?

“he close proximity of Haley and Tillerson’ comments may have given Assad the assurance that he could do this,”aid Linda Robinson, a senior international policy analyst at RAND Corporation who traveled to the region in February with Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the commander of the United States Central Command.

In an interview earlier this week with AM Tampa Bay, Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, accused Mr. Tillerson of “n essence, almost nodding to the idea that Assad was going to get to stay in some capacity.”e added, “ don’ think it’ a coincidence that a few days later we see this.”

People at the Pentagon —here Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, along with the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, and General Votel, quickly came up with a retaliatory military plan —ave also questioned why Mr. Assad would risk his gains in the six-year civil war with a chemical attack. The generals appear to have brought Mr. Trump, Mr. Tillerson and Ms. Haley back to the former American frame of mind that “ssad must go.”

“hatever clumsiness the secretary of state and U.N. ambassador committed in the last week, nobody but Bashar al-Assad is responsible for the chemical weapons attack, and we should not blur the morality of who is to blame,”aid Kori Schake, a Hoover Institution fellow who edited the book “arriors and Citizens: American Views of Our Military”ith Mr. Mattis.

But, Ms. Schake added, “he president’ indiscipline will result in a lot of the kinds of reversals we just saw on Syria, and the thoughtful people in the cabinet will have to figure out a way to meet the country’ strategic objectives.”

The need for the Pentagon to educate civilians in the Trump administration also featured in the decision by Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to take Mr. Trump’ son-in-law and senior adviser, Jared Kushner, to Baghdad this week to meet with Iraqi authorities and American military officials in Iraq.

Pentagon officials said Mr. Assad’ decision to drop chemical weapons on Idlib most likely included anxiety over the Syrian government’ losses of military gains made in the past two years. But several officials said the remarks by Ms. Haley, Mr. Tillerson and Mr. Spicer could have emboldened Mr. Assad into believing that there would be no retaliation.

At the very least, the Trump administration has been sending mixed messages to Mr. Assad —nd to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia —n its intentions in Syria. Just days after winning the presidential election in November, Mr. Trump signaled in an interview with The Wall Street Journal that in Syria, he would focus solely on bombing the Islamic State. “y attitude was, you’e fighting Syria, Syria is fighting ISIS, and you have to get rid of ISIS,”r. Trump said.

Just days after that, Mr. Assad seemed to take those comments to heart, and publicly called Mr. Trump a potential “atural ally”n the fight against terrorism.

“he Syrians can argue that they felt they were given a green light, with the U.S. sending very inconsistent messages,”aid Kathleen Hicks, director of the international security program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.

Mr. Mattis and other military officials in the Trump administration were quick to urge their national security counterparts to respond forcefully to the chemical weapons attack. Over two days, the Pentagon drew up a list of options for responding that was whittled down to one —aunching cruise missiles at the Syrian air base of Al Shayrat. Intelligence officials had determined, with a high degree of confidence, that Syrian fighter jets took off from there in launching the chemical attack on Idlib.

Once he was presented with the cruise missile response, administration officials said Mr. Trump —ho said he was appalled by the television images of Syrian children killed or injured in the attack —nstantly approved the plan presented by Mr. Mattis and General McMaster.

And by Thursday, Mr. Tillerson had returned to the standard American foreign policy playbook on Mr. Assad. At the United Nations, Ms. Haley was also back on board.

“he moral stain of the Assad regime could no longer go unanswered,”he declared to the Security Council on Friday.

Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting.

Recent comments by American officials may have emboldened President Bashar al-Assad of Syria into believing that there would be no retaliation for this week’ chemical weapons attack. | Joseph Eid/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170408ed48000b5



Nicholas Kristof
Trump Was Right to Strike Syria

By NICHOLAS KRISTOF 
1,285 words
7 April 2017
22:10
NYT Blogs
NYTB
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved 

President Trump’ air strikes against Syria were of dubious legality. They were hypocritical. They were impulsive. They may have had political motivations. They create new risks for the United States.

But most of all, they were right.

I’ deeply suspicious of Trump’ policies and competence, but this is a case where he is right and Barack Obama was wrong. Indeed, many of us believe that Obama’ worst foreign policy mistake was his passivity in Syria.

One of Trump’ problems is that he has lied so much and so often that he doesn’ have credibility at home or abroad in a foreign crisis like this. I likewise find it unnerving that he came to the right decision in an impulsive way, changing policy 180 degrees after compelling photos emerged of children gassed in Syria. Should a president’ decisions about war really depend on the photos taken?

Yet for all my distrust of Trump’ motivations and capacity to execute a strategy, here’ why I believe he was right.

Since the horrors of mustard gas during World War I a century ago, one of the world’ more successful international norms has been a taboo on the use of chemical weapons. We all have an interest in reinforcing that norm, so this is not just about Syria but also about deterring the next dictator from turning to sarin.

For an overstretched military, poison gas is a convenient way to terrify and subdue a population. That’ why Saddam Hussein used gas on Kurds in 1988, and why Bashar al-Assad has used gas against his own people in Syria. The best way for the world to change the calculus is to show that use of chemical weapons carries a special price —uch as a military strike on an airbase.

Paradoxically, Assad may have used chemical weapons because he perceived a green light from the Trump administration. In recent days, Rex Tillerson, Sean Spicer and Nikki Haley all suggested that it was no longer American policy to push for the removal of Assad, and that may have emboldened him to open the chemical weapons toolbox. That mistake made it doubly important for Trump to show that neither Assad nor any leader can get away with using weapons of mass destruction.

Look, for a Syrian child, it doesn’ matter much whether death comes from a barrel bomb, a mortar shell, a bullet, or a nerve agent. I hope Trump will also show more interest in stopping all slaughter of Syrians —ut it’ still important to defend the norm against chemical weapons (the United States undermined that norm after Saddam’ gas attack by falsely suggesting that Iran was to blame).

Critics note that Trump’ air strikes don’ have clear legal grounding. They’e right, and that was one reason Obama didn’ act. But Bill Clinton’ 1999 intervention to prevent genocide in Kosovo was also of uncertain legality, and thank God for it. Clinton has said that his greatest foreign policy mistake was not intervening in Rwanda during the 1994 genocide; any such intervention also would have been of unclear legality —nd the right thing to do.

There are risks ahead, of Russia or Syria targeting American aircraft or of Iran seeking revenge against Americans in Iraq. War plans rarely survive the first shot, and military interventions are easier to begin than to end. But as long as we don’ seek to topple Assad militarily, everybody has an interest in avoiding an escalation.

It’ also fair for critics to highlight Trump’ hypocrisy, and raise concerns that he may have fired missiles for political reasons, to show himself as a leader and distract from political problems. Certainly Trump previously objected to what he is now doing.

Referring to Obama in 2013, he tweeted: “he president must get Congressional approval before attacking Syria.”nd when Trump speaks about the suffering of Syria’ “eautiful little babies,”ne wonders how he justifies vilifying and barring those same babies with his travel ban. et I’ rather Trump inconsistently do the right thing than consistently do the wrong thing.

Many of my fellow progressives viscerally oppose any use of force, but I think that’ a mistake. I was against the Iraq war, but some military interventions save lives. The no fly zone over northern Iraq in the 1990s is one example, and so are the British intervention in Sierra Leone and French intervention in Mali. It’ prudent to be suspicious of military interventions, but imprudent to reject any use of force categorically.

Want proof that military interventions in the Middle East can work? In 2014, Obama ordered air strikes near the Syria-Iraq border against ISIS as it was attacking members of the Yazidi minority. Those U.S. strikes saved many thousands of Yazidi lives, although they came too late to save thousands more who were killed or kidnapped as sex slaves.

In Syria, the crucial question is what comes next.

There’ some bold talk among politicians about ousting Assad from Syria. Really? People have been counting on Assad’ fall for six years now, and he’ as entrenched as ever.

Moreover, air strips can be rebuilt, and if this was a one-time strike then the larger slaughter in Syria will continue indefinitely. But I’ hoping that the administration may use it as a tool to push for a ceasefire.

As Secretary of State, John Kerry worked valiantly for a peace deal in Syria. But he had neither carrots nor sticks to offer. Kerry pleaded with Obama for leverage in the form of military strikes, but Obama refused.

Now the State Department finally has leverage. But, tragically, we seem to lack a Secretary of State with the clout and inclination to seize that leverage and push for a peace deal.

My proposed course in Syria is the same one that Hillary Clinton and many others have favored: missile strikes to ground Assad’ small air force. This should help end the barrel bombs and make Assad realize that he has no military solution, and that it’ time for negotiation. The most plausible negotiated outcome would be a long-term ceasefire and de facto partition of Syria, putting off reintegration until Assad is no longer around.

Even if we can’ leverage military strikes into a peace deal, the strikes are still worthwhile by degrading the air assets that Assad uses to kill his own people.

Syria is a spectacular country redolent with history, and inhabited by a normally warm and hospitable people. Yet Obama’ well-meant caution has allowed Syria’ downward spiral to turn it into a symbol of brutality and suffering that has also aggravated the Sunni-Shia schism all over the world.

Because there was no good option on any given day, we always chose to do little or nothing. The result was that more than 300,000 people were killed, vast numbers were tortured and raped, almost five million refugees fled Syria and destabilized other countries, ISIS sowed terrorism worldwide, and genocides unfolded against the Yazidi and Christian communities in Syria and Iraq.

For all the legitimate concerns about the risks ahead, now again we just might have a window to curb the bloodshed in Syria. I’ glad Trump took the important first step of holding Assad accountable for using chemical weapons. But it’ all going to depend now on whether Trump, who so far has been a master of incompetence, can manage the far more difficult challenge of using war to midwife peace.

Document NYTB000020170407ed470002t



U.S.; Politics
Trump’ View of Syria: How It Evolved, in 19 Tweets

By NICHOLAS FANDOS 
1,468 words
8 April 2017
00:50
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —Donald J. Trump had a blunt warning for his predecessor.

“e should stay the hell out of Syria,”he wrote on Twitter in June 2013, after President Barack Obama directed American forces to increase support to Syrian rebels in the wake of a deadly chemical weapons attack by that country’ government.

We should stay the hell out of Syria, the "rebels" are just as bad as the current regime. WHAT WILL WE GET FOR OUR LIVES AND $ BILLIONS?ZERO —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 16, 2013

Nearly four years later, now president himself and grappling with how to respond to another chemical weapons attack by the Syrian government, Mr. Trump ignored his own warnings and did what Mr. Obama threatened but never carried out: order a missile strike targeting assets of President Bashar al-Assad.

To understand the magnitude of Mr. Trump’ reversal and the history of his public stances on one of the world’ bloodiest civil wars, one need look no further than the president’ Twitter account.

Mr. Trump posted dozens of tweets about the conflict in the years before he declared his candidacy for the White House, and frequently did so during the campaign as well. Channeling the same bluntness that helped fuel his political rise, he carved out a staunchly noninterventionist stance on the conflict and criticized as plodding Mr. Obama’ approach.

But he also made one thing clear: If he was in charge, any action would be swift and secretive to catch Mr. Assad off guard.

We have sifted through Mr. Trump’ account for the highlights:

2011-2012: Syria enters his radar screen

It was several months after it began before the growing conflict in Syria appears to have attracted Mr. Trump’ attention, and, even then, it was only a blip. Mr. Trump, at the time best known as a reality television personality, first weighed in on Syria in October 2011 to criticize the United Nations for its inaction after China and Russia had successfully blocked sanctions against the Assad government.

Why is the UN condemning @Israel and doing nothing about Syria? What a disgrace. —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) October 6, 2011

Nearly a year later, in the summer of 2012, Mr. Trump wrote again, this time aiming his criticism squarely at Mr. Obama for letting Russia begin to gain a foothold in the country — mistake he said Mr. Obama’ Republican challenger at the time, Mitt Romney, would not have made.

Russia's recent actions in Syria have proven @MittRomney right. @BarackObama offers Putin "flexibility." @MittRomney will exert influence. —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 18, 2012

August 2013: A chemical attack and warning on airstrikes

Late the next summer, as evidence began to emerge of a deadly chemical weapons attack on rebel-held suburbs of Damascus, the country’ capital, the Obama administration began to debate military retaliation. And Mr. Trump unleashed a torrent of criticism.

In dozens of tweets, he warned Mr. Obama to “tay out”f Syria and focus on problems at home. Intervention, he said, would only risk hurting civilians and empowering would-be terrorists.

Remember, all these ‘reedom fighters’n Syria want to fly planes into our buildings. —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 28, 2013

Let the Arab League take care of Syria. Why are these rich Arab countries not paying us for the tremendous cost of such an attack? —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 29, 2013

If Obama attacks Syria and innocent civilians are hurt and killed, he and the U.S. will look very bad! —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 30, 2013

Despite his opposition to intervention, Mr. Trump repeatedly urged Mr. Obama to seek congressional approval to carry out punitive strikes against the Assad regime, warning that Mr. Obama would be making a “ig mistake”f he failed to do so.

What will we get for bombing Syria besides more debt and a possible long term conflict? Obama needs Congressional approval. —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 29, 2013

The President must get Congressional approval before attacking Syria-big mistake if he does not! —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 30, 2013

August 2013: ‘HOOT FIRST AND TALK LATER’

At the same time he was tweeting his thoughts on how Washington should handle the crisis, Mr. Trump maintained the effort had already been sabotaged by too much “alk.”

If we are going to continue to be stupid and go into Syria (watch Russia), as they say in the movies, SHOOT FIRST AND TALK LATER! —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 29, 2013

We have given Syria so much time and information-there has never been such an instance in wartime history. Syria is now fully prepared! —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 2, 2013

Mr. Trump said he would have done things differently had he been in charge. It was an argument he would later repeat as a candidate, and as president.

@walaa_3ssaf No, dopey, I would not go into Syria, but if I did it would be by surprise and not blurted all over the media like fools. —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 29, 2013

September 2013: Debating Obama’ ‘ed Line’

The debate over intervention centered in large part around a statement  Mr. Obama made in 2012. The use of chemical weapons by Mr. Assad, he said, would cross a “ed line” that would change the president’ calculus and have “normous consequences”or the Syrian government.

As he would do frequently during his campaign for president two years later, Mr. Trump used Twitter to repeatedly ridicule Mr. Obama’ line as “ery dumb.”

President Obama put himself in a very bad position when he talked about Syria crossing the RED LINE. Amazingly, now he denies he said that! —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 5, 2013

The only reason President Obama wants to attack Syria is to save face over his very dumb RED LINE statement. Do NOT attack Syria,fix U.S.A. —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 5, 2013

Facing stiff opposition in Congress, Mr. Obama unexpectedly said he would hold off on military action to instead pursue an international agreement to destroy Syria’ stockpile of chemical weapons. Mr. Trump dismissed the proposal as a “ed line 2,”nd said it strengthened Mr. Assad.

Now Obama has set red line 2 with demand that Assad hands over Syria’ chemical weapons or it will face an attack. —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 9, 2013

Bashar Assad is stronger today than he was before Obama threatened military action. Obama really bungled this. —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 16, 2013

2015-2016: A growing refugee crisis

As the conflict receded from the public spotlight, Mr. Trump turned to other subjects. Aside from a couple of stray mentions of the country in connection with the allied campaign against the Islamic State, Mr. Trump did not take it up again until late 2015 —fter he had become a Republican candidate for president.

He again warned about getting involved with Syria, and also cast suspicion upon refugees, whose flight out of the war-torn nation had prompted an international crisis.

Refugees from Syria are now pouring into our great country. Who knows who they are - some could be ISIS. Is our president insane? —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 17, 2015

Europe and the U.S. must immediately stop taking in people from Syria. This will be the destruction of civilization as we know it! So sad! —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 24, 2016

Campaign 2016: Pinning Syria’ woes on Clinton

Mr. Trump reiterated many of his older positions in the run-up to last fall’ election. This time, he focused on tying American policy —hich he termed a disaster created by Mr. Obama —o Hillary Clinton, the former secretary of state and his Democratic opponent.

CLINTON’ FLAILING SYRIA POLICY WAS JUDGED A FAILURE:https://t.co/ICZxn7Q3vZ#VPDebate —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) October 5, 2016

FACT ✔️ on “ed line”n Syria: HRC "I wasn’ there." Fact: line drawn in Aug ’2. HRC Secy of State til Feb ’3. https://t.co/4yZjH3TR5B —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) October 10, 2016

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* Trump’ Strike on Syria Has All Sides Asking: What Next?

* Acting on Instinct, Trump Upends His Own Foreign Policy

* Dozens of U.S. Missiles Hit Air Base in Syria

President Trump at the White House on Thursday, hours before a missile strike in Syria. | Al Drago/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170407ed4700bf5



CONTRIBUTING OP-ED WRITER
OpEd; SECT
After the Missiles, We Need Smart Diplomacy

By ANTONY J. BLINKEN 
924 words
7 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

President Donald J. Trump was right to strike at the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad for using a weapon of mass destruction, the nerve agent sarin, against its own people. Mr. Trump may not want to be ''president of the world'' but when a tyrant blatantly violates a basic norm of international conduct -- in this case, the ban on using chemical or biological weapons in armed conflict, put in place after World War I -- the world looks to America to act. Mr. Trump did, and for that he should be commended.

The real test for Mr. Trump is what comes next. He has shown a total disinterest in working to end Syria's civil war. Now, the administration has leverage it should test with the Assad regime and Russia to restrain Syria's air force, stop any use of chemical or biological weapons, implement an effective cease-fire in Syria's civil war and even move toward a negotiated transition of power -- goals that eluded the Obama administration.

At the same time, it must prevent or mitigate the possible unintended consequences of using force, including complicating the military campaign against the Islamic State. All this will require something in which the administration has shown little interest: smart diplomacy.

That smart diplomacy starts with Russia. The administration reportedly previewed the strike with Moscow. Cynics might conclude the fix is in: The United States quietly warns the Russians, they give Mr. Assad a heads-up and tell him not to react, and everyone calls it a day. More likely, the administration wanted to make sure Moscow knew exactly what we were doing so that Moscow would not overreact or leave its forces in harm's way.

The administration should make clear to Moscow that it will hold it accountable for Mr. Assad's actions going forward, rally others to do the same and launch more strikes if necessary. The United States should also condition counter-terrorism cooperation with Russia -- something Moscow wants -- on Russia's efforts to rein in the Assad regime and push it toward genuine peace negotiations with rebels. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson's trip to Moscow next week will be pivotal in advancing this message and managing any risk of escalation with Russia.

The administration should play on the likelihood that Russian President Vladimir V. Putin is livid with Mr. Assad. Mr. Putin has helped the dictator gain the upper hand in Syria's civil war. But Mr. Assad's renewed use of sarin gas -- which the United States and Russia stopped him from employing in 2013 by diplomatically enforcing President Obama's much maligned red line against chemical weapons -- was totally unnecessary and hugely embarrassing to Moscow.

The Russians also know they run an increased risk of blowback for their continued support of Mr. Assad and complicity in his inhumane brutality against Syria's Sunni community. Syria's Sunni Arab neighbors and Turkey may now feel compelled to double down on their support for the Syrian opposition, making Moscow's life a lot harder. Sunni Muslims in Russia, central Asia and the Caucasus will be further enraged against Moscow, and some of the thousands of Chechen fighters in Syria could now seek vengeance back home. The recent horrific attack in the St. Petersburg subway -- apparently by an ethnic Uzbek possibly radicalized by the war in Syria -- may be a preview of things to come if Moscow does not begin to extricate itself from the Syrian morass. The Trump administration should help Mr. Putin find an exit ramp.

Mr. Trump must also carefully guard against the possible downsides of his actions, especially with regard to the counter-ISIS campaign.

The administration will have to convince Moscow not to complicate life for American pilots by painting them with their potent air defenses, or engaging in dangerous fly-bys. He will have to warn Mr. Assad's other major patron, Iran, not to retaliate by unleashing its militia in Iraq against American troops. He will have to balance further action against the Assad regime with the need to keep our resources focused on defeating the Islamic State.

And the president will have to control for mission creep. If Mr. Assad persists in the use of chemical or biological weapons, it will take extraordinary discipline to avoid falling into an escalation trap that leads from justified punitive strikes to a broader, and riskier, United States intervention. After all, American involvement in Libya, which I advocated, began as an effort to protect civilians from violence by the government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. But it ended in regime change. Owning Syria would be exponentially more challenging than our already fraught responsibility for post-Qaddafi Libya.

Here at home, Mr. Trump must speak directly to the American people about the country's mission and its objectives, thoroughly brief Congress and seek its support, and make clear the legal basis for United States actions. And while he's at it, he should reopen the door he has tried to slam shut on Syrian refugees. The president's human reaction to the suffering of those gassed by the Assad regime should extend to all the victims of Syria's civil war, including those fleeing its violence.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Antony J. Blinken, a deputy secretary of state in the Obama administration, is a contributing opinion writer.

Document NYTF000020170407ed4700091



Contributing Op-Ed Writer
Opinion
After the Missiles, We Need Smart Diplomacy

By ANTONY J. BLINKEN 
951 words
7 April 2017
06:26
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

President Donald J. Trump was right to strike at the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad for using a weapon of mass destruction, the nerve agent sarin, against its own people. Mr. Trump may not want to be “resident of the world”ut when a tyrant blatantly violates a basic norm of international conduct —n this case, the ban on using chemical or biological weapons in armed conflict, put in place after World War I —he world looks to America to act. Mr. Trump did, and for that he should be commended.

The real test for Mr. Trump is what comes next. He has shown a total disinterest in working to end Syria’ civil war. Now the administration has leverage it should test with the Assad regime and Russia to restrain Syria’ air force, stop any use of chemical or biological weapons, implement an effective cease-fire in Syria’ civil war and even move toward a negotiated transition of power —oals that eluded the Obama administration.

At the same time, it must prevent or mitigate the possible unintended consequences of using force, including complicating the military campaign against the Islamic State. All this will require something in which the administration has shown little interest: smart diplomacy.

That smart diplomacy starts with Russia. The administration reportedly previewed the strike with Moscow. Cynics might conclude the fix is in: The United States quietly warns the Russians, they give Mr. Assad a heads-up and tell him not to react, and everyone calls it a day. More likely, the administration wanted to make sure Moscow knew exactly what we were doing so that Moscow would not overreact or leave its forces in harm’ way.

The administration should make clear to Moscow that it will hold it accountable for Mr. Assad’ actions going forward, rally others to do the same and launch more strikes if necessary. The United States should also condition counter-terrorism cooperation with Russia —omething Moscow wants —n Russia’ efforts to rein in the Assad regime and push it toward genuine peace negotiations with rebels. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson’ trip to Moscow next week will be pivotal in advancing this message and managing any risk of escalation with Russia.

The administration should play on the likelihood that Russian President Vladimir V. Putin is livid with Mr. Assad. Mr. Putin has helped the dictator gain the upper hand in Syria’ civil war. But Mr. Assad’ renewed use of sarin gas —hich the United States and Russia stopped him from employing in 2013 by diplomatically enforcing President Obama’ much maligned red line against chemical weapons —as totally unnecessary and hugely embarrassing to Moscow.

The Russians also know they run an increased risk of blowback for their continued support of Mr. Assad and complicity in his inhumane brutality against Syria’ Sunni community. Syria’ Sunni Arab neighbors and Turkey may now feel compelled to double down on their support for the Syrian opposition, making Moscow’ life a lot harder. Sunni Muslims in Russia, central Asia and the Caucasus will be further enraged against Moscow, and some of the thousands of Chechen fighters in Syria could now seek vengeance back home. The recent horrific attack in the St. Petersburg subway —pparently by an ethnic Uzbek possibly radicalized by the war in Syria —ay be a preview of things to come if Moscow does not begin to extricate itself from the Syrian morass. The Trump administration should help Mr. Putin find an exit ramp.

Mr. Trump must also carefully guard against the possible downsides of his actions, especially with regard to the counter-ISIS campaign.

The administration will have to convince Moscow not to complicate life for American pilots by painting them with their potent air defenses, or engaging in dangerous fly-bys. He will have to warn Mr. Assad’ other major patron, Iran, not to retaliate by unleashing its militia in Iraq against American troops. He will have to balance further action against the Assad regime with the need to keep our resources focused on defeating the Islamic State.

And the president will have to control for mission creep. If Mr. Assad persists in the use of chemical or biological weapons, it will take extraordinary discipline to avoid falling into an escalation trap that leads from justified punitive strikes to a broader, and riskier, United States intervention. After all, American involvement in Libya, which I advocated, began as an effort to protect civilians from violence by the government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. But it ended in regime change. Owning Syria would be exponentially more challenging than our already fraught responsibility for post-Qaddafi Libya.

Here at home, Mr. Trump must speak directly to the American people about the country’ mission and its objectives, thoroughly brief Congress and seek its support, and make clear the legal basis for United States actions. And while he’ at it, he should reopen the door he has tried to slam shut on Syrian refugees. The president’ human reaction to the suffering of those gassed by the Assad regime should extend to all the victims of Syria’ civil war, including those fleeing its violence.

Antony J. Blinken, a deputy secretary of state in the Obama administration, is a contributing opinion writer.

President Trump spoke about the missile attack on Syria at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach, Fla., on Thursday. | Doug Mills/The New York Times | A tomahawk missile being fired from the Ross destroyer in the Mediterranean Sea. | MC3 Robert S. Price/U.S. Navy, via Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170407ed470020a



Op-Ed Columnist
Opinion
Creeping Toward Crisis

By CHARLES M. BLOW 
943 words
6 April 2017
09:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

I am racked with anxiety that our buffoonish “resident”—ho sounds so internationally unsophisticated and who is still operating under a cloud of illegitimacy —s beginning to face his first real foreign crises.

What worries me most is that he seems to have no coherent plan, at least not one that he is willing or able to communicate. “ don’ show my hand”sn’ a strategy to conceal a plan as much as one to conceal the absence of a plan.

His statements are all bluster and bungling and bosh. Our commander in chief is not in full command of his emotions or facts or geopolitics.

We may sometimes think that the absurdity of Trump’ endless stream of contradictions and lies ends at the nation’ borders, but it doesn’. The world is watching, and the world is full of dangerous men who see killing as a means of maintaining and exerting power. They see in Trump a novice and know-nothing, and they will surely test his resolve.

Trump has exposed himself to the world as an imbecile and burned through American credibility with his incessant lying. Even many of our allies seem confused and worried about where we stand and how we plan to proceed.

Trump is full of pride, obsessed with strongman personas, and absent of historical and geopolitical perspective. This is the worst possible situation. The man who could bring us into military engagement is woefully deficient in intellectual engagement.

Just days after the Trump administration shockingly signaled a softer stance on President Bashar al-Assad  of Syria , Assad —ossibly emboldened by America’ reversed course —unleashed an atrocious chemical attack  on his own people, killing dozens.

Rather than using the bulk of his response to condemn the butcher Assad or the inaction of Assad’ patron, Vladimir Putin —et alone take responsibility for the role his own administration’ shifting position might have played —rump harped on what he inherited from President Obama.

When asked Wednesday during a news conference  with King Abdullah II of Jordan whether the chemical attack this week crossed a “ed line,”rump said: “t crossed a lot of lines for me. When you kill innocent children, innocent babies, babies, little babies, with a chemical gas that is so lethal, people were shocked to hear what gas it was, that crosses many many lines, beyond a red line. Many many lines.”

He continued: “t’ very, very possible, and I will tell you it’ already happened, that my attitude toward Syria and Assad has changed very much.”

But changed from what? From the soft pedal of a few days ago that may have provided cover for this attack, or from previous statements in which he warned that America should “stay out of Syria ”

To change a position, one must start from an established position. Trump is all over the place like a spider playing Twister. During the news conference, he said that he was a “lexible person,”ut I believe him to be an obtuse one.

During the news conference, a reporter asked:

“f I may, Mr. President: You know very well that the Iranian militias and Hezbollah have been propping the Syrian regime for a while, over a few years now. Will you go after them? What message will you give them today? And will you work with the Russians to stop, to ground, the Syrian Air Force and to establish safe zones?”

Actually, it was clear that the president didn’ “now very well.”n fact, he seemed lost by the question. So instead of answering, he opened an attack on the Iran nuclear deal and ISIS.

The reporter had to point out the ridiculousness of the answer: “ut sir, I’ talking about the Iranian militias in Syria supporting the Syrian regime, separate of the nuclear deal. What message do you have for them today?”aught in his ignorance, Trump clumsily responded: “ou will see. They will have a message. You will see what the message will be, O.K.”

It was beyond embarrassing: It was mortifying. And it was terrifying.

Then there is North Korea , which keeps testing missiles , including one this week in advance of Trump’ meeting with President Xi Jinping  of China, a clear message that North Korea continues its weapons program unbowed by pressure from America or China.

Trump is depending on China to exert influence on North Korea that it may be reluctant, or not have the capacity, to do. In any case, this week Trump told The Financial Times , “f China is not going to solve North Korea, we will.”

This seemed to signal the possibility of unilateral action of some kind, but the form is not clear. The Syrian and North Korean problems are complex and can’ be solved by a simpleton. Every action produces a reaction. Every lever you pull risks a life —r many.

This is not about Trump’ ego, even though I’ sure he believes that it is. It is about whether this draft dodger’ ignorance and insecurities could haphazardly plunge our country —nd indeed the world —nto an armed conflict. The King of Chaos isn’ suited for the steady navigation of crisis.

I invite you to join me on Facebook  and follow me on Twitter (@CharlesMBlow) , or email me at chblow@nytimes.com .

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook  and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter .

President Trump in the Oval Office on April 5. | Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170406ed46002h0



opinion
Creeping Toward Crisis; Op-Ed Columnist

By CHARLES M. BLOW 
931 words
6 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

I am racked with anxiety that our buffoonish “resident”—ho sounds so internationally unsophisticated and who is still operating under a cloud of illegitimacy —s beginning to face his first real foreign crises.

What worries me most is that he seems to have no coherent plan, at least not one that he is willing or able to communicate. “ don’ show my hand”sn’ a strategy to conceal a plan as much as one to conceal the absence of a plan.

His statements are all bluster and bungling and bosh. Our commander in chief is not in full command of his emotions or facts or geopolitics.

We may sometimes think that the absurdity of Trump’ endless stream of contradictions and lies ends at the nation’ borders, but it doesn’. The world is watching, and the world is full of dangerous men who see killing as a means of maintaining and exerting power. They see in Trump a novice and know-nothing, and they will surely test his resolve.

Trump has exposed himself to the world as an imbecile and burned through American credibility with his incessant lying. Even many of our allies seem confused and worried about where we stand and how we plan to proceed.

Trump is full of pride, obsessed with strongman personas, and absent of historical and geopolitical perspective. This is the worst possible situation. The man who could bring us into military engagement is woefully deficient in intellectual engagement.

Just days after the Trump administration shockingly signaled a softer stance on President Bashar al-Assad  of Syria , Assad —ossibly emboldened by America’ reversed course —unleashed an atrocious chemical attack  on his own people, killing dozens.

Rather than using the bulk of his response to condemn the butcher Assad or the inaction of Assad’ patron, Vladimir Putin —et alone take responsibility for the role his own administration’ shifting position might have played —rump harped on what he inherited from President Obama.

When asked Wednesday during a news conference  with King Abdullah II of Jordan whether the chemical attack this week crossed a “ed line,”rump said: “t crossed a lot of lines for me. When you kill innocent children, innocent babies, babies, little babies, with a chemical gas that is so lethal, people were shocked to hear what gas it was, that crosses many many lines, beyond a red line. Many many lines.”

He continued: “t’ very, very possible, and I will tell you it’ already happened, that my attitude toward Syria and Assad has changed very much.”

But changed from what? From the soft pedal of a few days ago that may have provided cover for this attack, or from previous statements in which he warned that America should “stay out of Syria ”

To change a position, one must start from an established position. Trump is all over the place like a spider playing Twister. During the news conference, he said that he was a “lexible person,”ut I believe him to be an obtuse one.

During the news conference, a reporter asked:

“f I may, Mr. President: You know very well that the Iranian militias and Hezbollah have been propping the Syrian regime for a while, over a few years now. Will you go after them? What message will you give them today? And will you work with the Russians to stop, to ground, the Syrian Air Force and to establish safe zones?”

Actually, it was clear that the president didn’ “now very well.”n fact, he seemed lost by the question. So instead of answering, he opened an attack on the Iran nuclear deal and ISIS.

The reporter had to point out the ridiculousness of the answer: “ut sir, I’ talking about the Iranian militias in Syria supporting the Syrian regime, separate of the nuclear deal. What message do you have for them today?”aught in his ignorance, Trump clumsily responded: “ou will see. They will have a message. You will see what the message will be, O.K.”

It was beyond embarrassing: It was mortifying. And it was terrifying.

Then there is North Korea , which keeps testing missiles , including one this week in advance of Trump’ meeting with President Xi Jinping  of China, a clear message that North Korea continues its weapons program unbowed by pressure from America or China.

Trump is depending on China to exert influence on North Korea that it may be reluctant, or not have the capacity, to do. In any case, this week Trump told The Financial Times , “f China is not going to solve North Korea, we will.”

This seemed to signal the possibility of unilateral action of some kind, but the form is not clear. The Syrian and North Korean problems are complex and can’ be solved by a simpleton. Every action produces a reaction. Every lever you pull risks a life —r many.

This is not about Trump’ ego, even though I’ sure he believes that it is. It is about whether this draft dodger’ ignorance and insecurities could haphazardly plunge our country —nd indeed the world —nto an armed conflict. The King of Chaos isn’ suited for the steady navigation of crisis.

I invite you to join me on Facebook  and follow me on Twitter (@CharlesMBlow) , or email me at chblow@nytimes.com .

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook  and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter .

Document INHT000020170406ed4600003



Washington; SECT
Partial Transcript: Trump's Interview With The Times

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
4,891 words
6 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The following is a partial transcript of President Trump's interview with The New York Times's Maggie Haberman and Glenn Thrush. It has been lightly edited for content and clarity, and omits several off-the-record comments and asides.

At least six White House aides were sitting in: Gary D. Cohn, President Trump's lead economic adviser and a former president of Goldman Sachs; Reed Cordish, an assistant to the president; Sean Spicer, the press secretary; Hope Hicks, a long-serving Trump aide; and eventually Vice President Mike Pence and the chief of staff, Reince Priebus.

MAGGIE HABERMAN, White House correspondent: Seems like it's actually not been a terrible process for [Judge Neil M.] Gorsuch, right? I mean, it's been pretty smooth.

PRESIDENT TRUMP: It's never an easy process. I think it's been very smooth considering there's tremendous hostility on the other side. I think it's been pretty smooth.

HABERMAN: You talk to Democrats privately that will admit --

TRUMP: I do.

HABERMAN: But do they admit to you that they don't actually have a huge objection to Gorsuch, they think that he's probably --

TRUMP: They do. They admit that.

HABERMAN: Right. In private.

TRUMP: Elijah Cummings [a Democratic representative from Maryland] was in my office and he said, ''You will go down as one of the great presidents in the history of our country.''

HABERMAN: Really.

TRUMP: And then he went out and I watched him on television yesterday and I said, ''Was that the same man?''

[Laughter.]

TRUMP: But I said, and I liked him, but I said that was really nice. He said, in a group of people, ''You will go down as one of the great presidents in the history of our country.'' And then I watched him on television and I said, ''Is that the same man that said that to me?''

GLENN THRUSH, White House correspondent: Why do you think Democrats feel the need to oppose Gorsuch? What do you think the politics is?

TRUMP: Well, I think that some of it had to do with the election. They thought they were going to win. You know, winning the Electoral College is, for a Republican, is close to impossible and I won it quite easily. And I think they are still recovering from that, but they are recovering now. I think the Susan Rice thing is a massive story. I think it's a massive, massive story. All over the world, I mean other than The New York Times.

HABERMAN: We've written about it twice.

TRUMP: Huh?

HABERMAN: We've written about it twice.

TRUMP: Yeah, it's a bigger story than you know. I think --

HABERMAN: You mean there's more information that we're not aware of?

TRUMP: I think that it's going to be the biggest story.

THRUSH: Why? What do you think --

TRUMP: Take a look at what's happening. I mean, first of all her performance was horrible yesterday on television even though she was interviewed by Hillary Clinton's P.R. person, Andrea Mitchell [the NBC News journalist]. Course you've been accused of that also.

HABERMAN: Mostly by you, though.

TRUMP: No, no, no. Mostly by a lot of people. So you know, we'll see what happens, but it looks like it's breaking into a massive story.

THRUSH: What do you think are -- what other shoes are there to drop on this?

HABERMAN: Yeah, what else could we learn on this?

TRUMP: I think you're going to see a lot. I think you'll see a lot.

HABERMAN: In terms of what she did and in terms of [unintelligible]?

TRUMP: I think in terms of what other people have done also.

HABERMAN: Really?

TRUMP: I think it's one of the biggest stories. The Russia story is a total hoax. There has been absolutely nothing coming out of that. But what, you know, what various things led into it was the story that we're talking about, the Susan Rice. What's happened is terrible. I've never seen people so indignant, including many Democrats who are friends of mine. I've never seen them acting this way. Because that's really an affront on them, you know, they are talking about civil liberties. It's such an affront, what took place.

THRUSH: What other people do you think will get ensnared in this? Can you give us a sense? How far this might extend --

HABERMAN: From the previous administration.

TRUMP: I think from the previous administration.

THRUSH: How far up do you think this goes? Chief of staff?

TRUMP: I don't want to say, but --

THRUSH: President?

TRUMP: I don't want to say, but you know who. You know what was going on. You probably know better than anybody. I mean, I frankly think The Times is missing a big thing by not writing it because you're missing out on the biggest story there is.

[Mr. Trump makes a comment off the record, and mentions the Fox News host Bill O'Reilly.]

THRUSH: We're back on the record?

HABERMAN: Yeah, back on the record, do you think that he's being unfairly treated? I mean, I watched it because I was curious how he was dealing with everything.

TRUMP: I think he's a person I know well. He's a good person. I think he may, you know, I think he shouldn't have settled, personally, I think he shouldn't have settled.

HABERMAN: How come?

TRUMP: Because you -- should have taken it all the way. No, I know Bill. Bill's a good person.

HABERMAN: Yeah.

TRUMP: I don't think Bill would do anything wrong.

HOPE HICKS, White House director of strategic communications: Can we get to infrastructure? [Laughter.] Because I know we are sensitive about time.

HABERMAN: I understand. I just want to ask one last follow-up on that note, and then we'll move on, not on O'Reilly.

TRUMP: You certainly covered O'Reilly big. Not Susan Rice, boy, O'Reilly [unintelligible]. He's taking my place. He's taking my place.

HABERMAN: Sir, if you could give us more information about Rice. If the administration would give us more information --

TRUMP: No, you have a lot of information. No, you have so much information.

HABERMAN: If you would have given it to us last week, we would have written it. Would you declassify some of the information so that --

TRUMP: I don't want to talk about that.

HABERMAN: No? O.K.

TRUMP: No. I just don't want to talk about that. It's such an important story for our country, for the world. What took place.

HABERMAN: Why not talk about it then? With all due respect.

TRUMP: At the right time, I will be.

THRUSH: One last thing on that. Have you actually seen intelligence that leads you to believe that people other than Susan Rice are involved.

TRUMP: I don't want to comment on anything about -- other than to say I think it's a -- I think it's truly one of the big stories of our time.

THRUSH: Do you think she might have committed a crime?

TRUMP: Do I think?

THRUSH: Yeah.

TRUMP: Yes, I think.

HABERMAN: On infrastructure, just generally speaking, there's been a lot of reports floating around about this package that you're looking at. Can you give us the broad outlooks?

TRUMP: We want to do a great infrastructure plan, and on that side I will say that we're going to have, I believe, tremendous Democrat support. We are also going to have some good Republican support, and I think it's going to be one of the very bipartisan bills and it's going to happen. I may put it in with health care.

HABERMAN: Really?

TRUMP: Yeah. I may put it in with something else because it's a very popular thing. We've spent $6 trillion in the Middle East, as of two months ago. Uh, $6 trillion. And yet we can't fix our own roads and our own highways. And our bridges, which are, in many cases, in very bad shape. And we're going to have a very big infrastructure plan. And bill. And it's going to come soon. And I think we'll have support from Democrats and Republicans.

THRUSH: [Transportation Secretary] Elaine Chao said that it would likely come ''later in the year.'' Are you thinking about accelerating?

TRUMP: I am. I'm thinking about accelerating it. I'm thinking about putting it with another bill. Could be health care, could be something else. [Cross talk.] Could be tax reform.

HABERMAN: What's your time frame, at this point, that you're looking at as an accelerated?

TRUMP: Well, we're working -- you know when people said, when you guys, because you know we have a very solid administration. We have some very, very good people. This man was the president of Goldman Sachs. I mean, he was, like, the president of Goldman Sachs.

HABERMAN: I'm very familiar with his work.

TRUMP: And believe me, they wanted him. But he wanted to do something more important. As he said, as big as Goldman Sachs are, it was --

HABERMAN: This is bigger.

TRUMP: -- and is. The numbers here are staggering. He did the biggest deals in the world. They were, like, tiny deals. They were like peanut deals. But, but we just have a great group of people.

THRUSH: We've heard some outlines in the press -- how much public money versus tax credits are we talking about?

TRUMP: We may go public/private on some deals. We're going to do a very big -- you know, the money that was squandered by the past administrations. Squandered on airplane routing systems that don't work. That, you know -- what would you call the actual system itself? What would you say just so they know?

UNIDENTIFIED AIDE: The current system? Land-based radar.

TRUMP: It is so bad. It's so out of whack. They had all of these different companies hired. Tremendous amounts of money was spent. And they don't hook up. They didn't hire one company. They don't hook up.

THRUSH: Well, how much money in total, there are numbers that have been floating around. It's two to three hundred billion over 10 years of federal aid.

TRUMP: No. More than that. Much more than that.

THRUSH: How much more?

TRUMP: We're talking about a trillion-dollar infrastructure.

THRUSH: But I mean, in terms of actual --

TRUMP: We may take that trillion, and we may also in addition use public/private. But we're talking about an investment of a trillion dollars.

HABERMAN: What would be the breakdown be?

TRUMP: On roads, on bridges, on many different things. And it's also going to be -- we have to refurbish to a large extent. You know, we can build new highways, which are much more expensive. And sometimes they're the highways to hell. You know they're called, like the Second Avenue subway, the tunnel to nowhere. Which, after spending 12 trillion, 12 billion dollars, they realize it now. But you know when they built the Second Avenue subway, you know they never knew where it was going. Did you know this? This was one of the great of all time. And then they ended up finishing it.

THRUSH: Can we bookmark that for one second? I just want to ask you about -- O.K. Tax credits versus actual money on the table, federal money. You say a trillion total. The estimates out there are two to three hundred billion in federal expenditures as opposed to tax credits. Are those numbers accurate? Give me a general account.

TRUMP: Nothing is accurate now because we haven't made a final determination. We haven't made a determination as to public/private. There are some things that work very nicely public/private. There are some things that don't. The federal government, we're doing very well you saw, a lot of good numbers coming out. You saw our imports. You saw what happened with China. And various other people that this country has been dealing with over the years. You saw the numbers come out today, they're very promising. Lot of good numbers are coming out. We are borrowing very inexpensively. When you can borrow so inexpensively, you don't have to do the public/private thing. Because public/private can be very expensive. When you go equity, when you give equity to people who own your highways essentially for a 30-year period, who own your tollbooths for a period of time -- come on in, Mike! You know Mike and Reince?

TRUMP: Uh, we're working on health care. Can I just say, so when you called the health care bill, you know, that was just a negotiation. You didn't hear me say it's over. That was a negotiation. You understand? A continuing negotiation. It may go on for a long time or it may go on until this afternoon. I don't know. It's a continuing negotiation.

[Laughter.]

HABERMAN: You said you expect Democrats -- I have two questions I want to ask you. You raised both of them. You expect that you will have Democratic support, but you have not spoken to [Senator Chuck] Schumer in weeks, so how do you expect -- I don't mean on public health care but on infrastructure.

TRUMP: No, because they are desperate for infrastructure. That's the thing that they want second to -- that would be their second number -- that would be their second request.

HABERMAN: What do you think their first is?

TRUMP: I know it, but I can't tell you it.

HABERMAN: You referenced the New York projects --

TRUMP: The tunnel to nowhere, I call it.

HABERMAN: Well that's my question for you. Two of those projects, the Hudson rail tunnel and one is the Second Avenue subway, are two projects you've been hearing about for much of your developing career.

TRUMP: For much of my life.

HABERMAN: Right, and so same, we're all New Yorkers at this table.

THRUSH: In your budget you either zeroed out or cut a lot. We reported --

TRUMP: We don't want money being thrown out the window, as it has been for many years. Not just in Obama's years. I mean for many years.

THRUSH: What do you say to New Yorker officials that think those are really vital projects? What do you say to them? Do you support them?

TRUMP: Well, I may support them, I'm going to look at them. So what I'm doing -- is you know -- I did great in real estate in New York. I know all the developers. I know all of the folks. I know the good ones and the bad ones. And I'm setting up a commission of very smart people that know how to spend money properly. That know how to build on time, on budget. And ideally, under time and under budget. I'm setting up a commission. It's going to be headed by [the developer] Richard LeFrak and it's going to be headed -- they're going to be co- -- Steve Roth. R-O-T-H of Vornado. Two very talented, smart, tough people. And they are going to, along with me, put on a group of 20 people, 20 to 25 people on a commission. We're going to run projects through them. And they will have great expertise in that room. We'll have it from both coasts, and right down the middle. We're going to have representatives from various parts of the country that are all are very, very successful in terms of infrastructure. From different fields, but always infrastructure. But everything is going to be run by them. One of the things -- you probably saw what I said yesterday -- did you see where I held up the deal?

HABERMAN: I did. The chart.

TRUMP: That's a highway. That's a highway. What is that, 17 agencies, Gary? Hundreds and hundreds of approvals. Some of which, statutorily, you have to wait six months before you ask for the next one. If we do the -- when we do the infrastructure, it's going to be very important to me that if we give billions of dollars to a state, like New York, California or any other state, that they're going to have to start spending that money, they're going to have to have approval within 120 days.

[Cross talk.]

TRUMP: And if they don't -- well, otherwise, you'll give them money and they won't start the highway till -- which is something that no one has ever done.

THRUSH: You've spent most of your career in New York. A, what do you think of the subway system in New York? Do you think it's in good shape? And B, when's the last time you were on the train in the city?

TRUMP: It's been a long time. It's been a long time. It has been. I know the subway system very well. I used to take it to Kew-Forest School, in Forest Hills, when I lived in Queens. And I'd take the subway to school. Seems a long time ago --

[Cross talk.]

TRUMP: I'd take it from Jamaica, 179th Street. Jamaica, right? To Forest Hills. I understand the subway very well. I used to ride between the cars.

HABERMAN: Did your parents tell you not to do that?

TRUMP: They weren't thrilled when they heard that.

THRUSH: We'll, you're kind of doing that politically now, so --

TRUMP: [Unintelligible.] That could be the best statement --

[Laughter.]

TRUMP: No, they were not happy. I used to love to do that. Those were the old days.

THRUSH: But you think the infrastructure in New York is in pretty good shape? You're a developer. You know that stuff.

TRUMP: I think it's in poor shape. The highways are in poor shape.

HABERMAN: What about the airports?

TRUMP: I think the airports are a horror show. I've traveled the world, I know the world.

HABERMAN: And, well, you've traveled the country. So you saw all of these cities in the last year and a half, two years. Tell us what you thought, do worst, do best in terms of airport, in terms of infrastructure, in terms of what you saw.

TRUMP: When you look at the infrastructure in places like Iowa, in places like Tennessee and Alabama and places I won by massive --

[Cohn sneezes.]

TRUMP: God bless you. You O.K., Gary? That was a pretty tough one. I've got to make sure my man is all right.

[Laughter.]

[Cross talk.]

TRUMP: When you look at the infrastructure of some parts of our country, it's really remarkably good. But you come back to New York and you look at the infrastructure of New York, you look at Van Wyck Expressway, you look at the medians, which, I would, you know, I've already got an order out -- the aluminum medians -- you've heard me talk about it.

HABERMAN: I've heard you talk about it, and I take those roads all the time, so --

TRUMP: Whoever the person is that owns that company is a genius salesman. That is the worst garbage. I think it bends by the heat, because not that many cars could possibly hit it. It's the worst garbage. And I also think it's dangerous because it's a spear. And if you hit those things, they come flying apart. And if you're driving, you've got yourself a problem.

THRUSH: Do you drive?

TRUMP: Well, I used to.

REED CORDISH: Per the president's instructions, the infrastructure package is going to fix the broken permit system, the broken process.

HABERMAN: Explain.

CORDISH: We can give you the details of it, but that's such a big part of the story. That's going to create benefit far beyond the federal dollars that we're talking about. That's what's really going on -- unleash the true revival of the infrastructure.

TRUMP: It's a very important element.

HABERMAN: How much time are you spending on infrastructure, versus health care or --

TRUMP: I would say 10 percent more. Right now I'm focused on China.

Focused on the Middle East. We're doing very, very well against ISIS, as you know. We just had a horrible thing happen yesterday.

HABERMAN: Did you see the images out of Syria? What do you think watching that as a president --

TRUMP: I think it's a disgrace. I think it's an affront to humanity. Inconceivable that somebody could do that. Those kids were so beautiful. To look at those scenes of those beautiful children being carried out.

HABERMAN: Where were you when you found out about it?

TRUMP: I was here. I saw it on television, I saw it on --

THRUSH: What do you think it says about the role of Russia in Syria?

TRUMP: Well, I think it's a very sad day for Russia because they're aligned, and in this case, all information points to Syria that they did this. Why they did this, who knows? That's a level -- first of all, they weren't supposed to have this. Obama said, ''It's all cleared away.'' Well, that's another thing he didn't do. This was a big moment, a big moment in the Middle East was when Obama drew the red line in the sand, and it was immediately violated, and did nothing. That was a big moment in the Middle East. I know you're not going to report it, but -- that was a big, bad moment in the Middle East.

THRUSH: We both reported on it extensively. And we grilled both [the former White House press secretary] Jay Carney and the president --

TRUMP: If that were violated, you would not have had this happened. It couldn't have been any worse in the Middle East, because you have five million people, now they're all over the place, including millions of deaths, in my opinion --

THRUSH: Is this the level of something you would contact Mr. Putin about, personally?

TRUMP: I never talk about what I do militarily. I've been complaining about that for years. In terms of Syria. I just don't talk about it. People say, ''Will you do something with Syria?'' I just don't talk about it.

THRUSH: What about Russia's role in all this in abetting the --

TRUMP: Well, I think it's very disappointing. I think it's very disappointing. Now this was done by -- the information is, this was done by Syria purely. But anybody aligned with Syria -- this is very disappointing.

AIDE: If we have any more questions about infrastructure, and then we just have to wrap up.

GARY D. COHN: Also, you were asking the president how he spends his time. Don't forget he's spending an enormous amount of time on trade and taxes. Those are two big areas.

TRUMP: And the trade is starting now, big league. It's a good point, Gary. The trade is starting. I mean, its started. You see it already. You see it in the numbers.

HABERMAN: On tax reform very quickly just because you said you might attach infrastructure to another piece of legislation.

TRUMP: Yes.

HABERMAN: Where are you -- we've heard a bunch of sort of amorphous proposals -- where are you in terms of the border adjustment tax?

TRUMP: Well, we're very much -- I don't want to announce it yet -- but we're very much set, my team and others -- uh, [Treasury Secretary] Steve Mnuchin, lot of other people -- we're very much set on the concept of the tax.

HABERMAN: You are.

TRUMP: We want to see what happens with health care first. Because health care will affect taxes. Because, if we get the health care that we want, we're going to end up with great health care and we're going to end up actually with a saving. And the saving will go toward a tax reduction.

HABERMAN: How do you deal with the House Freedom Caucus on an infrastructure bill, given that they seem to feel empowered right now?

TRUMP: Well, they're all friends of mine, Maggie. And you see that. They go out there and say, ''We love our president.'' You know, I mean, they're all friends of mine. I won their districts, some of them, by 48 percent, 42 percent, 45 percent. They're all friends of mine. They've been great. Uh, I think you're going to see it coming together. You're already seeing it. I think you saw it yesterday.

HABERMAN: Do you feel there was movement on health care yesterday? There's been conflicting reports.

TRUMP: Yeah. I do.

HABERMAN: O.K.

THRUSH: Do you feel you've surrendered any leverage in these health care --

TRUMP: No.

THRUSH: Do you think these guys can --

TRUMP: No. I didn't surrender leverage. I'm not looking to gain leverage. I'm looking to get great health care. And the easiest thing for me to do would be to not do health care. Just relax. Don't do it. If I don't do that, other things happen. And I think it's time that we have -- because, look -- what's going to happen is Obamacare is not sustainable. It's over. It will be anywhere from six months to a year. It's over. It's over.

THRUSH: On infrastructure, one of the things --

TRUMP: Now, if I want to deal with Democrats, Glenn, if I want to deal with Democrats, all I have to do is let it go a little further. You know, you have many states now, you have many states coming up where they're going to have no insurance company. O.K.? It's already happened in Tennessee. It's happening in Kentucky. Tennessee only has half coverage. Half the state is gone. They left. But I'd rather solve it in a much better way for the country.

[Cross talk.]

TRUMP: And I think we have a good chance.

THRUSH: Vis-àvis health care and infrastructure. One of the things that we've heard over the past couple of months was that you, early on, were very enthusiastic about infrastructure as a way to bring all these forces together.

TRUMP: I am.

THRUSH: And that you might have preferred to have done infrastructure first. Who sold you on doing it --

TRUMP: Me.

THRUSH: -- the other way? And do you regret not doing infrastructure first?

TRUMP: [Unintelligible.]

HABERMAN: What accounted for the change? What was your process?

TRUMP: Because infrastructure is so popular that I might want to use it for another bill.

HABERMAN: So then -- so as a sweetener for something else.

TRUMP: Very simple.

TRUMP: Because infrastructure is so popular with the Democrats, and pretty popular with the Republicans. A lot of Republicans want infrastructure, too. Number one, we need it as a country. We need it. We have to fix our roads and our bridges and we need it. And our airports, by the way, which are Third World airports. You look at these airports. They're horrible. I mean, you go to Kennedy. You go to L.A.X. These airports are horrible. I'm a person that, before I was doing this, I was in Qatar and I was all over the world and I was in different places in China, and you see airports, it's like we're -- we are Third World.

THRUSH: Joe Biden said --

HABERMAN: That's right.

TRUMP: The point, the point is that infrastructure is in my opinion very popular. It's going to be bipartisan. And I'm going to use it in another bill. That's an important bill.

HABERMAN: What would be a signature piece of infrastructure beyond roads and bridges? What would be a standout project?

TRUMP: We're looking at that, and we're going to announce something very soon.

THRUSH: Can I ask you one last question?

TRUMP: Yes.

THRUSH: On the infrastructure stuff, a couple of quick things. Davis-Bacon [a law that regulates wages on federally funded projects]. Democrats have said that will be a poison pill. Are you going to touch Davis-Bacon? What are you going to do?

TRUMP: We're going to make an announcement in two weeks --

HABERMAN: Really?

TRUMP: -- on Davis-Bacon.

HABERMAN: O.K. Can you give us a hint on where you are?

TRUMP: No.

[Laughter. Cross talk.]

TRUMP: It's an important question, actually.

[Unintelligible.]

TRUMP: It's going to be good.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170406ed460006y



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Old Tactics and New Buck Norms of Warfare

By RUSSELL GOLDMAN 
686 words
6 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

In six years of war, President Bashar al-Assad of Syria has overseen a campaign of carnage, turning an enormous cache of deadly weapons against the very people they were presumably stockpiled to protect.

In a campaign to crush rebels and jihadists, Mr. Assad and his allies have relied on tactics that go far beyond the norms of modern warfare to kill many thousands of Syrians. Here are the ways they have done it.

Chemical Weapons

In the latest attack on civilians, more than 100 people, including children, were believed to have been killed by chemical weapons in a rebel-held town in Idlib Province on Tuesday. A doctor there said the victims' pupils were reduced to pinhole-size dots, a characteristic of nerve agents and other banned toxic substances.

The United States put the blame for the attack on the Syrian government and its patrons, Russia and Iran, and suggested that the salvo was a war crime. While the attack was among the deadliest uses of chemical weapons in Syria in years, it was far from an isolated case.

During the war, the Assad government has been accused of regularly using chlorine gas, which is less deadly than the agent used on Tuesday and is legal in its commercial form. According to the Violations Documentation Center, an antigovernment watchdog, more than 1,100 Syrians have been killed in chemical weapons and gas attacks.

There are also reports that the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, has used mustard agent in northern Syria.

Siege Tactics and Starvation

In a war that has involved some of the modern world's most dangerous weapons, Mr. Assad and his allies have also used an ancient tactic to devastating effect: siege warfare.

Last year, government troops brought the rebel-held districts of Aleppo, Syria's largest city before the war, to its knees. Residents of those areas of the northern city were besieged for months.

Hundreds of thousands of people there and in other besieged cities risked starving to death, and many hundreds succumbed to the stranglehold that forces loyal to Mr. Assad had on the city's food supply.

In September, after the Assad government agreed to allow international aid convoys to enter Aleppo, Russian or Syrian warplanes attacked the trucks, killing about 20 people and leading to a suspension in aid.

A month earlier, the rebel-controlled city of Daraya, after four years of siege and bombings, struck a deal to surrender to the government.

Rebel forces and the Islamic State have also besieged government-controlled areas on a smaller scale.

Mass Executions and Torture

The Syrian government has summarily executed 5,000 to 13,000 people in mass hangings in just one of its many prisons since the start of the six-year-old uprising against Mr. Assad, Amnesty International said in a report in February.

Inmates are kept under conditions so dismal -- including regular, severe beatings and deprivation of food, water, medicine and basic sanitation -- that they amount to deliberate extermination, defined under international law as a crime against humanity, the report said.

Targeting of Hospitals

Syrian and Russian warplanes have bombed civilian targets and population centers, hitting mosques, schools and markets.

Government forces have struck rebel-held areas with barrel bombs, large containers filled with explosive material and shrapnel.

Airstrikes have also targeted hospitals. According to the group Physicians for Human Rights, more than 300 hospitals have been attacked, a phenomenon the United Nations has likened to a ''weapon of war.''

Rebels have also shelled civilian areas, but their weapons are less powerful.

Scud Missiles

More than 38,000 people have been killed in shelling attacks and explosions, according to the Violations Documentation Center, a Syrian local monitoring group that compiles data on human rights breaches.

Among the deadliest weapons deployed against civilians were Scud missiles, aimed at rebel-held areas in the early years of the war. Scores of people were killed in explosions and buried under rubble when their homes were hit.

Follow Russell Goldman on Twitter @GoldmanRussell .

Document NYTF000020170406ed4600041



U.S.; Politics
Partial Transcript: Trump’ Interview With The Times

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
4,964 words
6 April 2017
03:25
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —he following is a partial transcript of President Trump’ interview with The New York Times’aggie Haberman and Glenn Thrush. It has been lightly edited for content and clarity, and omits several off-the-record comments and asides.

At least six White House aides were sitting in: Gary D. Cohn, President Trump’ lead economic adviser and a former president of Goldman Sachs; Reed Cordish, an assistant to the president; Sean Spicer, the press secretary; Hope Hicks, a long-serving Trump aide; and eventually Vice President Mike Pence and the chief of staff, Reince Priebus.

MAGGIE HABERMAN, White House correspondent: Seems like it’ actually not been a terrible process for [Judge Neil M.] Gorsuch, right? I mean, it’ been pretty smooth.

PRESIDENT TRUMP: It’ never an easy process. I think it’ been very smooth considering there’ tremendous hostility on the other side. I think it’ been pretty smooth.

HABERMAN: You talk to Democrats privately that will admit —

TRUMP: I do.

HABERMAN: But do they admit to you that they don’ actually have a huge objection to Gorsuch, they think that he’ probably —

TRUMP: They do. They admit that.

HABERMAN: Right. In private.

TRUMP: Elijah Cummings [a Democratic representative from Maryland] was in my office and he said, “ou will go down as one of the great presidents in the history of our country.”

HABERMAN: Really.

TRUMP: And then he went out and I watched him on television yesterday and I said, “as that the same man?”

[Laughter.]

TRUMP: But I said, and I liked him, but I said that was really nice. He said, in a group of people, “ou will go down as one of the great presidents in the history of our country.”nd then I watched him on television and I said, “s that the same man that said that to me?”

GLENN THRUSH, White House correspondent: Why do you think Democrats feel the need to oppose Gorsuch? What do you think the politics is?

TRUMP: Well, I think that some of it had to do with the election. They thought they were going to win. You know, winning the Electoral College is, for a Republican, is close to impossible and I won it quite easily. And I think they are still recovering from that, but they are recovering now. I think the Susan Rice thing is a massive story. I think it’ a massive, massive story. All over the world, I mean other than The New York Times.

HABERMAN: We’e written about it twice.

TRUMP: Huh?

HABERMAN: We’e written about it twice.

TRUMP: Yeah, it’ a bigger story than you know. I think —

HABERMAN: You mean there’ more information that we’e not aware of?

TRUMP: I think that it’ going to be the biggest story.

THRUSH: Why? What do you think —

TRUMP: Take a look at what’ happening. I mean, first of all her performance was horrible yesterday on television even though she was interviewed by Hillary Clinton’ P.R. person, Andrea Mitchell [the NBC News journalist]. Course you’e been accused of that also.

HABERMAN: Mostly by you, though.

TRUMP: No, no, no. Mostly by a lot of people. So you know, we’l see what happens, but it looks like it’ breaking into a massive story.

THRUSH: What do you think are —hat other shoes are there to drop on this?

HABERMAN: Yeah, what else could we learn on this?

TRUMP: I think you’e going to see a lot. I think you’l see a lot.

HABERMAN: In terms of what she did and in terms of [unintelligible]?

TRUMP: I think in terms of what other people have done also.

HABERMAN: Really?

TRUMP: I think it’ one of the biggest stories. The Russia story is a total hoax. There has been absolutely nothing coming out of that. But what, you know, what various things led into it was the story that we’e talking about, the Susan Rice. What’ happened is terrible. I’e never seen people so indignant, including many Democrats who are friends of mine. I’e never seen them acting this way. Because that’ really an affront on them, you know, they are talking about civil liberties. It’ such an affront, what took place.

THRUSH: What other people do you think will get ensnared in this? Can you give us a sense? How far this might extend —

HABERMAN: From the previous administration.

TRUMP: I think from the previous administration.

THRUSH: How far up do you think this goes? Chief of staff?

TRUMP: I don’ want to say, but —

THRUSH: President?

TRUMP: I don’ want to say, but you know who. You know what was going on. You probably know better than anybody. I mean, I frankly think The Times is missing a big thing by not writing it because you’e missing out on the biggest story there is.

[Mr. Trump makes a comment off the record, and mentions the Fox News host Bill O’eilly.]

THRUSH: We’e back on the record?

HABERMAN: Yeah, back on the record, do you think that he’ being unfairly treated? I mean, I watched it because I was curious how he was dealing with everything.

TRUMP: I think he’ a person I know well. He’ a good person. I think he may, you know, I think he shouldn’ have settled, personally, I think he shouldn’ have settled.

HABERMAN: How come?

TRUMP: Because you —hould have taken it all the way. No, I know Bill. Bill’ a good person.

HABERMAN: Yeah.

TRUMP: I don’ think Bill would do anything wrong.

HOPE HICKS, White House director of strategic communications: Can we get to infrastructure? [Laughter.] Because I know we are sensitive about time.

HABERMAN: I understand. I just want to ask one last follow-up on that note, and then we’l move on, not on O’eilly.

TRUMP: You certainly covered O’eilly big. Not Susan Rice, boy, O’eilly [unintelligible]. He’ taking my place. He’ taking my place.

HABERMAN: Sir, if you could give us more information about Rice. If the administration would give us more information —

TRUMP: No, you have a lot of information. No, you have so much information.

HABERMAN: If you would have given it to us last week, we would have written it. Would you declassify some of the information so that —

TRUMP: I don’ want to talk about that.

HABERMAN: No? O.K.

TRUMP: No. I just don’ want to talk about that. It’ such an important story for our country, for the world. What took place.

HABERMAN: Why not talk about it then? With all due respect.

TRUMP: At the right time, I will be.

THRUSH: One last thing on that. Have you actually seen intelligence that leads you to believe that people other than Susan Rice are involved.

TRUMP: I don’ want to comment on anything about —ther than to say I think it’ a — think it’ truly one of the big stories of our time.

THRUSH: Do you think she might have committed a crime?

TRUMP: Do I think?

THRUSH: Yeah.

TRUMP: Yes, I think.

HABERMAN: On infrastructure, just generally speaking, there’ been a lot of reports floating around about this package that you’e looking at. Can you give us the broad outlooks?

TRUMP: We want to do a great infrastructure plan, and on that side I will say that we’e going to have, I believe, tremendous Democrat support. We are also going to have some good Republican support, and I think it’ going to be one of the very bipartisan bills and it’ going to happen. I may put it in with health care.

HABERMAN: Really?

TRUMP: Yeah. I may put it in with something else because it’ a very popular thing. We’e spent $6 trillion in the Middle East, as of two months ago. Uh, $6 trillion. And yet we can’ fix our own roads and our own highways. And our bridges, which are, in many cases, in very bad shape. And we’e going to have a very big infrastructure plan. And bill. And it’ going to come soon. And I think we’l have support from Democrats and Republicans.

THRUSH: [Transportation Secretary] Elaine Chao said that it would likely come “ater in the year.”re you thinking about accelerating?

TRUMP: I am. I’ thinking about accelerating it. I’ thinking about putting it with another bill. Could be health care, could be something else. [Cross talk.] Could be tax reform.

HABERMAN: What’ your time frame, at this point, that you’e looking at as an accelerated?

TRUMP: Well, we’e working —ou know when people said, when you guys, because you know we have a very solid administration. We have some very, very good people. This man was the president of Goldman Sachs. I mean, he was, like, the president of Goldman Sachs.

HABERMAN: I’ very familiar with his work.

TRUMP: And believe me, they wanted him. But he wanted to do something more important. As he said, as big as Goldman Sachs are, it was —

HABERMAN: This is bigger.

TRUMP: —nd is. The numbers here are staggering. He did the biggest deals in the world. They were, like, tiny deals. They were like peanut deals. But, but we just have a great group of people.

THRUSH: We’e heard some outlines in the press —ow much public money versus tax credits are we talking about?

TRUMP: We may go public/private on some deals. We’e going to do a very big —ou know, the money that was squandered by the past administrations. Squandered on airplane routing systems that don’ work. That, you know —hat would you call the actual system itself? What would you say just so they know?

UNIDENTIFIED AIDE: The current system? Land-based radar.

TRUMP: It is so bad. It’ so out of whack. They had all of these different companies hired. Tremendous amounts of money was spent. And they don’ hook up. They didn’ hire one company. They don’ hook up.

THRUSH: Well, how much money in total, there are numbers that have been floating around. It’ two to three hundred billion over 10 years of federal aid.

TRUMP: No. More than that. Much more than that.

THRUSH: How much more?

TRUMP: We’e talking about a trillion-dollar infrastructure.

THRUSH: But I mean, in terms of actual —

TRUMP: We may take that trillion, and we may also in addition use public/private. But we’e talking about an investment of a trillion dollars.

HABERMAN: What would be the breakdown be?

TRUMP: On roads, on bridges, on many different things. And it’ also going to be —e have to refurbish to a large extent. You know, we can build new highways, which are much more expensive. And sometimes they’e the highways to hell. You know they’e called, like the Second Avenue subway, the tunnel to nowhere. Which, after spending 12 trillion, 12 billion dollars, they realize it now. But you know when they built the Second Avenue subway, you know they never knew where it was going. Did you know this? This was one of the great of all time. And then they ended up finishing it.

THRUSH: Can we bookmark that for one second? I just want to ask you about —.K. Tax credits versus actual money on the table, federal money. You say a trillion total. The estimates out there are two to three hundred billion in federal expenditures as opposed to tax credits. Are those numbers accurate? Give me a general account.

TRUMP: Nothing is accurate now because we haven’ made a final determination. We haven’ made a determination as to public/private. There are some things that work very nicely public/private. There are some things that don’. The federal government, we’e doing very well you saw, a lot of good numbers coming out. You saw our imports. You saw what happened with China. And various other people that this country has been dealing with over the years. You saw the numbers come out today, they’e very promising. Lot of good numbers are coming out. We are borrowing very inexpensively. When you can borrow so inexpensively, you don’ have to do the public/private thing. Because public/private can be very expensive. When you go equity, when you give equity to people who own your highways essentially for a 30-year period, who own your tollbooths for a period of time —ome on in, Mike! You know Mike and Reince?

TRUMP: Uh, we’e working on health care. Can I just say, so when you called the health care bill, you know, that was just a negotiation. You didn’ hear me say it’ over. That was a negotiation. You understand? A continuing negotiation. It may go on for a long time or it may go on until this afternoon. I don’ know. It’ a continuing negotiation.

[Laughter.]

HABERMAN: You said you expect Democrats — have two questions I want to ask you. You raised both of them. You expect that you will have Democratic support, but you have not spoken to [Senator Chuck] Schumer in weeks, so how do you expect — don’ mean on public health care but on infrastructure.

TRUMP: No, because they are desperate for infrastructure. That’ the thing that they want second to —hat would be their second number —hat would be their second request.

HABERMAN: What do you think their first is?

TRUMP: I know it, but I can’ tell you it.

HABERMAN: You referenced the New York projects —

TRUMP: The tunnel to nowhere, I call it.

HABERMAN: Well that’ my question for you. Two of those projects, the Hudson rail tunnel and one is the Second Avenue subway, are two projects you’e been hearing about for much of your developing career.

TRUMP: For much of my life.

HABERMAN: Right, and so same, we’e all New Yorkers at this table.

THRUSH: In your budget you either zeroed out or cut a lot. We reported —

TRUMP: We don’ want money being thrown out the window, as it has been for many years. Not just in Obama’ years. I mean for many years.

THRUSH: What do you say to New Yorker officials that think those are really vital projects? What do you say to them? Do you support them?

TRUMP: Well, I may support them, I’ going to look at them. So what I’ doing —s you know — did great in real estate in New York. I know all the developers. I know all of the folks. I know the good ones and the bad ones. And I’ setting up a commission of very smart people that know how to spend money properly. That know how to build on time, on budget. And ideally, under time and under budget. I’ setting up a commission. It’ going to be headed by [the developer] Richard LeFrak and it’ going to be headed —hey’e going to be co- —Steve Roth. R-O-T-H of Vornado. Two very talented, smart, tough people. And they are going to, along with me, put on a group of 20 people, 20 to25 people on a commission. We’e going to run projects through them. And they will have great expertise in that room. We’l have it from both coasts, and right down the middle. We’e going to have representatives from various parts of the country that are all are very, very successful in terms of infrastructure. From different fields, but always infrastructure. But everything is going to be run by them. One of the things —ou probably saw what I said yesterday —id you see where I held up the deal?

HABERMAN: I did. The chart.

TRUMP: That’ a highway. That’ a highway. What is that, 17 agencies, Gary? Hundreds and hundreds of approvals. Some of which, statutorily, you have to wait six months before you ask for the next one. If we do the —hen we do the infrastructure, it’ going to be very important to me that if we give billions of dollars to a state, like New York, California or any other state, that they’e going to have to start spending that money, they’e going to have to have approval within 120 days.

[Cross talk.]

TRUMP: And if they don’ —ell, otherwise, you’l give them money and they won’ start the highway till —hich is something that no one has ever done.

THRUSH: You’e spent most of your career in New York. A, what do you think of the subway system in New York? Do you think it’ in good shape? And B, when’ the last time you were on the train in the city?

TRUMP: It’ been a long time. It’ been a long time. It has been. I know the subway system very well. I used to take it to Kew-Forest School, in Forest Hills, when I lived in Queens. And I’ take the subway to school. Seems a long time ago —

[Cross talk.]

TRUMP: I’ take it from Jamaica, 179th Street. Jamaica, right? To Forest Hills. I understand the subway very well. I used to ride between the cars.

HABERMAN: Did your parents tell you not to do that?

TRUMP: They weren’ thrilled when they heard that.

THRUSH: We’l, you’e kind of doing that politically now, so —

TRUMP: [Unintelligible.] That could be the best statement —

[Laughter.]

TRUMP: No, they were not happy. I used to love to do that. Those were the old days.

THRUSH: But you think the infrastructure in New York is in pretty good shape? You’e a developer. You know that stuff.

TRUMP: I think it’ in poor shape. The highways are in poor shape.

HABERMAN: What about the airports?

TRUMP: I think the airports are a horror show. I’e traveled the world, I know the world.

HABERMAN: And, well, you’e traveled the country. So you saw all of these cities in the last year and a half, two years. Tell us what you thought, do worst, do best in terms of airport, in terms of infrastructure, in terms of what you saw.

TRUMP: When you look at the infrastructure in places like Iowa, in places like Tennessee and Alabama and places I won by massive —

[Cohn sneezes.]

TRUMP: God bless you. You O.K., Gary? That was a pretty tough one. I’e got to make sure my man is all right.

[Laughter.]

[Cross talk.]

TRUMP: When you look at the infrastructure of some parts of our country, it’ really remarkably good. But you come back to New York and you look at the infrastructure of New York, you look at Van Wyck Expressway, you look at the medians, which, I would, you know, I’e already got an order out —he aluminum medians —ou’e heard me talk about it.

HABERMAN: I’e heard you talk about it, and I take those roads all the time, so —

TRUMP: Whoever the person is that owns that company is a genius salesman. That is the worst garbage. I think it bends by the heat, because not that many cars could possibly hit it. It’ the worst garbage. And I also think it’ dangerous because it’ a spear. And if you hit those things, they come flying apart. And if you’e driving, you’e got yourself a problem.

THRUSH: Do you drive?

TRUMP: Well, I used to.

REED CORDISH: Per the president’ instructions, the infrastructure package is going to fix the broken permit system, the broken process.

HABERMAN: Explain.

CORDISH: We can give you the details of it, but that’ such a big part of the story. That’ going to create benefit far beyond the federal dollars that we’e talking about. That’ what’ really going on —nleash the true revival of the infrastructure.

TRUMP: It’ a very important element.

HABERMAN: How much time are you spending on infrastructure, versus health care or —

TRUMP: I would say 10 percent more. Right now I’ focused on China.

Focused on the Middle East. We’e doing very, very well against ISIS, as you know. We just had a horrible thing happen yesterday.

HABERMAN: Did you see the images out of Syria? What do you think watching that as a president —

TRUMP: I think it’ a disgrace. I think it’ an affront to humanity. Inconceivable that somebody could do that. Those kids were so beautiful. To look at those scenes of those beautiful children being carried out.

HABERMAN: Where were you when you found out about it?

TRUMP: I was here. I saw it on television, I saw it on —

THRUSH: What do you think it says about the role of Russia in Syria?

TRUMP: Well, I think it’ a very sad day for Russia because they’e aligned, and in this case, all information points to Syria that they did this. Why they did this, who knows? That’ a level —irst of all, they weren’ supposed to have this. Obama said, “t’ all cleared away.”ell, that’ another thing he didn’ do. This was a big moment, a big moment in the Middle East was when Obama drew the red line in the sand, and it was immediately violated, and did nothing. That was a big moment in the Middle East. I know you’e not going to report it, but —hat was a big, bad moment in the Middle East.

THRUSH: We both reported on it extensively. And we grilled both [the former White House press secretary] Jay Carney and the president —

TRUMP: If that were violated, you would not have had this happened. It couldn’ have been any worse in the Middle East, because you have five million people, now they’e all over the place, including millions of deaths, in my opinion —

THRUSH: Is this the level of something you would contact Mr. Putin about, personally?

TRUMP: I never talk about what I do militarily. I’e been complaining about that for years. In terms of Syria. I just don’ talk about it. People say, “ill you do something with Syria?” just don’ talk about it.

THRUSH: What about Russia’ role in all this in abetting the —

TRUMP: Well, I think it’ very disappointing. I think it’ very disappointing. Now this was done by —he information is, this was done by Syria purely. But anybody aligned with Syria —his is very disappointing.

AIDE: If we have any more questions about infrastructure, and then we just have to wrap up.

GARY D. COHN: Also, you were asking the president how he spends his time. Don’ forget he’ spending an enormous amount of time on trade and taxes. Those are two big areas.

TRUMP: And the trade is starting now, big league. It’ a good point, Gary. The trade is starting. I mean, its started. You see it already. You see it in the numbers.

HABERMAN: On tax reform very quickly just because you said you might attach infrastructure to another piece of legislation.

TRUMP: Yes.

HABERMAN: Where are you —e’e heard a bunch of sort of amorphous proposals —here are you in terms of the border adjustment tax?

TRUMP: Well, we’e very much — don’ want to announce it yet —ut we’e very much set, my team and others —h, [Treasury Secretary] Steve Mnuchin, lot of other people —e’e very much set on the concept of the tax.

HABERMAN: You are.

TRUMP: We want to see what happens with health care first. Because health care will affect taxes. Because, if we get the health care that we want, we’e going to end up with great health care and were going to end up actually with a saving. And the saving will go toward a tax reduction.

HABERMAN: How do you deal with the House Freedom Caucus on an infrastructure bill, given that they seem to feel empowered right now?

TRUMP: Well, they’e all friends of mine, Maggie. And you see that. They go out there and say, “e love our president.”ou know, I mean, they’e all friends of mine. I won their districts, some of them, by 48 percent, 42 percent, 45 percent. They’e all friends of mine. They’e been great. Uh, I think you’e going to see it coming together. You’e already seeing it. I think you saw it yesterday.

HABERMAN: Do you feel there was movement on health care yesterday? There’ been conflicting reports.

TRUMP: Yeah. I do.

HABERMAN: O.K.

THRUSH: Do you feel you’e surrendered any leverage in these health care —

TRUMP: No.

THRUSH: Do you think these guys can —

TRUMP: No. I didn’ surrender leverage. I’ not looking to gain leverage. I’ looking to get great health care. And the easiest thing for me to do would be to not do health care. Just relax. Don’ do it. If I don’ do that, other things happen. And I think it’ time that we have —ecause, look —hat’ going to happen is Obamacare is not sustainable. It’ over. It will be anywhere from six months to a year. It’ over. It’ over.

THRUSH: On infrastructure, one of the things —

TRUMP: Now, if I want to deal with Democrats, Glenn, if I want to deal with Democrats, all I have to do is let it go a little further. You know, you have many states now, you have many states coming up where they’e going to have no insurance company. O.K.? It’ already happened in Tennessee. It’ happening in Kentucky. Tennessee only has half coverage. Half the state is gone. They left. But I’ rather solve it in a much better way for the country.

[Cross talk.]

TRUMP: And I think we have a good chance.

THRUSH: Vis-àvis health care and infrastructure. One of the things that we’e heard over the past couple of months was that you, early on, were very enthusiastic about infrastructure as a way to bring all these forces together.

TRUMP: I am.

THRUSH: And that you might have preferred to have done infrastructure first. Who sold you on doing it —

TRUMP: Me.

THRUSH: —he other way? And do you regret not doing infrastructure first?

TRUMP: [Unintelligible.]

HABERMAN: What accounted for the change? What was your process?

TRUMP: Because infrastructure is so popular that I might want to use it for another bill.

HABERMAN: So then —o as a sweetener for something else.

TRUMP: Very simple.

TRUMP: Because infrastructure is so popular with the Democrats, and pretty popular with the Republicans. A lot of Republicans want infrastructure, too. Number one, we need it as a country. We need it. We have to fix our roads and our bridges and we need it. And our airports, by the way, which are Third World airports. You look at these airports. They’e horrible. I mean, you go to Kennedy. You go to L.A.X. These airports are horrible. I’ a person that, before I was doing this, I was in Qatar and I was all over the world and I was in different places in China, and you see airports, it’ like we’e —e are Third World.

THRUSH: Joe Biden said —

HABERMAN: That’ right.

TRUMP: The point, the point is that infrastructure is in my opinion very popular. It’ going to be bipartisan. And I’ going to use it in another bill. That’ an important bill.

HABERMAN: What would be a signature piece of infrastructure beyond roads and bridges? What would be a standout project?

TRUMP: We’e looking at that, and we’e going to announce something very soon.

THRUSH: Can I ask you one last question?

TRUMP: Yes.

THRUSH: On the infrastructure stuff, a couple of quick things. Davis-Bacon [a law that regulates wages on federally funded projects]. Democrats have said that will be a poison pill. Are you going to touch Davis-Bacon? What are you going to do?

TRUMP: We’e going to make an announcement in two weeks —

HABERMAN: Really?

TRUMP: —n Davis-Bacon.

HABERMAN: O.K. Can you give us a hint on where you are?

TRUMP: No.

[Laughter. Cross talk.]

TRUMP: It’ an important question, actually.

[Unintelligible.]

TRUMP: It’ going to be good.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* Trump Weighs Infrastructure Bill but Keeps New York Up in the Air

* Trump, Citing No Evidence, Suggests Susan Rice Committed Crime

* Trump Cuts Leave Bridge and Rail Projects Hanging

* Trump Budget Leaves New York-Area Transit Projects Up in the Air

* Trump the Builder? Budget Blueprint Puts His Promises on Infrastructure in Doubt

President Trump in the Rose Garden of the White House during a news conference on Wednesday. | Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170406ed460015p



World; Middle East
Trump’ View of Syria and Assad Altered After ‘nacceptable’hemical Attack

By MARK LANDLER, DAVID E. SANGER and MICHAEL D. SHEAR 
1,504 words
5 April 2017
19:51
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —resident Trump warned on Wednesday that he would not tolerate the “einous”chemical weapons attack in Syria , opening the door to a greater American role in protecting the population in a vicious civil war that he has always said the United States should avoid.

The president declined to offer any details about potential action. But he said his horror at the images of “nnocent children, innocent babies”hoked by poison gas in a rebel-held area of Syria had caused him to reassess his approach. Only days after the White House declared it would be “illy”o persist in trying to oust President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, Mr. Trump said, “y attitude toward Syria and Assad has changed very much.”

“t crossed a lot of lines for me,”he president declared at a news conference  in the Rose Garden, referring to the “ed line”hat his predecessor, President Barack Obama , had drawn before a 2013 poison-gas attack by Mr. Assad’ forces. Mr. Obama’ failure to strike Syria after that, Mr. Trump claimed, sowed the conditions for this new assault. The estimated death toll was reported to have exceeded 100.

Syria was one of several places, along with North Korea and Iran, where Mr. Trump on Wednesday threatened a forceful American response. But in all these cases, he declined to disclose options, arguing that there was a need for surprise but stoking worries that his fledgling administration is not ready to deal with multiple threats across the Middle East and Asia.

At the United Nations, Mr. Trump’ ambassador, Nikki R. Haley,  warned  that the United States might take unilateral action if the Security Council failed to respond to this latest atrocity in Syria. A shift in policy could include airstrikes, which were considered and ultimately rejected by Mr. Obama.

The president, standing alongside King Abdullah II  of Jordan  at the news conference, told reporters, “’ not saying I’ doing anything one way or the other, but I’ certainly not going to be telling you.”

Mr. Trump’ stern words and lack of specifics attested to a leader, 75 days into his presidency, who is determined to show a more muscular style than Mr. Obama but is grappling with many of the same complexities that dogged his predecessor. And they raised anew a question that Mr. Trump until now has avoided: his criteria for using force, both in a humanitarian cause and in facing a direct, if distant, threat to the United States.

“t is usually better to threaten unspecific consequences until you are at a more advanced stage of planning,”aid Walter Russell Mead, a foreign policy expert at Bard College. “he danger is you become so distracted by these multiple crises that you can’ focus on the most urgent one, or the one where the U.S. actually has a chance of succeeding.”

Mr. Trump’ challenge is complicated by the new upheaval in the ranks of his national security aides, with the abrupt removal of his chief strategist, Stephen K. Bannon , from the senior policy panel of the National Security Council. On Thursday, Mr. Trump is to meet President Xi Jinping of China in Florida, where the president plans to push for more Chinese support in the campaign to pressure North Korea.

Mr. Trump said he viewed North Korea, which tested an intermediate-range missile on Tuesday, as a “ig problem.”ut he offered no remedies. Similarly, he vowed to send a message to Iran, which is backing pro-Assad militias in Syria and which he said had benefited from a “ne sided”uclear deal with the United States negotiated by the Obama administration. But he did not say what form it would take.

At times, the Trump administration has seemed at a loss for words in responding to fast-moving events. When North Korea launched its missile, Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson issued a statement so cryptic that it left much of Washington confused.

“orth Korea launched yet another intermediate range ballistic missile,”the statement said . “he United States has spoken enough about North Korea. We have no further comment.”

Until this week, North Korea and Iran both figured higher on Mr. Trump’ list of pressing foreign problems than Syria’ civil war.

In September 2013, when Mr. Obama confronted a chemical weapons attack not unlike the one Mr. Trump faces today, Mr. Trump said on Twitter : “resident Obama, do not attack Syria. There is no upside and tremendous downside. Save your ‘owder’or another (and more important) day!”s a candidate, Mr. Trump said repeatedly that forcing Mr. Assad out of power was not as urgent a priority for the United States as vanquishing the Islamic State.

Nothing, it seems, affects Mr. Trump’ judgments as much as what he sees on television. On Wednesday, he said the images of death inside Syria affected him, presumably in ways they did not under similar circumstances four years ago. “ will tell you that attack on children had a big, big impact on me,”e said. “hat was a horrible, horrible thing.”

Mr. Trump has declined to define what kind of humanitarian crisis would prompt him to act. If he considers military action in Syria, he is likely to face the same reality Mr. Obama did: While it is possible to bomb Mr. Assad’ warplanes, runways and military installations —omething some senior members of the Obama administration now wish they had done —ny longer-term solution would require a major presence of troops and air power.

Despite his earlier advice to Mr. Obama not to act, Mr. Trump now says his predecessor missed an opportunity to solve the Syria conflict by failing to enforce his “ed line in the sand.”

“hen he didn’ cross that line after making the threat,”r. Trump said, “ think that set us back a long ways, not only in Syria, but in many other parts of the world, because it was a blank threat.”

Mr. Trump was similarly withering about Mr. Obama’ nuclear deal with Iran. He hinted that because Congress had not ratified the accord, the new administration could somehow unravel it. The agreement, however, is not a treaty and thus does not require congressional ratification. Privately, White House officials have said the president is unlikely to rip it up.

But Mr. Trump said he did plan to deal with Hezbollah, which is backing the Assad government in Syria, and with other Iranian-backed militias that are fighting in Syria and Iraq. “ou will see,”e told a reporter. “hey will have a message. You will see what the message will be.”

On Thursday, Mr. Trump will face perhaps the most complex diplomatic challenge of his presidency in playing host to Mr. Xi at his private club in Palm Beach. He plans to make North Korea the centerpiece of the meeting, pressuring the Chinese to do more to compel the North Korean dictator, Kim Jong-un , to give up his nuclear weapons .

Mr. Trump has never publicly addressed the central conundrum: While he wants North Korea to give up its nuclear weapons, he does not want to open negotiations. That means he will either have to commit to using force or publicly back down by entering into another set of talks —wo options his administration has found unpalatable.

Apart from some messages on Twitter and Mr. Tillerson’ own statements during a trip to Seoul, South Korea’ capital, two weeks ago —hen he said the United States would negotiate with North Korea only after it gave up its weapons and missiles —he Trump administration has said very little about North Korea, quite deliberately.

Mr. Tillerson has made clear he will be a diplomat of few words, preferring to do his deals behind closed doors and open himself to as little probing of the strategy as possible. But in the absence of much public comment, American allies seem confused about the Trump administration’ strategy of coercive diplomacy.

“he conundrum,”aid Robert S. Litwak , the director of studies at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars , “s that North Korea never acts except under pressure, but pressure never works.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter  and in the Morning Briefing newsletter .

* Worst Chemical Attack in Years in Syria; U.S. Blames Assad 

* Jordan Frees Soldier Who Killed 7 Israeli Schoolgirls in ’7 Rampage 

* Jordan Executes 10 Prisoners With Links to Islamic Extremism 

* \b ISIS\b0  Is Said to Claim Responsibility for Deadly Attack in Jordan 

* Cache of Weapons Suggests Gunmen in Jordan Were Planning Multiple Attacks 

President Trump spoke about the recent chemical attack in Syria during a news conference with King Abdullah of Jordan on Wednesday. “hat attack on children yesterday had a big impact on me,”e said. | By THE NEW YORK TIMES 

Document NYTFEED020170405ed45006y1



world
Assad’ History of Chemical Attacks, and Other Atrocities

By RUSSELL GOLDMAN 
740 words
5 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In six years of war, President Bashar al-Assad of Syria has overseen a campaign of carnage, turning an enormous cache of deadly weapons against the very people they were presumably stockpiled to protect.

In a campaign to crush rebels and jihadists, Mr. Assad and his allies have relied on tactics that go far beyond the norms of modern warfare to kill many thousands of Syrians. Here are the ways they have done it.

Chemical Weapons

In the latest attack on civilians, more than 100 people, including children, were believed to have been killed by chemical weapons in a rebel-held town in Idlib Province on Tuesday. A doctor there said the victims' pupils were reduced to pinhole-size dots, a characteristic of nerve agents and other banned toxic substances.

The United States put the blame for the attack on the Syrian government and its patrons, Russia and Iran, and suggested that the salvo was a war crime. While the attack was among the deadliest uses of chemical weapons in Syria in years, it was far from an isolated case.

During the war, the Assad government has been accused of regularly using chlorine gas, which is less deadly than the agent used on Tuesday and is legal in its commercial form. According to the Violations Documentation Center, an antigovernment watchdog, more than 1,100 Syrians have been killed in chemical weapons and gas attacks.

There are also reports that the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, has used mustard agent in northern Syria.

Siege Tactics and Starvation

In a war that has involved some of the modern world’ most dangerous weapons, Mr. Assad and his allies have also used an ancient tactic to devastating effect: siege warfare.

Last year, government troops brought the rebel-held districts of Aleppo, Syria’ largest city before the war, to its knees. Residents of those areas of the northern city were besieged for months.

Hundreds of thousands of people there and in other besieged cities risked starving to death, and many hundreds succumbed to the stranglehold that forces loyal to Mr. Assad had on the city’ food supply.

In September, after the Assad government agreed to allow international aid convoys to enter Aleppo, Russian or Syrian warplanes attacked the trucks, killing about 20 people and leading to a suspension in aid.

A month earlier, the rebel-controlled city of Daraya, after four years of siege and bombings, struck a deal to surrender to the government.

Rebel forces and the Islamic State have also besieged government-controlled areas on a smaller scale.

Mass Executions and Torture

The Syrian government has summarily executed 5,000 to 13,000 people in mass hangings in just one of its many prisons since the start of the six-year-old uprising against Mr. Assad, Amnesty International said in a report in February.

Inmates are kept under conditions so dismal —ncluding regular, severe beatings and deprivation of food, water, medicine and basic sanitation —hat they amount to deliberate extermination, defined under international law as a crime against humanity, the report said.

Targeting of Hospitals

Syrian and Russian warplanes have bombed civilian targets and population centers, hitting mosques, schools and markets.

Government forces have struck rebel-held areas with barrel bombs, large containers filled with explosive material and shrapnel.

Airstrikes have also targeted hospitals. According to the group Physicians for Human Rights, more than 300 hospitals have been attacked, a phenomenon the United Nations has likened to a “eapon of war.”

Rebels have also shelled civilian areas, but their weapons are less powerful.

Scud Missiles

More than 38,000 people have been killed in shelling attacks and explosions, according to the Violations Documentation Center, a Syrian local monitoring group that compiles data on human rights breaches.

Among the deadliest weapons deployed against civilians were Scud missiles, aimed at rebel-held areas in the early years of the war. Scores of people were killed in explosions and buried under rubble when their homes were hit.

Follow Russell Goldman on Twitter @GoldmanRussell.

* The Holes in Russia’ Account of the Syria Chemical Attack

* Worst Chemical Attack in Years in Syria; U.S. Blames Assad

* High-Ranking Syrian Officials Could Face Reckoning in Landmark Spain Case

* Syrian Military, Not Rebels, Severed Damascus Water Supply, U.N. Finds

* U.N. Investigators Say Syria Bombed Convoy and Did So Deliberately

Document INHT000020170406ed450000q



opinion
President Trump’ Real-World Syria Lesson; Op-Ed Columnist

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
981 words
5 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

With each passing day our new president is discovering that every big problem he faces is like Obamacare —f there were a good, easy solution it would have been found already, and even the less good solutions are more than his own party is ready to pay for or the country is ready to tolerate.

But on Tuesday, tragically, Trump got this lesson in foreign policy via a truly vile poison-gas attack on Syrian civilians, many of them children, reportedly perpetrated by the pro-Russian, pro-Iranian, murderous regime of Bashar al-Assad.

President Trump came to office with the naïe view that he could make fighting \b ISIS\b0  the centerpiece of his Middle East policy —nd just drop more bombs and send more special forces than President Barack Obama did to prove his toughness. Trump also seemed to think that fighting ISIS would be a bridge to building a partnership with President Vladimir Putin of Russia.

It was naïe because ISIS does not exist in a vacuum —or is it the only bad actor in the region. ISIS was produced as a Sunni Muslim reaction to massive overreach by Iran in Iraq, where Iranian-backed Shiite militias and the Iraqi government forces of Nouri al-Maliki tried to crush all vestiges of Sunni power in that country and make it a vassal of Iran. (If you think ISIS is sick, Google the phrase “ower drills to the head and Shiite militias in Iraq”nd you will discover that ISIS did not invent depravity in that part of the world.)

The Iranian/Shiite onslaught against Iraqi Sunnis ran parallel with Assad’ Shiite-Alawite regime in Syria, turning what started out as a multisectarian democracy movement in Syria into a sectarian war between Sunnis and Shiites. Assad figured that if he just gunned down or poison-gassed enough Syrian Sunnis he could turn their democracy efforts into a sectarian struggle against his Shiite-Alawite regime —nd presto, it worked.

The opposition almost toppled him, but with the aid of Russia, Iran and Iran’ Hezbollah militia, Assad was able to pummel the Syrian Sunnis into submission as well.

ISIS was the deformed creature created by a pincers movement —ussia, Iran, Assad and Hezbollah in Syria on one flank and Iran and pro-Iranian militias in Iraq on the other. When Trump said he wanted to partner with Russia to crush ISIS, it was music to the ears of Assad, Russia, Iran and Hezbollah. Like everyone else, they figured they could manipulate Trump’ ignorance to their advantage.

So, last week, someone named “Rex Tillerson”who, I am told, is the U.S. secretary of state) declared that the “onger-term status of President Assad will be decided by the Syrian people”—s if the Syrian people will be having an Iowa-like primary on that subject soon. U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley made the same point even more cravenly, telling reporters that the United States’“riority is no longer to sit there and focus on getting Assad out.”

Is there any wonder that Assad felt no compunction about perpetrating what this paper described as “ne of the deadliest chemical weapons attacks in years in Syria,”illing dozens of people in Idlib Province, the last major holdout for Syrian rebels.

Mind you, Donald Trump did not cause this Syria problem, and he is right to complain that it was left in his lap by the Obama team, which had its own futile strategy for dealing with Syria —rying to negotiate with Russia and Iran, the key players there, without creating any leverage on the ground.

But if you’e looking for a culprit for why America has refused to intervene in Syria, you have to look both to your left and to your right.

“he only obstacle to putting real U.S. military leverage into Syria is democracy in America,”xplained the foreign policy expert Michael Mandelbaum, author of “ission Failure: America and the World in the Post-Cold War Era.”“he American public simply does not want to spend the blood and treasure to produce what would probably be a less awful but still not good outcome in Syria.”nd that is a byproduct of the failed George W. Bush interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Alas, though, I now think doing nothing is a mistake. Just letting Assad keep trying to restore control over all of Syria will mean endless massacres. A negotiated power-sharing solution is impossible; there is no trust.

The least bad solution is a partition of Syria and the creation of a primarily Sunni protected area —rotected by an international force, including, if necessary, some U.S. troops. That should at least stop the killing —nd the refugee flows that are fueling a populist-nationalist backlash all across the European Union.

It won’ be pretty or easy. But in the Cold War we put 400,000 troops in Europe to keep the sectarian peace there and to keep Europe on a democracy track. Having NATO and the Arab League establish a safe zone in Syria for the same purpose is worth a try. And then if Putin and Iran want to keep the butcher Assad in Damascus, they can have him.

It’ either that, President Trump, or get ready for a lot more days like Tuesday. As I said, every problem is like Obamacare —ever as easy as you thought to fix. The least bad alternatives can be forged only by a compromise in the middle, and, like your hotels, they’l all soon have your name on them.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

* A New Level of Depravity, Even for Bashar al-Assad

Document INHT000020170405ed450000k



World; Middle East
The Many Ways Assad Has Killed His Own People

By RUSSELL GOLDMAN 
937 words
5 April 2017
17:12
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In six years of war, President Bashar al-Assad of Syria has overseen a campaign of carnage, turning an enormous cache of deadly weapons against the very people they were presumably stockpiled to protect. In a campaign to crush rebels and jihadists, Mr. Assad and his allies have relied on tactics that go far beyond the norms of modern warfare to kill many thousands of Syrians. Here are the ways they have done it.

Chemical weapons

In the latest attack on civilians, at least 69 people, including children, were killed in a chemical weapons attack on a rebel-held town in Idlib Province on Tuesday. A doctor there said the victims' pupils were reduced to pinhole-size dots, a characteristic of nerve agents and other banned toxic substances.

The United States put the blame for the attack on the Syrian government and its patrons, Russia and Iran, and suggested that the salvo was a war crime. While the attack was among the deadliest uses of chemical weapons in Syria in years, it was far from an isolated case.

During the war, the Assad government has been accused of regularly using chlorine gas, which is less deadly than the agent used on Tuesday and is legal in its commercial form. According to the Violations Documentation Center, an antigovernment watchdog, more than 1,100 Syrians have been killed in chemical weapons and gas attacks.

There are also reports that the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, has used mustard agent in northern Syria.

Siege tactics and starvation

In a war that has involved some of the modern world’ most dangerous weapons, Mr. Assad and his allies have also used an ancient tactic to devastating effect: siege warfare.

Last year, government troops brought the rebel-held districts of Aleppo, Syria’ largest city before the war, to its knees, besieging them for months. Hundreds of thousands of people there and in other besieged cities risked starving to death, and many hundreds succumbed to the stranglehold that forces loyal to Mr. Assad had on the city’ food supply.

In September 2016, after the Assad government agreed to allow international aid convoys to enter Aleppo, Russian or Syrian warplanes attacked the trucks, killing about 20 people and leading to a suspension in aid. A month earlier, the rebel-controlled city of Daraya, after four years of siege and bombings, struck a deal to surrender to the government.

Rebel forces and the Islamic State have also besieged government-controlled areas on a smaller scale.

Mass executions and torture

The Syrian government has summarily executed 5,000 to 13,000 people in mass hangings in just one of its many prisons since the start of the six-year-old uprising against Mr. Assad, Amnesty International said in a report in February.

Inmates are kept under conditions so dismal —ncluding regular, severe beatings and deprivation of food, water, medicine and basic sanitation —hat they amount to deliberate extermination, defined under international law as a crime against humanity, the report said.

Barrel bombs and targeting of hospitals

Syrian and Russian warplanes have bombed civilian targets and population centers, hitting mosques, schools and markets.

Government forces have struck rebel-held areas with barrel bombs, large containers filled with explosive material and shrapnel.

Airstrikes have also targeted hospitals. According to the Physicians for Human Rights, more than 300 hospitals have been attacked, a phenomenon the United Nations has likened to a “eapon of war.”

Rebels have also shelled civilian areas, but their weapons are less powerful.

Scud missiles

More than 38,000 people have been killed in shelling attacks and explosions, according to the Violations Documentation Center.

Among the deadliest weapons deployed against civilians were Scud missiles, aimed at rebel-held areas in the early years of the war. Scores of people were killed in explosions and buried under rubble when their homes were destroyed.

* Worst Chemical Attack in Years in Syria; U.S. Blames Assad

* High-Ranking Syrian Officials Could Face Reckoning in Landmark Spain Case

* Syrian Military, Not Rebels, Severed Damascus Water Supply, U.N. Finds

* U.N. Investigators Say Syria Bombed Convoy and Did So Deliberately

Bodies lay in the parking area of a hospital in Khan Sheikhoun, a rebel-held town in Idlib Province in northwestern Syria, after a chemical bombing. | Omar Haj Kadour/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | A civilian treated for respiratory distress in Aleppo, Syria, in December. Syrian forces used chlorine gas bombs in the city at least eight times from Nov. 17 to Dec. 13, Human Rights Watch reported. | Ghirh Sy/European Pressphoto Agency | Members of the White Helmets civil defense organization searched for victims amid the rubble of a building in Aleppo after what were reported to be airstrikes in October. Government forces besieged the rebel-held part of the city for months last year. | Karam Al-Masri/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | A Syrian Army defector in a blue hooded jacket during a briefing before the House Foreign Affairs Committee in 2014. The defector, a former army photographer, has smuggled out of Syria more than 50,000 photographs that document the torture and death of thousands of Syrians in President Assad’ prisons. | Alex Wong/Getty Images | A medic surveyed the damage inside Anadan Hospital, hit by an airstrike in Aleppo Province last year. | Ammar Abdullah/Reuters | A resident at the edge of a huge crater created by what people in the area said was a Scud missile strike in Idlib Province in 2013. | Bryan Denton for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170405ed45005eh



Best of Late Night
Arts; Television
Stephen Colbert Was ‘ike an Alien’efore He Was Famous, Louis C.K. Says

By GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO 
863 words
5 April 2017
11:08
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep —nd lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com .

A Portrait of the Host as a Quirky Kid

Louis C. K. scolded Jimmy Fallon last week for a pretty “umb thing”e said on “he Tonight Show.”Mr. Fallon seemed to be saying, over and over, that napping wasn’ a form of sleeping.) This week Louis C. K. aimed his playful scorn at Stephen Colbert. He said the “ate Show”ost was just a weird, nerdy kid when the two worked together on “he Dana Carvey Show”ears ago.

LOUIS C. K.: Now you’e Stephen Colbert. You’e king of the late night now. You’e a big shot. That’ right, you’e No. 1. You’e the top of the charts. But at the time, you were just this very weird-looking dude, and you had this —ou were like, ‘i!’ike you were ——

COLBERT: I was socialized, is what you mean.

LOUIS C. K.: No, you were like an alien who studied human behavior, and got close but didn’ quite get there.

COLBERT: You’e describing a sociopath. Like I could murder you and my heart rate wouldn’ go up.

LOUIS C. K.: No, no, I think you’e the next version of human.

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Louis C. K. told the audience what it was like casting both Steve Carell and Mr. Colbert on the “arvey”how.

LOUIS C. K.: We talked about ‘he Steves.’hat’ what we talked about. And you were a funny pair; you were a weird, funny pair. He looked like every man, and you looked like no people.

COLBERT: I’ trying hard to make this feel like a compliment!

LOUIS C. K.: No, it really is! It is.

COLBERT: I look like no one?

LOUIS C. K.: You’e a remarkable person. You’e just unusual.

COLBERT: Well, we have a clip here ——

LOUIS C. K.: A freak. Yeah, go ahead. That was mean on purpose.

Is Kushner a Little Overworked?

Trevor Noah pointed out that President Trump has been relying more and more on his son-in-law, Jared Kushner. He’ tasked him with overseeing Middle East policy, responding to the country’ opioid epidemic and reforming the criminal justice system, as well as coordinating the visit this week by Xi Jinping, the Chinese president.

“hat is so much stuff that there’ no way Kushner isn’ going to get it all mixed up. I predict he’ just going to start messing the things up. He’l be like, ‘r. President, uh, I sent the black people to Iraq, and I’e imprisoned all of our veterans, and I injected the Chinese president with opium and, oh, ISIS is coming to Mar-a-Lago. It’ all mixed up!’”—REVOR NOAH

Some analysts are saying Mr. Trump favors Mr. Kushner because of his loyalty more than his skill set.

“h, look at that. It looks like Donald Trump has a blind trust after all.”—REVOR NOAH

The Punchiest Punchlines

“his week, the National Archives reached out to the White House and requested that all of the president’ tweets be saved and preserved for history. Future generations, I’ so, so sorry. These tweets will be saved for ‘istorical value.’nd they’l be filed under ‘mpeachment evidence.’”—AMES CORDEN

“arlier today, Donald Trump addressed a group of builders’nions, and to prove he was a builder, he spent a lot of the speech building up his ego.”—TEPHEN COLBERT

The Bits Worth Watching

“henomenal”

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Almost as phenomenal:

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

What We’e Excited About on Wednesday Night

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Mr. Colbert follows his Louis C. K. interview with another comic: Steve Martin makes a special guest appearance on “he Late Show”n Wednesday.

Also, Check This Out

In the age of Black Lives Matter, James Baldwin seems to have finally taken his place in the top tier of America’ pantheon of seminal writers and thinkers. (The film “ Am Not Your Negro,”n theaters now, is only the most recent example of his relevance.) Now a debate about how to honor his legacy has erupted in southern France. A group of Baldwin lovers is trying to turn the house where he lived for almost two decades into a writers’etreat, but some members of his family question whether the people spearheading the effort can represent Baldwin’ legacy. Even the lead organizer, who is white, has called herself “n imperfect candidate for this job.”

Louis C.K. kept up his habit of keeping it entirely real with late-show hosts. | CBS | Trevor Noah wondered if a very busy Jared Kushner might end up getting his wires crossed. | Comedy Central | James Baldwin at his home in southern France in 1979. | Ralph Gatti/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170405ed450038p



National Desk; SECTA
Conspicuous Silence Ends as  ISIS  Ridicules Trump

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI; Reporting was contributed by Liam Stack and Yousur al-Hlou in New York, Hwaida Saad in Beirut, Omar al-Jawoshy in Baghdad, and an employee of the New York Times in Mosul, Iraq. 
738 words
5 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
15
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Although members and supporters of the Islamic State have frequently commented on President Trump and his policies, analysts have been puzzled by the terrorist group's official silence about him. Mr. Trump had not been mentioned in any of the group's official media -- all frequent venues for criticism or taunting of former President Barack Obama and other world leaders.

More than two months after Mr. Trump was sworn in as president, the Islamic State's spokesman on Tuesday released the group's first official statement on him, in an audio recording calling him an ''idiot'' and deriding his attacks on Muslims, among other claims.

Even then, Mr. Trump was only indirectly insulted rather than called out by name.

''America, you have drowned and there is no savior; you have become prey for the soldiers of the caliphate in every part of the Earth; you are bankrupt, and the signs of your demise are evident to every eye,'' the spokesman said, according to a translation by Reuters. ''There is no more evidence than the fact that you are being run by an idiot who does not know what Syria or Iraq or Islam is.''

Some terrorism experts have called some of Mr. Trump's statements and policies -- particularly his ban on visas for people from a selection of predominantly Muslim countries -- a potential boon to propaganda by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. The group has long asserted that Muslims are victims of discrimination and abuse in the West, and supporters and members of the Islamic State have seized on some of Mr. Trump's statements as evidence of hostility toward Muslims.

''I ask Allah to deliver America to Trump,'' one supporter of the Islamic State said during the presidential campaign in a Telegram post archived by Mara Revkin, a resident fellow at the Abdallah S. Kamel Center for the Study of Islamic Law and Civilization at Yale Law School.

During the Mosul offensive, a civilian trapped in an area of the city under Islamic State control told The New York Times by telephone that the group's fighters on his street were jokingly calling Mr. Trump's executive travel order ''a blessed ban.''

Amarnath Amarasingam, a senior research fellow at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue in London, has interviewed supporters of the Islamic State regarding this disconnect.

''The longer-term goal of ISIS is to let the United States eat itself from the inside -- just let it happen,'' he said.

By contrast, Mr. Obama was frequently named in Islamic State publications and statements.

Mr. Amarasingam argued that was because the group saw Mr. Obama's relatively better image in the Muslim world as more troubling.

''They assumed that with him,'' he said, referring to the Islamic State's views on Mr. Obama, ''you need to tease out those subtleties. 'He calls Muslims part of American family, but he doesn't really believe that.' Whereas with Trump, he openly declared Islam hates us. There are no subtleties to unmask.''

The new recording by Abu Hassan, the Islamic State's spokesman, is only the second one publicly released. The first was four months ago.

He is considered to be a little-known figure who moved into the post after the group's long-serving spokesman, Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, was killed last year in an airstrike.

The speech makes references to current events, including the ongoing offensive in Mosul. In closing, Abu Hassan appears to also make a reference to the recent bombing in St. Petersburg, calling on supporters, including in Russia, to rise up.

''O monotheists in America, Europe and Russia! O supporters of the caliphate; you who have listened to the call to fight!'' he said, according to a translation provided by the SITE Intelligence Group. ''You are today a knife in the backs of the polytheists, so roll up your sleeves.''

Follow Rukmini Callimachi on Twitter @rcallimachi .

The ''I Am a Muslim Too'' rally in February in Times Square. Some terrorism experts have called some of President Trump's statements and policies a potential boon to propaganda by ISIS. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EDUARDO MUNOZ ALVAREZ/GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170405ed450004o



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
Trump's Real-World Syria Lesson

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
969 words
5 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
23
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

With each passing day our new president is discovering that every big problem he faces is like Obamacare -- if there were a good, easy solution it would have been found already, and even the less good solutions are more than his own party is ready to pay for or the country is ready to tolerate.

But on Tuesday, tragically, Trump got this lesson in foreign policy via a truly vile poison-gas attack on Syrian civilians, many of them children, reportedly perpetrated by the pro-Russian, pro-Iranian, murderous regime of Bashar al-Assad.

President Trump came to office with the naïe view that he could make fighting ISIS the centerpiece of his Middle East policy -- and just drop more bombs and send more special forces than President Barack Obama did to prove his toughness. Trump also seemed to think that fighting ISIS would be a bridge to building a partnership with President Vladimir Putin of Russia.

It was naïe because ISIS does not exist in a vacuum -- nor is it the only bad actor in the region. ISIS was produced as a Sunni Muslim reaction to massive overreach by Iran in Iraq, where Iranian-backed Shiite militias and the Iraqi government forces of Nouri al-Maliki tried to crush all vestiges of Sunni power in that country and make it a vassal of Iran. (If you think ISIS is sick, Google the phrase ''power drills to the head and Shiite militias in Iraq'' and you will discover that ISIS did not invent depravity in that part of the world.)

The Iranian/Shiite onslaught against Iraqi Sunnis ran parallel with Assad's Shiite-Alawite regime in Syria, turning what started out as a multisectarian democracy movement in Syria into a sectarian war between Sunnis and Shiites. Assad figured that if he just gunned down or poison-gassed enough Syrian Sunnis he could turn their democracy efforts into a sectarian struggle against his Shiite-Alawite regime -- and presto, it worked.

The opposition almost toppled him, but with the aid of Russia, Iran and Iran's Hezbollah militia, Assad was able to pummel the Syrian Sunnis into submission as well.

ISIS was the deformed creature created by a pincers movement -- Russia, Iran, Assad and Hezbollah in Syria on one flank and Iran and pro-Iranian militias in Iraq on the other. When Trump said he wanted to partner with Russia to crush ISIS, it was music to the ears of Assad, Russia, Iran and Hezbollah. Like everyone else, they figured they could manipulate Trump's ignorance to their advantage.

So, last week, someone named ''Rex Tillerson'' (who, I am told, is the U.S. secretary of state) declared that the ''longer-term status of President Assad will be decided by the Syrian people'' -- as if the Syrian people will be having an Iowa-like primary on that subject soon. U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley made the same point even more cravenly, telling reporters that the United States' ''priority is no longer to sit there and focus on getting Assad out.''

Is there any wonder that Assad felt no compunction about perpetrating what this paper described as ''one of the deadliest chemical weapons attacks in years in Syria,'' killing dozens of people in Idlib Province, the last major holdout for Syrian rebels.

Mind you, Donald Trump did not cause this Syria problem, and he is right to complain that it was left in his lap by the Obama team, which had its own futile strategy for dealing with Syria -- trying to negotiate with Russia and Iran, the key players there, without creating any leverage on the ground.

But if you're looking for a culprit for why America has refused to intervene in Syria, you have to look both to your left and to your right.

''The only obstacle to putting real U.S. military leverage into Syria is democracy in America,'' explained the foreign policy expert Michael Mandelbaum, author of ''Mission Failure: America and the World in the Post-Cold War Era.'' ''The American public simply does not want to spend the blood and treasure to produce what would probably be a less awful but still not good outcome in Syria.'' And that is a byproduct of the failed George W. Bush interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Alas, though, I now think doing nothing is a mistake. Just letting Assad keep trying to restore control over all of Syria will mean endless massacres. A negotiated power-sharing solution is impossible; there is no trust.

The least bad solution is a partition of Syria and the creation of a primarily Sunni protected area -- protected by an international force, including, if necessary, some U.S. troops. That should at least stop the killing -- and the refugee flows that are fueling a populist-nationalist backlash all across the European Union.

It won't be pretty or easy. But in the Cold War we put 400,000 troops in Europe to keep the sectarian peace there and to keep Europe on a democracy track. Having NATO and the Arab League establish a safe zone in Syria for the same purpose is worth a try. And then if Putin and Iran want to keep the butcher Assad in Damascus, they can have him.

It's either that, President Trump, or get ready for a lot more days like Tuesday. As I said, every problem is like Obamacare -- never as easy as you thought to fix. The least bad alternatives can be forged only by a compromise in the middle, and, like your hotels, they'll all soon have your name on them.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170405ed450004b



Washington; SECT
Fact Check: Trump, Faulting Obama on Syria, Contradicts Himself

By LINDA QIU 
726 words
5 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

In a statement condemning Tuesday's chemical attack in Syria, President Trump faulted the administration of former President Barack Obama for not intervening more aggressively in that country's civil war -- contradicting his own, earlier advice.

''Today's chemical attack in Syria against innocent people, including women and children, is reprehensible and cannot be ignored by the civilized world,'' Mr. Trump said in the statement released by the White House. ''These heinous actions by the Bashar al-Assad regime are a consequence of the past administration's weakness and irresolution.''

''President Obama said in 2012 that he would establish a 'red line' against the use of chemical weapons and then did nothing,'' Mr. Trump continued, referring to Mr. Obama's first direct threat of force. ''The United States stands with our allies across the globe to condemn this intolerable attack.''

But Mr. Trump has repeatedly advocated doing ''nothing'' in Syria, insisting it is not America's ''problem.''

Mr. Trump told Mr. Obama to 'not attack.'

In 2013, the Obama administration concluded that the government of Syria's president, Mr. Assad, had used chemical weapons in an attack that killed hundreds of people on the outskirts of Damascus. At the time, critics noted that Mr. Obama was stepping back from his own ''red line'' threat to punish Mr. Assad for deploying chemical weapons.

Mr. Trump also mentioned the red line threat, but to counsel restraint.

The only reason President Obama wants to attack Syria is to save face over his very dumb RED LINE statement. Do NOT attack Syria,fix U.S.A. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 5, 2013

In more than a dozen messages on Twitter in 2013 and 2014, Mr. Trump repeated his advice, emphatically stating that ''Syria is NOT our problem,'' appealing directly to Mr. Obama to ''not attack Syria'' as ''there is no upside and tremendous downside'' and telling him to ''stay out of Syria.''

Mr. Trump had a noninterventionist stance during the 2016 election.

Mr. Trump shrugged at calls to use force against Mr. Assad's government and endorsed Russia's support of the Syrian leader.

''You have Russia that's now there. Russia's on the side of Assad, and Russia wants to get rid of ISIS as much as we do, if not more, because they don't want them coming into Russia,'' Mr. Trump said in a September 2015 interview with CNN. ''Let Syria and ISIS fight. Why do we care?''

In a May 2016 interview on MSNBC, Mr. Trump said the United States had ''bigger problems than Assad.'' He added, ''I would have stayed out of Syria and wouldn't have fought so much for Assad, against Assad.''

So emphatic was Mr. Trump's stance on Syria that he disavowed the stance of his own running mate. After the October 2016 vice-presidential debate, when Mike Pence, then governor of Indiana, backed strikes against Mr. Assad, Mr. Trump stated, ''I disagree.''

In the general election, Mr. Trump repeatedly criticized Hillary Clinton and Mr. Obama for pushing for ''immediate regime change in Syria.'' Yet as even Mr. Trump noted in his statement on Tuesday, Mr. Obama did little to remove Mr. Assad.

Mr. Trump also disparaged Mrs. Clinton's campaign stances on Syria -- she had denounced Russia's intervention in the war and called for a no-fly zone -- and Mr. Trump said numerous times that her policies would ''lead to World War III.''

After his election, Mr. Trump questioned the incentive for 'attacking.'

''I think going in was a terrible, terrible mistake. Syria, we have to solve that problem because we are going to just keep fighting, fighting forever. I have a different view on Syria than everybody else,'' he said during an interview with The New York Times.

Referring to Senator Lindsey Graham's call to support rebels in Syria fighting Mr. Assad, Mr. Trump said: ''Give me a break. I had to listen to Lindsey Graham talk about, you know, attacking Syria and attacking, you know, and it's like you're now attacking Russia, you're attacking Iran, you're attacking. And what are we getting? We're getting -- and what are we getting?''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170405ed4500047



Op-Ed Columnist
Opinion
President Trump’ Real-World Syria Lesson

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
1,004 words
5 April 2017
09:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

With each passing day our new president is discovering that every big problem he faces is like Obamacare —f there were a good, easy solution it would have been found already, and even the less good solutions are more than his own party is ready to pay for or the country is ready to tolerate.

But on Tuesday, tragically, Trump got this lesson in foreign policy via a truly vile poison-gas attack on Syrian civilians, many of them children, reportedly perpetrated by the pro-Russian, pro-Iranian, murderous regime of Bashar al-Assad.

President Trump came to office with the naïe view that he could make fighting \b ISIS\b0  the centerpiece of his Middle East policy —nd just drop more bombs and send more special forces than President Barack Obama did to prove his toughness. Trump also seemed to think that fighting ISIS would be a bridge to building a partnership with President Vladimir Putin of Russia.

It was naïe because ISIS does not exist in a vacuum —or is it the only bad actor in the region. ISIS was produced as a Sunni Muslim reaction to massive overreach by Iran in Iraq, where Iranian-backed Shiite militias and the Iraqi government forces of Nouri al-Maliki tried to crush all vestiges of Sunni power in that country and make it a vassal of Iran. (If you think ISIS is sick, Google the phrase “ower drills to the head and Shiite militias in Iraq”nd you will discover that ISIS did not invent depravity in that part of the world.)

The Iranian/Shiite onslaught against Iraqi Sunnis ran parallel with Assad’ Shiite-Alawite regime in Syria, turning what started out as a multisectarian democracy movement in Syria into a sectarian war between Sunnis and Shiites. Assad figured that if he just gunned down or poison-gassed enough Syrian Sunnis he could turn their democracy efforts into a sectarian struggle against his Shiite-Alawite regime —nd presto, it worked.

The opposition almost toppled him, but with the aid of Russia, Iran and Iran’ Hezbollah militia, Assad was able to pummel the Syrian Sunnis into submission as well.

ISIS was the deformed creature created by a pincers movement —ussia, Iran, Assad and Hezbollah in Syria on one flank and Iran and pro-Iranian militias in Iraq on the other. When Trump said he wanted to partner with Russia to crush ISIS, it was music to the ears of Assad, Russia, Iran and Hezbollah. Like everyone else, they figured they could manipulate Trump’ ignorance to their advantage.

So, last week, someone named “Rex Tillerson”who, I am told, is the U.S. secretary of state) declared that the “onger-term status of President Assad will be decided by the Syrian people”—s if the Syrian people will be having an Iowa-like primary on that subject soon. U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley made the same point even more cravenly, telling reporters that the United States’“riority is no longer to sit there and focus on getting Assad out.”

Is there any wonder that Assad felt no compunction about perpetrating what this paper described as “ne of the deadliest chemical weapons attacks in years in Syria,”illing dozens of people in Idlib Province, the last major holdout for Syrian rebels.

Mind you, Donald Trump did not cause this Syria problem, and he is right to complain that it was left in his lap by the Obama team, which had its own futile strategy for dealing with Syria —rying to negotiate with Russia and Iran, the key players there, without creating any leverage on the ground.

But if you’e looking for a culprit for why America has refused to intervene in Syria, you have to look both to your left and to your right.

“he only obstacle to putting real U.S. military leverage into Syria is democracy in America,”xplained the foreign policy expert Michael Mandelbaum, author of “ission Failure: America and the World in the Post-Cold War Era.”“he American public simply does not want to spend the blood and treasure to produce what would probably be a less awful but still not good outcome in Syria.”nd that is a byproduct of the failed George W. Bush interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Alas, though, I now think doing nothing is a mistake. Just letting Assad keep trying to restore control over all of Syria will mean endless massacres. A negotiated power-sharing solution is impossible; there is no trust.

The least bad solution is a partition of Syria and the creation of a primarily Sunni protected area —rotected by an international force, including, if necessary, some U.S. troops. That should at least stop the killing —nd the refugee flows that are fueling a populist-nationalist backlash all across the European Union.

It won’ be pretty or easy. But in the Cold War we put 400,000 troops in Europe to keep the sectarian peace there and to keep Europe on a democracy track. Having NATO and the Arab League establish a safe zone in Syria for the same purpose is worth a try. And then if Putin and Iran want to keep the butcher Assad in Damascus, they can have him.

It’ either that, President Trump, or get ready for a lot more days like Tuesday. As I said, every problem is like Obamacare —ever as easy as you thought to fix. The least bad alternatives can be forged only by a compromise in the middle, and, like your hotels, they’l all soon have your name on them.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

* A New Level of Depravity, Even for Bashar al-Assad

The United States has refused to intervene in Syria, where President Bashar al-Assad has waged war on civilians. | Amer Almohibany/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170405ed45002s6



U.S.; Politics
Fact Check: Trump, Faulting Obama on Syria, Contradicts Himself

By LINDA QIU 
770 words
5 April 2017
04:07
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In a statement condemning Tuesday’ chemical attack in Syria, President Trump faulted the administration of former President Barack Obama for not intervening more aggressively in that country’ civil war —ontradicting his own, earlier advice.

“oday’ chemical attack in Syria against innocent people, including women and children, is reprehensible and cannot be ignored by the civilized world,”Mr. Trump said in the statement released by the White House. “hese heinous actions by the Bashar al-Assad regime are a consequence of the past administration’ weakness and irresolution.”

“resident Obama said in 2012 that he would establish a ‘ed line’gainst the use of chemical weapons and then did nothing,”r. Trump continued, referring to Mr. Obama’ first direct threat of force. “he United States stands with our allies across the globe to condemn this intolerable attack.”

But Mr. Trump has repeatedly advocated doing “othing”n Syria, insisting it is not America’ “roblem.”

Mr. Trump told Mr. Obama to ‘ot attack.’

In 2013, the Obama administration concluded that the government of Syria’ president, Mr. Assad, had used chemical weapons in an attack that killed hundreds of people on the outskirts of Damascus. At the time, critics noted that Mr. Obama was stepping back from his own  “ed line”hreat to punish Mr. Assad for deploying chemical weapons.

Mr. Trump also mentioned the red line threat, but to counsel restraint.

The only reason President Obama wants to attack Syria is to save face over his very dumb RED LINE statement. Do NOT attack Syria,fix U.S.A. —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 5, 2013

In more than a dozen messages on Twitter in 2013 and 2014, Mr. Trump repeated his advice, emphatically stating that “Syria is NOT our problem,”ppealing directly to Mr. Obama to “not attack Syria”s “here is no upside and tremendous downside”nd telling him to “stay out of Syria.”

Mr. Trump had a noninterventionist stance during the 2016 election.

Mr. Trump shrugged at calls to use force against Mr. Assad’ government and endorsed Russia’ support of the Syrian leader.

“ou have Russia that’ now there. Russia’ on the side of Assad, and Russia wants to get rid of ISIS as much as we do, if not more, because they don’ want them coming into Russia,”r. Trump said in a September 2015 interview with CNN. “et Syria and ISIS fight. Why do we care?”

In a May 2016 interview on MSNBC, Mr. Trump said the United States had “igger problems than Assad.”e added, “ would have stayed out of Syria and wouldn’ have fought so much for Assad, against Assad.”

So emphatic was Mr. Trump’ stance on Syria that he disavowed the stance of his own running mate. After the October 2016 vice-presidential debate, when Mike Pence, then governor of Indiana, backed strikes against Mr. Assad, Mr. Trump stated, “I disagree.”

In the general election, Mr. Trump repeatedly criticized Hillary Clinton and Mr. Obama for pushing for “immediate regime change in Syria.”et as even Mr. Trump noted in his statement on Tuesday, Mr. Obama did little to remove Mr. Assad.

Mr. Trump also disparaged Mrs. Clinton’ campaign stances on Syria —he had denounced Russia’ intervention in the war and called for a no-fly zone —nd Mr. Trump said numeroustimes that her policies would “lead to World War III.”

After his election, Mr. Trump questioned the incentive for ‘ttacking.’

“ think going in was a terrible, terrible mistake. Syria, we have to solve that problem because we are going to just keep fighting, fighting forever. I have a different view on Syria than everybody else,”e said during an interview with The New York Times.

Referring to Senator Lindsey Graham’ call to support rebels in Syria fighting Mr. Assad, Mr. Trump said: “ive me a break. I had to listen to Lindsey Graham talk about, you know, attacking Syria and attacking, you know, and it’ like you’e now attacking Russia, you’e attacking Iran, you’e attacking. And what are we getting? We’e getting —nd what are we getting?”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* Worst Chemical Attack in Years in Syria; U.S. Blames Assad

* Trump Speaks Out, in Muted Tones, on Rights Abuses

* Survivors of Syria Gas Attack Recount ‘ Cruel Scene’

A victim received oxygen after the attack in Syria on Tuesday. | Ammar Abdullah/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170405ed45001p5



World; Middle East
 ISIS  Officially Taunts Trump, Ending a Conspicuous Silence

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
741 words
5 April 2017
02:10
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Although members and supporters of the Islamic State have frequently commented on President Trump and his policies, analysts have been puzzled by the terrorist group’ official silence about him. Mr. Trump had not been mentioned in any of the group’ official media —ll frequent venues for criticism or taunting of former President Barack Obama and other world leaders.

More than two months after Mr. Trump was sworn in as president, the Islamic State’ spokesman on Tuesday released the group’ first official statement on him, in an audio recording calling him an “diot”nd deriding his attacks on Muslims, among other claims.

Even then, Mr. Trump was only indirectly insulted rather than called out by name.

“merica, you have drowned and there is no savior; you have become prey for the soldiers of the caliphate in every part of the Earth; you are bankrupt, and the signs of your demise are evident to every eye,”he spokesman said, according to a translation by Reuters. “here is no more evidence than the fact that you are being run by an idiot who does not know what Syria or Iraq or Islam is.”

Some terrorism experts have called some of Mr. Trump’ statements and policies —articularly his ban on visas for people from a selection of predominantly Muslim countries — potential boon to propaganda by the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL. The group has long asserted that Muslims are victims of discrimination and abuse in the West, and supporters and members of the Islamic State have seized on some of Mr. Trump’ statements as evidence of hostility toward Muslims.

“ ask Allah to deliver America to Trump,”ne supporter of the Islamic State said during the presidential campaign in a Telegram post archived by Mara Revkin, a resident fellow at the Abdallah S. Kamel Center for the Study of Islamic Law and Civilization at Yale Law School.

During the Mosul offensive, a civilian trapped in an area of the city under Islamic State control told The New York Times by telephone that the group’ fighters on his street were jokingly calling Mr. Trump’ executive travel order “ blessed ban.”

Amarnath Amarasingam, a senior research fellow at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue in London, has interviewed supporters of the Islamic State regarding this disconnect.

“he longer-term goal of ISIS is to let the United States eat itself from the inside —ust let it happen,”e said.

By contrast, Mr. Obama was frequently named in Islamic State publications and statements.

Mr. Amarasingam argued that was because the group saw Mr. Obama’ relatively better image in the Muslim world as more troubling.

“hey assumed that with him,”e said, referring to the Islamic State’ views on Mr. Obama, “ou need to tease out those subtleties. ‘e calls Muslims part of American family, but he doesn’ really believe that.’hereas with Trump, he openly declared Islam hates us. There are no subtleties to unmask.”

The new recording by Abu Hassan, the Islamic State’ spokesman, is only the second one publicly released. The first was four months ago.

He is considered to be a little-known figure who moved into the post after the group’ long-serving spokesman, Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, was killed last year in an airstrike.

The speech makes references to current events, including the ongoing offensive in Mosul. In closing, Abu Hassan appears to also make a reference to the recent bombing in St. Petersburg, calling on supporters, including in Russia, to rise up.

“ monotheists in America, Europe and Russia! O supporters of the caliphate; you who have listened to the call to fight!”e said, according to a translation provided by the SITE Intelligence Group. “ou are today a knife in the backs of the polytheists, so roll up your sleeves.”

Follow Rukmini Callimachi on Twitter @rcallimachi.

* Jared Kushner Meets With Iraqi Leader on Future of \b ISIS\b0  Battle

* At Site of Deaths, Our Reporters Find Cost of U.S.-\b ISIS\b0  Battle

* Trump’ \b ISIS\b0  Plan, as Described by Tillerson, Sounds Like Obama’

* New \b ISIS\b0  Tactic: Gather Mosul’ Civilians, Then Lure an Airstrike

On Tuesday, the Islamic State released its first official statement on President Trump, though he was not called out by name. | Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170405ed450005l



world
 ISIS  Officially Taunts Trump, Ending a Conspicuous Silence

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
785 words
4 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Although members and supporters of the Islamic State have frequently commented on President Trump and his policies, analysts have been puzzled by the terrorist group’ official silence about him. Mr. Trump had not been mentioned in any of the group’ official media —ll frequent venues for criticism or taunting of former President Barack Obama and other world leaders.

More than two months after Mr. Trump was sworn in as president, the Islamic State’ spokesman on Tuesday released the group’ first official statement on him, in an audio recording calling him an “diot”nd deriding his attacks on Muslims, among other claims.

Even then, Mr. Trump was only indirectly insulted rather than called out by name.

“merica, you have drowned and there is no savior; you have become prey for the soldiers of the caliphate in every part of the Earth; you are bankrupt, and the signs of your demise are evident to every eye,”he spokesman said, according to a translation by Reuters. “here is no more evidence than the fact that you are being run by an idiot who does not know what Syria or Iraq or Islam is.”

Some terrorism experts have called some of Mr. Trump’ statements and policies —articularly his ban on visas for people from a selection of predominantly Muslim countries — potential boon to propaganda by the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL. The group has long asserted that Muslims are victims of discrimination and abuse in the West, and supporters and members of the Islamic State have seized on some of Mr. Trump’ statements as evidence of hostility toward Muslims.

“ ask Allah to deliver America to Trump,”ne supporter of the Islamic State said during the presidential campaign in a Telegram post archived by Mara Revkin, a resident fellow at the Abdallah S. Kamel Center for the Study of Islamic Law and Civilization at Yale Law School.

During the Mosul offensive, a civilian trapped in an area of the city under Islamic State control told The New York Times by telephone that the group’ fighters on his street were jokingly calling Mr. Trump’ executive travel order “ blessed ban.”

Amarnath Amarasingam, a senior research fellow at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue in London, has interviewed supporters of the Islamic State regarding this disconnect.

“he longer-term goal of ISIS is to let the United States eat itself from the inside —ust let it happen,”e said.

By contrast, Mr. Obama was frequently named in Islamic State publications and statements.

Mr. Amarasingam argued that was because the group saw Mr. Obama’ relatively better image in the Muslim world as more troubling.

“hey assumed that with him,”e said, referring to the Islamic State’ views on Mr. Obama, “ou need to tease out those subtleties. ‘e calls Muslims part of American family, but he doesn’ really believe that.’hereas with Trump, he openly declared Islam hates us. There are no subtleties to unmask.”

The new recording by Abu Hassan, the Islamic State’ spokesman, is only the second one publicly released. The first was four months ago.

He is considered to be a little-known figure who moved into the post after the group’ long-serving spokesman, Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, was killed last year in an airstrike.

The speech makes references to current events, including the ongoing offensive in Mosul. In closing, Abu Hassan appears to also make a reference to the recent bombing in St. Petersburg, calling on supporters, including in Russia, to rise up.

“ monotheists in America, Europe and Russia! O supporters of the caliphate; you who have listened to the call to fight!”e said, according to a translation provided by the SITE Intelligence Group. “ou are today a knife in the backs of the polytheists, so roll up your sleeves.”

Follow Rukmini Callimachi on Twitter @rcallimachi. Reporting was contributed by Liam Stack and Yousur al-Hlou in New York, Hwaida Saad in Beirut, Omar al-Jawoshy in Baghdad, and an employee of the New York Times in Mosul, Iraq.

PHOTO: The “ Am a Muslim Too”ally in February in Times Square. Some terrorism experts have called some of President Trump’ statements and policies a potential boon to propaganda by ISIS. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EDUARDO MUNOZ ALVAREZ/GETTY IMAGES)

* Jared Kushner Meets With Iraqi Leader on Future of \b ISIS\b0  Battle

* At Site of Deaths, Our Reporters Find Cost of U.S.-\b ISIS\b0  Battle

* Trump’ \b ISIS\b0  Plan, as Described by Tillerson, Sounds Like Obama’

* New \b ISIS\b0  Tactic: Gather Mosul’ Civilians, Then Lure an Airstrike

Document INHT000020170405ed440000w



National Desk; SECTA
Battle With  ISIS  Is Focus of Kushner's Trip to Iraq

By TIM ARANGO; Helene Cooper contributed reporting from Washington. 
1,071 words
4 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
14
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq -- After arriving in Baghdad on Monday afternoon, Jared Kushner, President Trump's son-in-law, met with Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi to discuss the fight against the Islamic State and whether the United States would leave troops in Iraq afterward, according to a spokesman for the prime minister.

Mr. Kushner, a senior adviser to the president, traveled to Iraq along with Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as part of the general's planned trip to discuss the battle against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS and ISIL.

Mr. Kushner was also expected to meet with officials from the United States-led military coalition and Iraq's minister of defense, according to an Iraqi military spokesman. He was also accompanied by Thomas P. Bossert, Mr. Trump's homeland security adviser.

As the first visit to Iraq by a senior member of Mr. Trump's White House, Mr. Kushner's arrival highlighted the president's approach to foreign affairs of often relying on loyalists with little experience in matters of war and diplomacy.

Benjamin J. Rhodes, who was a foreign policy adviser to President Barack Obama, wrote on Twitter: ''Kushner in Iraq before the National Security Advisor or Secretary of State. Totally normal.''

That was not the only way the trip broke with usual government practice: On Sunday evening, as word of Mr. Kushner's trip began to spread, the White House incorrectly told reporters on background that Mr. Kushner was in Iraq before he actually landed. Usually, officials have insisted on not confirming news of high-level visits to combat zones until after the officials arrive, to keep them from becoming targets.

In 2007, for example, a suicide bomber for the Taliban attacked Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan during a visit by Vice President Dick Cheney, killing more than 20 people and wounding 20. Mr. Cheney was unharmed.

On Monday, a statement issued by Mr. Abadi's office said that during the meeting, the American delegation ''stressed its support to the government in its war against terrorism and expressed their admiration for the improved combat capabilities of the Iraqi forces as they achieve victories against ISIS.''

Saad al-Hadithi, a spokesman for Mr. Abadi, said in an interview that the officials discussed ''the continuation of the cooperation to eliminate ISIS in Iraq and Syria, and also the training and arming of the Iraqi Army.''

The trip also seemed to represent another step, after a meeting between Mr. Trump and Mr. Abadi in Washington several weeks ago, to assure the Iraqis that the United States is a reliable ally, given that the relationship between the Trump administration and Iraq began on rocky footing.

First, in a speech at the C.I.A. shortly after his inauguration in January, Mr. Trump expressed regret that the United States had not taken Iraq's oil after the 2003 invasion, and he suggested there still might be a chance to do so. Then, he placed Iraq on a list of seven Muslim-dominated countries whose citizens were barred from traveling to the United States.

That ban was blocked by the courts and later replaced with a new one that did not include Iraq on the ban list. But Iraqis still view the initial listing as an insult at a time when the two countries are working together to fight the Islamic State in the battle for Mosul.

Iraq may yet take on greater importance for the Trump administration than just its part in the fight against the Islamic State. With administration officials having signaled a desire to take a tougher stance on Iran, which like Iraq is majority Shiite and whose power inside Iraq is paramount, Iraqi officials have worried that their country could again become a place for the two foreign powers to settle their differences.

After the American invasion of 2003, Iraqi Shiite militias aligned with Iran killed hundreds of Americans, and those same militias have taken on an important role in fighting the Islamic State. They are now essentially a parallel security structure within the state, even though they are directed by Iran.

There are already signs that the Trump administration sees Iraq as a place to push back on the growing power of Iran across the region, where Tehran has expanded its power through proxies in four countries: Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Yemen. In late February, for the first time in years, the foreign minister for Saudi Arabia, a Sunni power and Iran's chief regional rival, visited Baghdad in a trip encouraged by American officials.

That was seen by Iraqi officials as a signal by the Americans that they are intent on nudging the Saudis to take a stronger role in Iraq, whose Sunni minority has been alienated from the power centers of Baghdad. But Iraqi officials have said they worry that that will only exacerbate sectarian tensions in Iraq, and that the last thing the country needs is more foreign meddling.

The visit by Mr. Kushner came about a week after the Pentagon acknowledged that airstrikes in a neighborhood of Mosul may have mistakenly led to scores of civilian deaths -- as many as 200, according to Iraqis.

Though the battle to take that Iraqi city away from the Islamic State remains difficult, and may stretch for months more, the focus for the Trump administration will increasingly turn to what comes next.

The White House will have to decide whether to remove the thousands of American troops that returned to Iraq after the Islamic State seized Mosul in 2014 or to leave some behind to continue training the Iraqi Army and assisting in counterterrorism missions.

Mr. Trump has given mixed signals on this subject, at once vowing to end costly military missions abroad while, as a candidate, criticizing Mr. Obama for withdrawing all American troops from Iraq at the end of 2011. He has said that decision created a vacuum that allowed the Islamic State to thrive, eventually take over a third of the country and establish a base from which to carry out terrorist attacks in the West.

From right, Iraq's prime minister, Haider al-Abadi; Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr.; Jared Kushner; and Thomas P. Bossert. (PHOTOGRAPH BY OFFICE OF THE IRAQI PRIME MINISTER) 

Document NYTF000020170404ed4400051



World; Middle East
Jared Kushner Meets With Iraqi Leader on Future of  ISIS  Battle

By TIM ARANGO 
1,087 words
4 April 2017
03:55
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq —fter arriving in Baghdad on Monday afternoon, Jared Kushner, President Trump’ son-in-law, met with Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi to discuss the fight against the Islamic State and whether the United States would leave troops in Iraq afterward, according to a spokesman for the prime minister.

Mr. Kushner, a senior adviser to the president, traveled to Iraq along with Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as part of the general’ planned trip to discuss the battle against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS and ISIL.

Mr. Kushner was also expected to meet with officials from the United States-led military coalition and Iraq’ minister of defense, according to an Iraqi military spokesman. He was also accompanied by Thomas P. Bossert, Mr. Trump’ homeland security adviser.

As the first visit to Iraq by a senior member of Mr. Trump’ White House, Mr. Kushner’ arrival highlighted the president’ approach to foreign affairs of often relying on loyalists with little experience in matters of war and diplomacy.

Benjamin J. Rhodes, who was a foreign policy adviser to President Barack Obama, wrote on Twitter: “ushner in Iraq before the National Security Advisor or Secretary of State. Totally normal.”

That was not the only way the trip broke with usual government practice: On Sunday evening, as word of Mr. Kushner’ trip began to spread, the White House incorrectly told reporters on background that Mr. Kushner was in Iraq before he actually landed. Usually, officials have insisted on not confirming news of high-level visits to combat zones until after the officials arrive, to keep them from becoming targets.

In 2007, for example, a suicide bomber for the Taliban attacked Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan during a visit by Vice President Dick Cheney, killing more than 20 people and wounding 20. Mr. Cheney was unharmed.

On Monday, a statement issued by Mr. Abadi’ office said that during the meeting, the American delegation “tressed its support to the government in its war against terrorism and expressed their admiration for the improved combat capabilities of the Iraqi forces as they achieve victories against ISIS.”

Saad al-Hadithi, a spokesman for Mr. Abadi, said in an interview that the officials discussed “he continuation of the cooperation to eliminate ISIS in Iraq and Syria, and also the training and arming of the Iraqi Army.”

The trip also seemed to represent another step, after a meeting between Mr. Trump and Mr. Abadi in Washington several weeks ago, to assure the Iraqis that the United States is a reliable ally, given that the relationship between the Trump administration and Iraq began on rocky footing.

First, in a speech at the C.I.A. shortly after his inauguration in January, Mr. Trump expressed regret that the United States had not taken Iraq’ oil after the 2003 invasion, and he suggested there still might be a chance to do so. Then, he placed Iraq on a list of seven Muslim-dominated countries whose citizens were barred from traveling to the United States.

That ban was blocked by the courts and later replaced with a new one that did not include Iraq on the ban list. But Iraqis still view the initial listing as an insult at a time when the two countries are working together to fight the Islamic State in the battle for Mosul.

Iraq may yet take on greater importance for the Trump administration than just its part in the fight against the Islamic State. With administration officials having signaled a desire to take a tougher stance on Iran, which like Iraq is majority Shiite and whose power inside Iraq is paramount, Iraqi officials have worried that their country could again become a place for the two foreign powers to settle their differences.

After the American invasion of 2003, Iraqi Shiite militias aligned with Iran killed hundreds of Americans, and those same militias have taken on an important role in fighting the Islamic State. They are now essentially a parallel security structure within the state, even though they are directed by Iran.

There are already signs that the Trump administration sees Iraq as a place to push back on the growing power of Iran across the region, where Tehran has expanded its power through proxies in four countries: Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Yemen. In late February, for the first time in years, the foreign minister for Saudi Arabia, a Sunni power and Iran’ chief regional rival, visited Baghdad in a trip encouraged by American officials.

That was seen by Iraqi officials as a signal by the Americans that they are intent on nudging the Saudis to take a stronger role in Iraq, whose Sunni minority has been alienated from the power centers of Baghdad. But Iraqi officials have said they worry that that will only exacerbate sectarian tensions in Iraq, and that the last thing the country needs is more foreign meddling.

The visit by Mr. Kushner came about a week after the Pentagon acknowledged that airstrikes in a neighborhood of Mosul may have mistakenly led to scores of civilian deaths —s many as 200, according to Iraqis.

Though the battle to take that Iraqi city away from the Islamic State remains difficult, and may stretch for months more, the focus for the Trump administration will increasingly turn to what comes next.

The White House will have to decide whether to remove the thousands of American troops that returned to Iraq after the Islamic State seized Mosul in 2014 or to leave some behind to continue training the Iraqi Army and assisting in counterterrorism missions.

Mr. Trump has given mixed signals on this subject, at once vowing to end costly military missions abroad while, as a candidate, criticizing Mr. Obama for withdrawing all American troops from Iraq at the end of 2011. He has said that decision created a vacuum that allowed the Islamic State to thrive, eventually take over a third of the country and establish a base from which to carry out terrorist attacks in the West.

Helene Cooper contributed reporting from Washington.

* Jared Kushner Visits Iraq on Invitation From Joint Chiefs Chairman

* At Kushners’lagship Building, Mounting Debt and a Foundered Deal

From right, Iraq’ prime minister, Haider al-Abadi; Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr.; Jared Kushner; and Thomas P. Bossert. | Office of the Iraqi Prime Minister 

Document NYTFEED020170404ed440012x



Asia and Australia Edition
Briefing
St. Petersburg, Jared Kushner , North Korea: Your Morning Briefing

By CHARLES McDERMID 
1,215 words
3 April 2017
21:34
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•resident Vladimir Putin was just a few miles away when a bomb exploded on a subway in St. Petersburg , killing around 10 people and injuring dozens, including children.

Most terrorist attacks against Russia have been the work of Islamic insurgents, related either to bloody state crackdowns in the North Caucuses or Russian bombings against the Islamic State in Syria.

_____

•“e’ done a fantastic job in a very difficult situation.”

That was President Trump, speaking at the White House and welcoming  Egypt’ authoritarian president, Abdel Fattah e l-Sisi . The moment underscored a fundamental American shift away from international human rights toward an overwhelming focus on counterterrorism.

Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’ son-in-law  and adviser, once again served as a primary diplomatic envoy, arriving in Iraq for what the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff called “n update on the status of the counter-ISIS campaign.”

_____

•apan is sending its ambassador back to South Korea  after a three-month diplomatic break over the “omfort women”ssue, saying it needs someone there in light of Seoul’ political turmoil and the increased danger posed by the North.

The North’ global threat , a key topic when President Xi Jinping of China and Mr. Trump meet this week, appears to be increasing. An online ad for what seems to be excess quantities of a bomb-boosting isotope suggests that the country has been working on thermonuclear weapons.

_____

•r. Xi and Mr. Trump will be sizing each other up starting Thursday at Mr. Trump’ Florida estate, Mar-a-Lago. But many ordinary Chinese people taking their own measure of Mr. Trump  have been left bewildered, incensed and, sometimes, inspired.

His nationalist, protectionist message has translated into popularity within a hard-left fringe that wants to protect Chinese workers from privatization and foreign competition.

One even praised Mr. Trump for daring “o openly promote the political ideas of Chairman Mao.”

_____

•ambodia has long declined to pay back hundreds of millions of dollars the U.S. lent it during the bitter years of the Vietnam War —oney used to feed and clothe  refugees displaced by American bombs .

Some argue that the U.S. has a moral responsibility to pay. But when Prime Minister Hun Sen recently pressured Mr. Trump to forgive the debt outright, critics saw domestic political purposes, like distracting attention from his own government’ clampdown on dissent.

_____

•“t went crazy.”

A real estate agent was describing the buying frenzy south of Beijing since Saturday, after an area mostly known for donkey burgers was designated the Xiongan New Area .

The plans for a nearly 800-square-mile development sent property prices and shares of construction companies soaring, the latest example of the unpredictability of China’ property market.

Business

•ven as Uber talks up its determination to treat drivers more humanely, it is engaged in a behind-the-scenes experiment to manipulate them in the service of its growth .

•rab, the Singapore-based firm that is Uber’ biggest rival in Southeast Asia, is expanding its reach into Indonesia, acquiring  the shopping platform  Kudo .

•n April Fools’ay commercial for Godiva’ sister company in Turkey  showcased macabre animated pranks that for many evoked July’ attempted coup. Their fury sent the company’ stocks tumbling.

•Google engineers are trying to solve the problem of ads popping up near offensive content  in a novel way: by teaching ad-placing computers how to be offended.

•.S. stocks were weaker . Here’ a snapshot of global markets .

In the News

•he premier of Queensland, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said the cost of Cyclone Debbie’ damage to roads, bridges, crops and homes was expected “o be in the billions.” The Courier Mail ]

•he cyclone also brought unseasonably warm temperatures to northern Queensland, and with them came snakes. A lot of snakes. [ ABC ]

•urning joss, or paper gifts for ancestors, for the Chinese “omb sweeping”ingming festival this week could be releasing toxic smoke. [ South China Morning Post ]

•“ooking at your face, I now realize I must be very old too,”aid the Dalai Lama , 81, as he met an Indian soldier who guarded him during part of his flight from Tibet to into exile in 1959. [ BBC ]

•he South Korean women’ soccer team arrived in Pyongyang for an official game against North Korea later this week. North Korea is favored to win. [ Associated Press ]

•wo survivors of Canada’ quintuplet clan, separated from family and exhibited in a human zoo during the 1930s, now face a new indignity: the sale of their childhood home. [ The New York Times ]

Smarter Living

•itch your cartridge razor for a safety razor .

•hanging the way you sit and breathe can help you tame  your fight-or-flight instinct.

•n busy nights, stick with a classic, like this recipe for pasta puttanesca .

Noteworthy

•“ge of Empires: Chinese Art of the Qin and Han Dynasties ,” major exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, goes to the roots of Chinese identity. Our reviewer says it “rings us China becoming China in a big-picture take as strange and warm as life.”

•n ode to Vancouver by a native son calls the gleaming, multiethnic Canadian city " a rolling, improvisatory work in progress. "

•inally, in this Daily 360 , a chimp in Kenya stole our camera and made a pretty amazing film. (Spoiler: We finally traded a soda to get the camera back.)

Back Story

The dog has been man’ best friend, so to speak, for at least 15,000 years or so .

Breeding them for specific traits eventually led to the founding of the Kennel Club  in London on this day in 1873. The club runs the annual Crufts dog show  in Birmingham, England, one of the biggest in the world.

Descended from wolves, dogs were the first animals to be domesticated, an advance that appears to have occurred independently in ancient cultures around the world.

By the mid-1800s, breeding had become fashionable, and dog shows were a craze. A British politician, Sewallis Shirley, established the first Kennel Club to organize the breeds and regulate the exhibitions.

Kennel clubs register purebred dogs, record pedigrees and work to maintain breed standards. The clubs have been criticized by some for promoting inbreeding that destroys genetic diversity, among other complaints.

Maybe the relationship between humans and dogs isn’ so complicated. As Charles M. Schulz, the “eanuts”artoonist who created Snoopy, once said: “appiness is a warm puppy.”

_____

This briefing was prepared for the Asian morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian , European  and American  mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here  .

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com .

Anton Vaganov/Reuters | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | Korean Central News Agency, via Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Adam Dean for The New York Times | Bettmann, via Getty Images | Jason Lee/Reuters | Jon Huang | Australia Defence Force/, via Reuters | Illustration by Nigel Buchanan | Jake Naughton for The New York Times | Oli Scarff/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170403ed43007ep



U.S.
Jared Kushner Visits Iraq on Invitation From Joint Chiefs Chairman

By MAGGIE HABERMAN 
400 words
3 April 2017
04:34
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Jared Kushner, President Trump’ son-in-law, landed in Iraq on Monday, military officials said, visiting the country as the American military is aiding Iraqi forces in their brutal fight to retake Mosul from the Islamic State.

It was unclear what Mr. Kushner, who has been expanding his reach in his father-in-law’ administration, planned to gain from the trip. Mr. Kushner, 36, who serves as a senior adviser to Mr. Trump, was invited by Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Navy Capt. Greg Hicks, a spokesman for the chairman, said early Monday that the general had arrived in Iraq for meetings, including with coalition officials, accompanied by Mr. Kushner and Thomas P. Bossert, the president’ homeland security adviser.

The general invited Mr. Kushner and Mr. Bossert to accompany him “o receive an update on the status of the counter-ISIS campaign in Iraq and Syria,”aptain Hicks said.

Mr. Kushner is “raveling on behalf of the president to express the president’ support and commitment to the government of Iraq and U.S. personnel currently engaged in the campaign”gainst the Islamic State, Captain Hicks added.

Mr. Trump has repeatedly turned to Mr. Kushner as an envoy to foreign leaders, at times creating a parallel structure to the one led by Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson. Mr. Kushner has had a role in discussions with Mexico, whose government officials have expressed concern over Mr. Trump’ incendiary remarks on trade policy and his vow to build a wall at the border.

The president has also charged Mr. Kushner, who has no previous government or diplomatic experience, with a vague edict to establish peace between Israel and the Palestinians. Mr. Kushner is also taking the lead in preparing the West Wing for Mr. Trump’ meeting this week with the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, at Mar-a-Lago, the president’ club in Palm Beach, Fla.

In addition, Mr. Kushner has created an Office of American Innovation, which is intended to use ideas from the business world to improve the government.

Jared Kushner, President Trump’ son-in-law, in February at the White House. Mr. Trump has repeatedly turned to Mr. Kushner as an envoy to foreign leaders. | Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170403ed4300105



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Pakistan Approves Military Hero to Head a Tricky Saudi-Led Alliance

By SALMAN MASOOD and BEN HUBBARD; Salman Masood reported from Islamabad, and Ben Hubbard from Beirut, Lebanon. 
1,318 words
3 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- The appointment of a popular Pakistani general to head a Saudi-led alliance of Muslim countries has set off a furor in Pakistan, amid fears that the move could exacerbate sectarian tensions at home.

Pakistan's government last week approved the appointment of a former army chief, Raheel Sharif, to lead the Islamic Military Alliance, a posting announced by Saudi Arabia in January. The alliance includes several dozen mainly Muslim countries with the professed aim of countering terrorism, although it has taken no significant military actions, least of all fighting the Islamic State in Syria or Iraq.

Saudi officials have argued that the alliance's Muslim identity will make it more effective in combating Islamic extremists, while sending a powerful message that Muslim countries reject their ideology.

But critics note that the alliance does not include predominately Shiite states like Iran and Iraq, making it more of a Sunni military alliance than an ''Islamic'' one. Still, the appointment of Mr. Sharif would give the Saudi-led alliance a more international sheen. Saudi Arabia has also been seeking support from Pakistan for its campaign against Houthi rebels in Yemen and may be hoping Mr. Sharif's appointment could bolster that effort.

The Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party, led by Imran Khan, has been at the forefront of opposing the decision, saying it could widen the Sunni-Shiite divide in Pakistan and upset Iran, its majority-Shiite neighbor to the west. The party says it will raise the issue in the next session of Parliament later in April.

''We strongly advocate the policy of impartiality as far as conflicts in the Middle East and Muslim world are concerned,'' Mr. Khan said. ''We under no circumstances should fall into any conflict and hence be watchful of the impacts of every decision or choice we make.''

And on the country's rambunctious political talk shows, guests have been vigorously debating the appointment of Mr. Sharif, who was hugely popular for his successes against Taliban militants before retiring last year, with many expressing criticism and apprehension.

Pakistan is a predominantly Sunni country, like Saudi Arabia, but Shiites make up about 20 percent of the population and have often been targeted by extremist Sunni militants.

Saudi Arabia is a major donor to Pakistan and maintains close ties with its civil and military elite. It has appealed to Pakistan for military help with its campaign in Yemen against the Houthi rebels, who are aligned with Iran and belong to the Zaydi Shiite sect.

But Pakistan has so far stayed out of the operation, which is being conducted by Saudi Arabia and a smaller coalition of Arab countries. Egypt, too, has turned down requests for help in Yemen despite receiving considerable financial aid from Saudi Arabia.

Pakistan's Parliament passed a resolution in 2015 urging the government to stay neutral in Yemen, where more than 10,000 people have been killed, mainly in airstrikes, since Saudi Arabia began its campaign.

So far, the government has complied, but its inability to rally support behind the Saudi military effort has been embarrassing for Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, who lived in exile in the Saudi city of Jidda in the early 2000s. (Mr. Sharif, the prime minister, is not related to the former army chief.)

Now, the former army chief's presence at the head of the Islamic Military Alliance could signal a change in policy, analysts say.

Mr. Sharif's appointment ''is a bit of a departure from Pakistan's more-or-less neutral position on the Iran-Saudi regional war,'' said Arif Rafiq, a political analyst. ''As a result, it's been opposed by even the mainstream, nonsectarian political voices in Pakistan.''

Mr. Rafiq said the impact on sectarian relations in Pakistan was still uncertain.

If the alliance ''confronts Iran or Iranian-supported groups in places like Yemen, then it could trigger protests inside Pakistan,'' he said. ''On the other hand, if it is merely a symbolic coalition that limits itself to Saudi territory or focuses on combating ISIS, then the negative impact would be minimal,'' he added, referring to the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIL.

Mr. Rafiq said the retired general might see himself more broadly as the leader of a military force defending the Muslim holy sites of Mecca and Medina against the Islamic State, which might be more acceptable for most Pakistanis.

''For Pakistanis, to have one of their own leading, it would be a great honor,'' he said.

The establishment of the Islamic Military Alliance was announced in December 2015 by Saudi Arabia's deputy crown prince and defense minister, Mohammed bin Salman. It had 34 state members at the start and has since acquired several others. The coalition fighting in Yemen is a smaller group of Arab countries.

Pakistan's approval of Mr. Sharif's appointment two months after its announcement suggested some hesitation by the government.

For Mr. Sharif, the controversy has taken some luster off the popular image he enjoyed after a successful campaign against Taliban militants that began in 2014, clearing militant strongholds in northwest Pakistan.

The general's popularity overshadowed that of the civilian government, which has been troubled by corruption allegations. He was widely perceived as influencing foreign policy decisions and relations with neighbors, and indirectly pressuring government over political matters.

Last year, there were widespread calls for the general to take over the government instead of retiring when his term expired in November.

Since the news broke of his future job, he has maintained his characteristic silence, frustrating critics who wonder what his appointment means and the objectives of the military alliance.

''As a retired military chief seeking a high-profile job that will likely involve a great deal of shuttle diplomacy, why is General Raheel not seeking the government's approval to address the media and respond to the misgivings in person?'' an editorial in Dawn, the country's leading English daily, asked on Tuesday. ''Surely addressing the nation's concerns ought to be the priority.''

The newspaper said the ''clandestine manner'' in which the government handled the general's appointment had created the impression of a ''secret deal.''

Nasser Janjua, the Pakistani national security adviser, said last week that Mr. Sharif would play a visible, proactive role in the military alliance. Mr. Sharif will ''use his experiences and knowledge to remove internal misunderstandings among Muslim countries,'' Mr. Janjua was quoted as saying by local news media. He did not elaborate.

Pervez Musharraf, a former army chief who ruled Pakistan as president from 2001 to 2008, was hugely popular as a general but faced a backlash once he shed his uniform and dabbled in politics. Mr. Sharif's predecessor, Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, was also highly regarded, but became a figure of controversy after he extended his military term as corruption allegations swirled around his family.

Mr. Sharif, on the other hand, remains untainted by charges of corruption or nepotism.

''I think Raheel Sharif will be forever remembered in Pakistan as the man who boldly took on the Pakistani Taliban,'' Mr. Rafiq, the analyst, said. ''Many Pakistanis feel that he literally saved the country and restored its morale. This new position is unlikely to change those sentiments.''

Top, the aftermath of an airstrike in 2015 in Yemen, where Saudi Arabia has been seeking Pakistan's support for its military campaign. Above left, the new leader of the Islamic Military Alliance, Raheel Sharif, in 2013. Above right, Imran Khan, whose party opposes Mr. Sharif's appointment to the alliance. Critics worry it could widen the Sunni-Shiite divide in Pakistan and upset Iran. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES; MIAN KHURSHEED/REUTERS; FAROOQ NAEEM/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170403ed430004l



FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
Radical Ambition

By THOMAS CHATTERTON WILLIAMS 
4,860 words
2 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
24
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDI met Maajid Nawaz on a drizzly afternoon in March, tucked in a corner of the restaurant at the central London members' club he uses as a satellite office. He was dabbing the chicken from his Caesar salad into a mound of yellow English mustard, which he stopped doing for long enough to load a video on his iPhone and slide it across the table. It showed the Southern Poverty Law Center's Heidi Beirich, speaking at Duke University about him. ''Let me just give you an example of Maajid Nawaz -- our problem with him,'' she says. ''He believes that all mosques should be surveilled. In other words, his opinion is that all Muslims are potential terrorists.'' Nawaz, a Muslim himself, bristled with frustration at the claim. In fact, he explained, he is on record making the case against collective surveillance.

A former Islamist, for the past nine years Nawaz has made a name for himself as an indefatigable anti-extremist activist. These days he blends seamlessly into the sort of cosmopolitan circles that extremists decry; at his club, dressed in an olive bomber jacket over fitted workout sweats, he could have been a senior marketing exec or a music-video director. At 39, Nawaz is handsome and vaguely famous looking in person, prematurely silver-haired, with a widow's peak and Mephistophelean soul patch that punctuates a politician's easy smile. Whenever I saw him, he dapped me with one of those handclasp-half-hugs that, to anyone of a certain age, serves as shorthand for an adolescence steeped in the manners of hip-hop.

For Nawaz's detractors, of whom there are many, it's this very chameleon quality, this at-homeness in disparate roles and spaces, that has earned him a reputation as something of a charlatan, a preening opportunist cashing in on his own sensational travails by means of society's abundant anti-Muslim bias. This uncharitable narrative has shadowed him from the outset, yet his point of view has only grown more relevant after an exceptionally violent 2016 that saw coordinated suicide bombings in Brussels and Istanbul; a mass shooting in a nightclub in Orlando; the ambush and execution of a police officer and his partner near Paris; a Bastille Day slaughter in Nice; ax and suicide bomb attacks in Bavaria; the throat slitting of a Catholic priest in a church in Normandy; pressure-cooker bombs in Manhattan and New Jersey; and a massacre at a Christmas market in Berlin. And on March 22 this year in London, a man mowed down pedestrians with his car near Parliament before stabbing a police constable to death.

With each grisly new assault -- and the specter of Syria and the Islamic State looming beyond it -- the voices of hatred and reaction in the United States and throughout Britain and Europe found not only sympathetic ears but also willing hands to pull levers in the voting booths. Throughout the upheaval and backlash, Nawaz has remained a constant presence in the media: on ''Real Time With Bill Maher,'' trying to draw a distinction between religion and political dogma; in his book, ''Islam and the Future of Tolerance'' (co-written with the prominent ''new atheist'' Sam Harris), insisting that Islamism does have something to do with Islam and that ISIS in fact possesses a plausible if terribly ungenerous interpretation of the Quran. But whatever role Nawaz enjoys as a public intellectual is inextricable from his personal celebrity as a former fundamentalist. His work is his story, and his story is his celebrity. In order to make his case against radicalism, he finds himself in the not entirely enviable position of nonstop self-promotion.

On this front, he's as busy as ever. He is finishing a documentary based on his book with Harris, but foremost on Nawaz's mind these days is the 2017 opening of the first new chapter of his anti-extremist organization, the Quilliam Foundation, in the United States. ''Lots of Muslims in America are basically liberals, but if you don't have a visibly anti-extremist presence, then the Trumps of this world win'' through fear-mongering and misrepresentation, he says. ''Our presence is needed in America to reassure the mainstream, whereas our presence is needed in Europe to stop radicalization.''

Despite such deliberate affirmations and qualifications, there is nonetheless confusion as to where Nawaz's sympathies actually lie. According to Vice News, he has earned a ''terrorism'' designation on Thomson Reuters World-Check, a risk-assessment database. (Thomson Reuters would not confirm this.) But, last October, the Southern Poverty Law Center took the incredible step of including him on a ''Field Guide to Anti-Muslim Extremists,'' which they published with three other research organizations. The guide listed 15 public figures, and Nawaz was the only Muslim among them. (This is why Beirich brought him up at Duke.) He was visibly furious whenever the topic came up and told me he plans to crowdfund a legal response.

Though he and his allies, and even some of his opponents, have complained to the S.P.L.C. -- there is a change.org petition to remove him and the Somali-born atheist Ayaan Hirsi Ali, which has garnered almost 12,000 signatures -- the group has not wavered on its position, the costs of which have already been real for Quilliam. Nawaz claims that the listing has compromised some funding for the organization. ''I consider myself a liberal and wanted to work with liberals,'' he said, shaking his head.

In reality, his views on Islamic extremism are more complex than these labels allow, which is, arguably, one of the more compelling reasons to listen to him on the subject.

Early in Nawaz's 2012 memoir, ''Radical: My Journey Out of Islamist Extremism,'' there's an eyebrow-raising scene. The narrator, an irreligious, N.W.A.-loving child, has resorted to strapping a knife under his shirt for fear of the gangs of skinheads that stalk his Essex suburb, Southend. He is 15, and on this afternoon, he is with his older brother, Kaashif (identified by a pseudonym in the book), and a friend who has converted to Islam. Neighborhood racists have chased the boys with baseball bats and now have them cornered and outnumbered. The skinheads' leader steps forward and asks to talk. Kaashif gestures to the side of the road, where he and the skinhead fall into a tense and private discussion. When the two return, the skinheads begin to retreat. Incredulous, Maajid demands to know what his brother has told them. Kaashif says he told the skinhead, ''We're Muslims, and we don't fear death'' -- and, furthermore, that he was carrying a bomb in his backpack.

The anecdote, which surfaces repeatedly in ''Radical'' and ultimately swells to the dimensions of a creation myth, is quintessential Nawaz. On one hand, it's a distillation of his larger rhetorical project, capturing the confused and painful textures of contemporary Muslim experience that can lead to the embrace of Islamism: an initial lack of familiarity with religion; local grievance spun into a narrative of global victimization; a tribal relation to other Muslims beyond racial and ethnic categorization; the illusion of empowerment through threat of violence. On the other hand, it has become emblematic of the cantankerous, highly personal discourse that clings to the man himself: For a number of reasons -- more on which later -- many of his critics have come to claim that the anecdote is pure fabrication.

What's indisputable is that soon after that day in Southend, first following Kaashif's example but then with a fervency that was entirely his own, Nawaz threw himself into his new identity, falling under the sway of Nasim Ghani, a charismatic young recruiter and future leader of the British branch of Hizb ut-Tahrir, a multinational Islamic revolutionary organization founded in 1953 in Jerusalem. H.T., as Nawaz refers to it, advocates the imposition of Shariah law through ''bloodless'' coups in majority-Muslim countries first and ultimately in the West as well. In other words, these were Islamists but not jihadists, and the distinction isn't frivolous. Still, the line is a porous one: Two H.T. leaders, Anjem Choudary and Omar Bakri Mohammad, would go on to lead a splinter group of a far more deadly variety.

In September 2001, after stints of organizing and recruiting for H.T. in London and Pakistan, Nawaz took his first wife and their infant son to Alexandria, Egypt, where he posed as an Arabic-language student while secretly proselytizing for the group. Though H.T. is legal in Britain, it is banned in many majority-Muslim countries, including Egypt. In 2002, at 24, Nawaz was forcibly removed from his home, blindfolded and thrown in the back of a van, one more Islamist caught up in the wide and extralegal international crackdown on extremism in the wake of 9/11. He spent his next four years in Egyptian prisons, where he claims to have witnessed torture and where, in his solitude, he was able to memorize half of the Quran.

A pivotal moment in Nawaz's moral education came when news of the 7/7 attacks in London reached the inmates at Tora, Egypt's prison notorious for holding political dissidents. Four attackers bombed a bus and three subway trains, claiming 52 lives. Nawaz writes that he suddenly ''felt revulsion'' at the human cost of his ideas. A man Nawaz calls Omar, a Dagestani bomb maker, had celebrated the slaughter. Nawaz is a hero in his own telling of the ensuing exchange: He claims to have debated Omar for the entirety of the day about the legitimacy of killing British civilians, until the latter eventually conceded defeat. Nawaz writes, ''I felt that I had saved many future lives.''

In 2004, Amnesty International adopted Nawaz as a prisoner of conscience and secured his return to London two years later. His was not an overnight epiphany, but within two more years, he had graduated from the School of Oriental and African Studies at the University of London, renounced Islamism and H.T. and publicly reinvented himself as an advocate for liberal democracy: a media-savvy expert on preventing radicalization. His enemies, a long list made up of family members, ex-friends and former H.T. associates, have publicly questioned his conversion narrative. Ian Nisbet, a white convert to Islam who was jailed with Nawaz in Egypt, told a reporter from Alternet that Nawaz remained a fanatical Islamist after he was freed. Indeed, back in England, Nawaz appeared on the BBC's ''Hardtalk'' program and declared that his experience in Egypt left him convinced ''that there is a need to establish this caliphate as soon as possible.'' In his defense, Nawaz claims that making a clean break with a former life is both difficult and genuinely confusing. He rather colorfully compares it to a breakup with a lover. (Nawaz and his first wife split up around the time of his departure from H.T.) He has also insisted that his public positions were in part strategic: He didn't want to tip his hand to H.T. until he had his exit plans in place.

Whatever the case, that same year, alongside a college friend named Ed Husain, who had already made a name for himself with his own reverse-conversion memoir, ''The Islamist,'' Nawaz co-founded the Quilliam Foundation, which they named for William Quilliam, a British convert who opened one of Britain's first mosques in the late 1880s. Quilliam's first headquarters occupied the ground floor of a brick-and-terra-cotta rowhouse overlooking the verdure of Russell Square, practically the same view T.S. Eliot would have had when he worked at Faber & Faber, and just a block from two of the sites of the 7/7 attacks. As his critics constantly stress, Nawaz's timing was convenient; the British government was then looking to finance anti-extremist organizations and provided Quilliam with early funding.

Nawaz, then, is somewhat like British Petroleum when it is tasked with cleaning up a catastrophic oil spill: His main qualification to do this kind of decontamination work is precisely his experience as a contaminator. As recently as the mid-1990s, Islamist ideology was unpopular in British Muslim communities. ''We would have to convince people of something that is strange to them,'' he told me of those days. ''We had to really hone our argumentative skills and our ability to convince and influence people as that vanguard of the Islamist movement in the West.'' He insists his background as an Islamist is what allows him and others at Quilliam today not only to pinpoint Islamism's weaknesses but also to employ the very same tenacious ability to communicate ideas and influence people for the purpose now of advocating liberal values. ''They're transferable skills'' is how he once put it to me. What Nawaz seems to understand better than any of the other critics of Islam he's so often lumped with is that Islamism is cool -- and it is cool in some of the same ways that punk rock and gangsta rap and macho rebellion in general, whether symbolic or real, are perennially seductive. As a result, countering it will have to mean finding ways to, as he puts it, ''make it cool to be a liberal Muslim.''

And that may be harder than it seems. While the vast majority of British Muslims today are certainly not flocking to join groups like H.T. -- and many who have never been attracted to the ideology justifiably find it irritating to be lectured by a man who was -- a sobering number nonetheless have expressed views that would be very much at home in even more extreme precincts. An online poll done in Britain following the 7/7 bombings, for example, showed that more than a fifth of British Muslims felt some sympathy for the bombers' feelings and motives; more than half said they could understand the bombers' behavior; and nearly a third agreed that ''Western society is decadent and immoral and that Muslims should seek to bring it to an end'' by nonviolent means. One incredible Gallup report from 2009 found that 0 percent of British Muslims viewed homosexual acts as morally acceptable. Though it is not at all clear what pushes any given individual to cross the line into violence, attitudes like these are what Nawaz and Quilliam have controversially described as the ''mood music'' to terrorist acts.

It is this last contention that seems to be the crux of the S.P.L.C. complaint against Nawaz, along with the disclosure that, in 2010, Quilliam provided a list of nonviolent ''Islamist'' organizations to a British counterterrorism official. But Nawaz justifies the move by arguing that the distinction between violent and nonviolent Islamism is far less rigid than many liberals would like to think. ''Now when these guys are joining ISIS, the arguments have been made,'' he told me. ''What they're doing is just putting that last piece in the jigsaw: 'I'm going to go and fight for this cause.' But the ideology's already been established. The surveys and the polls tell you that.''

Before Quilliam moved late last year to an undisclosed location for security reasons, I visited Nawaz on several occasions. The organization hummed with the energy and sense of mission of a tech start-up. On one side were doors leading into a large and crowded room where 20-odd analysts, academics and imams were doing the intellectual grunt work that the foundation demands. On the other was the modest office Nawaz used for himself. Though he is the face of the organization, he is hardly the only employee with an exotic réumé On my first visit, my eyes fixed on a small prayer rug draped neatly over the arm of a desk chair. ''Oh, that's for him!'' Nawaz quickly clarified, referring to his officemate, Noman Benotman, the current president of the organization and a former jihadist who fought the Soviets in Afghanistan, tried to violently depose Muammar Gaddafi in the 1990s and later worked with Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahri in Sudan.

Back across the hall there was also Dr. Usama Hasan, the head of Islamic studies at the organization. The son of a conservative and influential Salafi sheikh, Hasan used a break from his studies at Cambridge to engage in jihad against the Soviets in Afghanistan (on a scale of one-to-ISIS, he told me, ''our group maybe got up to about five''). And yet, in 2011, after waging holy war in the east and after 25 years of service at his father's London mosque, that kind of effort didn't count for very much when he came under attack by hard-liners. He was forced to stop delivering Friday prayers when 50 Muslim protesters stormed his lecture and openly called for his execution. His offense had been to venture that Islam could be compatible with modern theories of evolution and that Muslim women should be allowed to uncover their hair in public.

Aside from the life experience of some of its members and the issuance of the occasional counter-fatwa, Quilliam is a standard left-of-center think tank: a body of experts conducting research and providing advice and ideas on specific political or social problems in support of liberal democracy. The group works to shape public opinion from the top down, making frequent media appearances, publishing reports that aim for the highest levels of government (such as a critical 2009 investigation into the ways British prisons incubate extremism) and periodically advising government ministers and heads of state on matters of terrorism. But they also engage ordinary Muslims and non-Muslims alike through outreach work, organizing debate and training programs in Europe and the Middle East.

All of this ought to make Quilliam a natural ally of progressives and of institutions like the Southern Poverty Law Center, whose mission, after all, is to advocate for the vulnerable. Yet that has not been the case. Nawaz's layered arguments and concessions -- his insistence, for example, that Islam does have something to do with Islamism -- provoke a visceral suspicion among those who are concerned with fighting Islamophobia above all. A term that you will hear with frequency from Nawaz is ''the regressive left,'' as in purportedly progressive institutions like the S.P.L.C. that, often starting from a legitimate concern that Muslims en masse not be persecuted for the actions of a few, nonetheless embody a perplexingly backward mind-set when it comes to Islam. ''It's an Orientalist fetish,'' Nawaz says, ''a deeply socially conservative Muslim who is medieval in their outlook is a 'real' Muslim, and anyone who's challenging that status quo is a sellout.'' The left has, in Nawaz's view, forfeited what's best about the liberal project, entirely conceding the right to speak in moral absolutes and about universal values. ''The problem is you can't draw a line with that reasoning: Why is what ISIS is doing bad, then?''

A core idea Quilliam espouses is that space must be claimed for secular identities within Islam; the measure of Muslim authenticity would then be a matter of individual imagination and will, not a test to pass or fail. In other words, he would like to see many more Muslims thinking, speaking and acting like him. Which is a big part of the reason it's impossible to think of Quilliam independent of the outsize figure cut by its co-founder, and why so much debate about the validity of the organization's ideas comes down to a question of being for or against Nawaz.

Attack pieces about Nawaz have practically become their own literary genre. In the summer of 2015, The Guardian ran a deeply critical story about him, which questioned the integrity of Nawaz's work with the Cameron administration and took him to task for, among other misdeeds, ''sipping a skinny flat white'' coffee in front of the reporter. This was followed, in January 2016, by a hard takedown at The New Republic, whose writer, Nathan Lean, had earlier referred on Twitter to Nawaz as Sam Harris's ''lap dog.'' Roughly a week after that piece came a longer, even more personal attack at Alternet, which stood out in its attempt to debunk, scene by scene, the events in ''Radical.'' The authors revisited the subject of the bomb in the backpack and quoted Nawaz's older brother as well as an anonymous cousin, who called the story ''imaginary.'' (Many of the sources in the Alternet article seem concerned that Kaashif's ruse in the anecdote might be taken literally.) When I asked him about it, Nawaz was dismissive. ''You go to a deeply wounded brother that loved me all of his life, and I turn out to be not who he aspires for me to be,'' he said. ''As a journalist, you can exploit that.'' He shrugged soberly.

It is undeniable that one advantage, and shortcoming, of memoir as a form lies in its ability to dominate the reader through an empirical imbalance that can never be resolved in its entirety. Arguments, when unsound, can be negated, but who can negate another person's lived experience? It is a rhetorical tactic that is, in fact, most at home on the left, where personal stories of grievance and oppression are typically set in opposition to the status quo in the wider society. Perhaps, then, this is why so much attention has been paid to Nawaz's biography. If his life story can be shown to be contrived, the deeper message, however compelling, can be pre-emptively dismissed: Not only is the messenger's life not a genuine Muslim life, when seen from this angle, it may even prove to be an anti-Muslim life.

I saw Nawaz in New York in September, while he was in town fund-raising for Quilliam's American chapter. We had made plans to meet at a Soho hotel for a drink, but he was running late. When I asked after him, the concierge either didn't know his real name or pretended not to. Nawaz and Benotman have been targeted by Al Qaeda and ISIS affiliates, and he travels under an alias. When he finally arrived, we went down to the bar, and he was in wonderful spirits. He's been criticized in the British press for drinking and receiving a lap dance at a strip club, but in situations like this, it's strange to think of Nawaz as having been anything like a humorless extremist. Yet the bind he has made for himself is a real one: He has to prove that liberal, moderate Islam can be ''cool,'' while not coming off as too hip to convince the left of his Muslim authenticity. He runs the very real risk of satisfying no one.

It reminded me of an observation that had been running through my head since the previous winter, when Quilliam opened an art exhibit in London called ''The Unbreakable Rope.'' Billed as ''an exploration of sexuality in Islam,'' the show was co-curated by Nawaz's second wife, Rachel Maggart (the couple had their first child in January), a lanky 32-year-old brunette from Tennessee by way of N.Y.U. In addition to the regular Quilliam bodyguards, there were plainclothes counterterrorism officers monitoring the site. Inside the venue, a shirtless, tattooed Kuwaiti performance artist did preparatory stretches with his assistant and a crystal ball. He would eventually be tied up in a corset and left on the floor for guests to contemplate. The crowd sipped wine and soft drinks and milled about the sparsely hung, mildly provocative artwork, which was in fact beside the point. The point, of course, was that they were even daring to do this in the first place.

I fell into conversation with Nawaz's mother and little sister and lost track of time as the space filled up all around us. There were whites, blacks, Persians, Arabs; people looked devout and nondevout, gay, straight, young and old. Standing next to me was a man with the voluminous beard of a cleric, turned out in an ankle-length djellaba, ironed as crisply as a bedsheet at the Ritz, a pair of Nike Air Force 1s and a flat-brimmed New Era cap printed with a four-letter expletive. He looked like a cross between the leader of Hezbollah and the Bay Area rapper Lil B. The room darkened and quieted, and Nawaz, brimming with life, stepped into the middle of the crowd, whose diversity he lauded, and thanked them all for coming. Like the B-boy he once aspired to be, he thrills to the sound of his own voice flowing through the microphone. ''The first thing they do is try to silence us, and the first to suffer are the creators!'' he told the room to enthusiastic applause. ''But while you throw gays off the rooftops, we who are Muslims want to respond like this!''

As I watched Nawaz bask in the applause of his most earnest admirers and glanced back at the walls adorned with such unbearably unhip art, the enormity of his task pressed itself upon me. After all, Islamism, like good art, is innately subversive; it captures diffuse feelings of alienation in a way that is difficult to fabricate. And therein lies the biggest challenge confronting Quilliam in Europe and, as it seeks to expand, in America: Though Nawaz himself is a star, there is something both noble and perilously square about this kind of eat-your-peas forced secularism.

Yet I'm convinced that Nawaz really does have his finger on the pulse of one of the most urgent problems of the contemporary era, a problem that is far too often mishandled or greeted with flat-out denial, through ignorance, hatred and fear, certainly, but also as a result of the very best of intentions. Without having planned to, I found myself at the hotel bar in New York opening up to Nawaz about a recent train ride my wife and I made in France. I watched an agitated young Arab man and his wife, in full abaya, shut themselves inside the bathroom along with all of their luggage. When they opened the door, the hair on my neck stood up, and I braced myself for a fusillade that never came. Even as I chastised myself for overreacting, I was convinced that the man continued to behave strangely. My shame increased with each moment nothing happened.

Nawaz listened intently to my story, but his eyes showed he'd long since arrived at his answer. ''You're caught in a classically Catch-22 situation,'' he said. ''You've got two competing forces, which are entirely legitimate. One is not wanting to racially profile, and the other is not wanting to be the neighbor of the San Bernardino shooter who didn't want to profile and, as a result, people lose their lives. Or, more urgently, [you] just don't want to be the first person to catch a bullet! On a human level, that is a perfectly natural reaction. The fact that you're having these doubts is a good thing.''

Though he meant this defense of human prejudice to reassure me, it did not. I almost wish he had accused me of Islamophobia -- at least then the conversation might have achieved a certain black-and-white clarity. But Nawaz, the consummate in-between thinker, then took care to layer on several more shades of gray. ''I literally just tweeted, five minutes before coming to see you, a picture of a blond ISIS child -- a child with blond hair -- helping to execute people,'' he said, producing on his phone a shocking image of a very young, Eastern European-looking boy holding a gun in the desert. ''I said, 'Trump, how you gonna profile this?' ''

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Correction: April 16, 2017, Sunday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on April 2 about Maajid Nawaz, a former Islamist who has started a foundation to combat extremism among Muslims, erroneously included the mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., on a list of terror attacks that took place in 2016. That shooting took place in December 2015.

Thomas Chatterton Williams is a contributing writer for the magazine. He last wrote about the novelist John Edgar Wideman.

Nawaz near Russell Square in London. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SIAN DAVEY) (MM25); From left: Imran Amed, Freida Pinto and Maajid Nawaz attend a dinner in December in Oxfordshire, England. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAMIR HUSSEIN/GETTY IMAGES) (MM26); Maajid Nawaz at 12, in Southend, England. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAAJID NAWAZ) (MM27); Maajid Nawaz speaks on stage at a fashion-industry event about global issues in December in Oxfordshire, England. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN PHILLIPS/GETTY IMAGES) (MM29) 

Document NYTF000020170416ed420001i



world
Pakistan Approves Military Hero to Head Tricky Saudi-Led Alliance

By SALMAN MASOOD and BEN HUBBARD 
1,349 words
2 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan —he appointment of a popular Pakistani general to head a Saudi-led alliance of Muslim countries has set off a furor in Pakistan, amid fears that the move could exacerbate sectarian tensions at home.

Pakistan’ government last week approved the appointment of a former army chief, Raheel Sharif, to lead the Islamic Military Alliance, a posting announced by Saudi Arabia in January. The alliance includes several dozen mainly Muslim countries with the professed aim of countering terrorism, although it has taken no significant military actions, least of all fighting the Islamic State in Syria or Iraq.

Saudi officials have argued that the alliance’ Muslim identity will make it more effective in combating Islamic extremists, while sending a powerful message that Muslim countries reject their ideology.

But critics note that the alliance does not include predominately Shiite states like Iran and Iraq, making it more of a Sunni military alliance than an “slamic”ne. Still, the appointment of Mr. Sharif would give the Saudi-led alliance a more international sheen. Saudi Arabia has also been seeking support from Pakistan for its campaign against Houthi rebels in Yemen and may be hoping Mr. Sharif’ appointment could bolster that effort.

The Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party, led by Imran Khan, has been at the forefront of opposing the decision, saying it could widen the Sunni-Shiite divide in Pakistan and upset Iran, its majority-Shiite neighbor to the west. The party says it will raise the issue in the next session of Parliament later in April.

“e strongly advocate the policy of impartiality as far as conflicts in the Middle East and Muslim world are concerned,”r. Khan said. “e under no circumstances should fall into any conflict and hence be watchful of the impacts of every decision or choice we make.”

And on the country’ rambunctious political talk shows, guests have been vigorously debating the appointment of Mr. Sharif, who was hugely popular for his successes against Taliban militants before retiring last year, with many expressing criticism and apprehension.

Pakistan is a predominantly Sunni country, like Saudi Arabia, but Shiites make up about 20 percent of the population and have often been targeted by extremist Sunni militants.

Saudi Arabia is a major donor to Pakistan and maintains close ties with its civil and military elite. It has appealed to Pakistan for military help with its campaign in Yemen against the Houthi rebels, who are aligned with Iran and belong to the Zaydi Shiite sect.

But Pakistan has so far stayed out of the operation, which is being conducted by Saudi Arabia and a smaller coalition of Arab countries. Egypt, too, has turned down requests for help in Yemen despite receiving considerable financial aid from Saudi Arabia.

Pakistan’ Parliament passed a resolution in 2015 urging the government to stay neutral in Yemen, where more than 10,000 people have been killed, mainly in airstrikes, since Saudi Arabia began its campaign.

So far, the government has complied, but its inability to rally support behind the Saudi military effort has been embarrassing for Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, who lived in exile in the Saudi city of Jidda in the early 2000s. (Mr. Sharif, the prime minister, is not related to the former army chief.)

Now, the former army chief’ presence at the head of the Islamic Military Alliance could signal a change in policy, analysts say.

Mr. Sharif’ appointment “s a bit of a departure from Pakistan’ more-or-less neutral position on the Iran-Saudi regional war,”aid Arif Rafiq, a political analyst. “s a result, it’ been opposed by even the mainstream, nonsectarian political voices in Pakistan.”

Mr. Rafiq said the impact on sectarian relations in Pakistan was still uncertain.

If the alliance “onfronts Iran or Iranian-supported groups in places like Yemen, then it could trigger protests inside Pakistan,”e said. “n the other hand, if it is merely a symbolic coalition that limits itself to Saudi territory or focuses on combating \b ISIS\b0 , then the negative impact would be minimal,”e added, referring to the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIL.

Mr. Rafiq said the retired general might see himself more broadly as the leader of a military force defending the Muslim holy sites of Mecca and Medina against the Islamic State, which might be more acceptable for most Pakistanis.

“or Pakistanis, to have one of their own leading, it would be a great honor,”e said.

The establishment of the Islamic Military Alliance was announced in December 2015 by Saudi Arabia’ deputy crown prince and defense minister, Mohammed bin Salman. It had 34 state members at the start and has since acquired several others. The coalition fighting in Yemen is a smaller group of Arab countries.

Pakistan’ approval of Mr. Sharif’ appointment two months after its announcement suggested some hesitation by the government.

For Mr. Sharif, the controversy has taken some luster off the popular image he enjoyed after a successful campaign against Taliban militants that began in 2014, clearing militant strongholds in northwest Pakistan.

The general’ popularity overshadowed that of the civilian government, which has been troubled by corruption allegations. He was widely perceived as influencing foreign policy decisions and relations with neighbors, and indirectly pressuring government over political matters.

Last year, there were widespread calls for the general to take over the government instead of retiring when his term expired in November.

Since the news broke of his future job, he has maintained his characteristic silence, frustrating critics who wonder what his appointment means and the objectives of the military alliance.

“s a retired military chief seeking a high-profile job that will likely involve a great deal of shuttle diplomacy, why is General Raheel not seeking the government’ approval to address the media and respond to the misgivings in person?”n editorial in Dawn, the country’ leading English daily, asked on Tuesday. “urely addressing the nation’ concerns ought to be the priority.”

The newspaper said the “landestine manner”n which the government handled the general’ appointment had created the impression of a “ecret deal.”

Nasser Janjua, the Pakistani national security adviser, said last week that Mr. Sharif would play a visible, proactive role in the military alliance. Mr. Sharif will “se his experiences and knowledge to remove internal misunderstandings among Muslim countries,”r. Janjua was quoted as saying by local news media. He did not elaborate.

Pervez Musharraf, a former army chief who ruled Pakistan as president from 2001 to 2008, was hugely popular as a general but faced a backlash once he shed his uniform and dabbled in politics. Mr. Sharif’ predecessor, Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, was also highly regarded, but became a figure of controversy after he extended his military term as corruption allegations swirled around his family.

Mr. Sharif, on the other hand, remains untainted by charges of corruption or nepotism.

“ think Raheel Sharif will be forever remembered in Pakistan as the man who boldly took on the Pakistani Taliban,”r. Rafiq, the analyst, said. “any Pakistanis feel that he literally saved the country and restored its morale. This new position is unlikely to change those sentiments.”

Salman Masood reported from Islamabad, and Ben Hubbard from Beirut, Lebanon.

PHOTOS: Top, the aftermath of an airstrike in 2015 in Yemen, where Saudi Arabia has been seeking Pakistan’ support for its military campaign. Above left, the new leader of the Islamic Military Alliance, Raheel Sharif, in 2013. Above right, Imran Khan, whose party opposes Mr. Sharif’ appointment to the alliance. Critics worry it could widen the Sunni-Shiite divide in Pakistan and upset Iran. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES; MIAN KHURSHEED/REUTERS; FAROOQ NAEEM/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE —GETTY IMAGES)

* Rise of Saudi Prince Shatters Decades of Royal Tradition

* Pakistan Surprised to Be Included in Saudi-Led Alliance It Never Heard Of

* Pakistan Military Deals a Blow to Jihadists but Not to Ideology

Document INHT000020170404ed420000i



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Best Sellers: Hardcover Fiction: Sunday, April 02nd 2017

481 words
2 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

About the Best Sellers:

These lists are an expanded version of those appearing in the April 02, 2017 print edition of the Book Review, reflecting sales for the week ending March 18, 2017. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above it. A dagger (†ndicates that some retailers report receiving bulk orders. For an explanation of our methodology, visit http://www.nytimes.com/best-sellers.

  Weeks


                              est Sellers: Hardcover Fiction

This Last On
Week Week List
  
1         1


THE CUTTHROAT, by Clive Cussler and Justin Scott. (Putnam) In 1911, searching for a young actress who has disappeared, the detective Isaac Bell discovers a serial killer.

2 1 2


DANGEROUS GAMES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte) A television correspondent investigates damning allegations against the vice president of the United States.

3 3 6


NORSE MYTHOLOGY, by Neil Gaiman. (Norton) A retelling of Norse folklore.

4  1


THE DEVIL'S TRIANGLE, by Catherine Coulter and J. T. Ellison. (Gallery Books) The F.B.I. special agent Nicholas Drummond and his partner, Michaela Caine, track evil twins who can control the weather.

5  1


IN THIS GRAVE HOUR, by Jacqueline Winspear. (Harper/HarperCollins) The psychologist and investigator Maisie Dobbs gets an assignment as World War II begins.

6  1


WITHOUT WARNING, by Joel C. Rosenberg. (Tyndale House) A journalist pursues the head of ISIS after an attack on the Capitol when the administration fails to take action.

7 4 5


LINCOLN IN THE BARDO, by George Saunders. (Random House) Visiting the grave of his recently deceased young son in 1862, Lincoln encounters a cemetery full of ghosts.

8 6 18


A GENTLEMAN IN MOSCOW, by Amor Towles. (Viking) A Russian count undergoes 30 years of house arrest.

9* 5 2


EXIT WEST, by Mohsin Hamid. (Riverhead) Lovers in a city overwhelmed with violence escape through mysterious doors.

10 2 2


SILENCE FALLEN, by Patricia Briggs. (Ace) The shape-shifter Mercy Thompson finds herself in the clutches of the world’ most powerful vampire.

11* 8 21


THE WHISTLER, by John Grisham. ( Doubleday) A whistleblower alerts a Florida investigator to judicial corruption involving the Mob and Indian casinos.

12 10 4


A PIECE OF THE WORLD, by Christina Baker Kline. (Morrow/HarperCollins) Imagining the life of the central figure of Andrew Wyeth’ iconic painting “hristina’ World.”

13 13 23


SMALL GREAT THINGS, by Jodi Picoult. (Ballantine) A medical crisis entangles a black nurse, a white supremacist father and a white lawyer.

14 9 32


THE UNDERGROUND RAILROAD, by Colson Whitehead. (Doubleday) A slave girl heads toward freedom on the network, envisioned as actual tracks and tunnels.

15 12 4


HUMANS, BOW DOWN, by James Patterson and Emily Raymond with Jill Dembowski. (Little, Brown) A woman is determined to save humanity from the robots.

Document NYTF000020170403ed420000o



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Best Sellers: Combined Print & E-Book Fiction: Sunday, April 02nd 2017

508 words
2 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

About the Best Sellers:

These lists are an expanded version of those appearing in the April 02, 2017 print edition of the Book Review, reflecting sales for the week ending March 18, 2017. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above it. A dagger (†ndicates that some retailers report receiving bulk orders. For an explanation of our methodology, visit http://www.nytimes.com/best-sellers.

  Weeks


                              est Sellers: Combined Print & E-Book Fiction

This Last On
Week Week List
  
1    1    8


THE SHACK, by William P. Young. (Windblown Media) A man whose daughter was abducted is invited to an isolated shack, apparently by God.

2  1


THE DEVIL'S TRIANGLE, by Catherine Coulter and J. T. Ellison. (Gallery Books) The F.B.I. special agent Nicholas Drummond and his partner, Michaela Caine, track evil twins who can control the weather.

3  1


THE CUTTHROAT, by Clive Cussler and Justin Scott. (Putnam) In 1911, searching for a young actress who has disappeared, the detective Isaac Bell discovers a serial killer.

4 4 31


BIG LITTLE LIES, by Liane Moriarty. (Berkley) Who will end up dead, and how, when three mothers with children in the same school become friends?

5 6 8


THE OBSESSION, by Nora Roberts. (Berkley) A woman is haunted by her father’ crimes as she tries to pursue love and her work as a photographer.

6 5 43


A MAN CALLED OVE, by Fredrik Backman. (Washington Square) A curmudgeon's gruff exterior masks a generosity of spirit. Originally published in Sweden in 2014.

7  1


IN THIS GRAVE HOUR, by Jacqueline Winspear. (Harper/HarperCollins) The psychologist and investigator Maisie Dobbs gets an assignment involving murdered Belgian refugees as World War II begins.

8 3 2


DANGEROUS GAMES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte) A television correspondent investigates damning allegations against the vice president of the United States.

9 8 15


A DOG'S PURPOSE, by W. Bruce Cameron. (Forge Books) A canine narrator undergoes a series of reincarnations.

10  1


WITHOUT WARNING, by Joel C. Rosenberg. (Tyndale House) A journalist pursues the head of ISIS after an attack on the Capitol when the administration fails to take action.

11 11 14


MILK AND HONEY, by Rupi Kaur. (Andrews McMeel) Poetic approaches to surviving adversity and loss.

12 9 3


EXPECTING TO DIE, by Lisa Jackson. (Zebra) Alvarez and Pescoli are back, dodging a reality-TV crew while tracking a serial killer stalking the woods of a remote Montana town.

13 14 6


NORSE MYTHOLOGY, by Neil Gaiman. (Norton) A retelling of Norse folklore.

14 12 13


THE LAST MILE, by David Baldacci. (Grand Central) In a sequel to “emory Man,”mos Decker, a detective with an extraordinary memory, investigates the case of a convicted killer who wins a last-minute reprieve.

15  2


LILAC GIRLS, by Martha Hall Kelly. (Ballantine) A story of three women’ lives during and after World War II.

Document NYTF000020170403ed420000n



World; Asia Pacific
20 Are Hacked and Beaten to Death at Pakistani Shrine

By SALMAN MASOOD 
976 words
2 April 2017
18:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan —he men and women arrived late on Saturday at a Sufi shrine in a village in central Pakistan. Followers of a self-described mystic, the pilgrims were accustomed to rituals in which they received spiritual guidance and sometimes removed their clothes to be cleansed of their sins.

Instead, the Pakistani police said on Sunday, they were given an intoxicating drink and then beaten with batons and hacked with knives, leaving 20 of them dead and four others injured.

After the massacre, the police said they had arrested the shrine’ custodian, Abdul Waheed, 50. Mr. Waheed, the authorities said, admitted luring the devotees to the site about 12 miles from Sargodha in Punjab Province, and carrying out the killings with the help of at least two associates.

An injured woman who managed to escape the attack ran and reported it to the authorities, officials said. The victims’odies, which had been stripped of clothing, bore the marks of torture, the police said.

“ixteen men and four women were found murdered,”aid Liaqut Ali Chatta, a senior district official.

The motive for the killings was not immediately clear, but officials said they were investigating whether it had to do with control of the shrine. Information about possible criminal charges was not immediately available.

Mr. Waheed told the authorities that he had killed the devotees at the shrine to Ali Muhammad Gujjar, the self-described mystic, in self-defense because he believed they planned to poison him.

Mr. Waheed also said that Mr. Gujjar, a relatively obscure mystic who died two years ago, had been poisoned by a group of devotees. Mr. Gujjar’ followers turned his grave into the shrine where the massacre occurred.

The devotees were Muslims of the Barelvi sect, who generally revere shrines and follow the teachings of people they deem to be saints and mystics. In rural areas, poor devotees seek not only spiritual guidance, but also cures for diseases, in rituals performed by mystics and shrine custodians.

Mr. Waheed, a former government employee who used to give sermons at the shrine, claims to be the spiritual heir to Mr. Gujjar. The rituals he performed were said to cure diseases and cleanse devotees of sin.

Those practices included beating devotees with batons after asking them to remove their clothes. Mr. Waheed would set the clothes on fire during the rituals, officials said.

One of those killed was Asif Ali Gujjar, Mr. Gujjar’ son, and police officials said the killings may have been related to disagreements over control of the shrine.

“here are reports that the accused had an issue with Asif over the custody of the shrine,”r. Chatta, the senior district official, said. “ocals say that Asif claimed he is the rightful heir of the shrine, being the son of Ali Muhammad Gujjar.”

Officials said that the people who went to the shrine Saturday night were given an intoxicating drink before they were tortured, raising the possibility that the killings were premeditated.

Malik Ahmed Khan, a spokesman for the provincial Punjab government, said there had been no previous complaints about the shrine or the practices there.

“nly after this incident, people from the surrounding area told police that they used to hear screams coming from the shrine”r. Khan said. “ocals said that the devotees were beaten as part of a ritual,”e added. “he shrine was always crowded by drug addicts and people who were under the influence.”

The chief minister of Punjab Province, Shahbaz Sharif, has ordered an inquiry into the killings and has announced that the families of those who were killed would be compensated, according to Salman Sufi, an aide to the chief minister.

“he practices at shrines include money donations, jewelry and gifts in return of a pat of blessing from the custodians,”r. Sufi said. “ome guardians are appointed after an inner power struggle no less than those on the lines of Cosa Nostra,”e added, referring to the Sicilian Mafia.

He said that the custodians of many shrines cultivated relationships with prominent local political figures to increase their influence and, in return for votes, receive protection.

“here have been cases in which unknowns are granted the status of sainthood and their burial places declared shrines, merely for the purpose of donation collection,”r. Sufi said. “arge sums of money are then collected and used on food, clothing, processions and, when an illicit custodian is involved, on drugs, women and alcohol.”

He called for proper regulations to be put in place to control shrine custodians in the country.

Daniyal Hassan contributed reporting from Lahore, Pakistan.

Correction: April 2, 2017, Sunday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misstated who had ordered an inquiry into the killings at the shrine. It was Shahbaz Sharif, chief minister of Punjab, not Salman Sufi, an aide to the chief minister.

* Pakistan Shrine Bombing Kills Scores in Worst Attack in Months

* Bombing at Sufi Shrine in Pakistan Kills Dozens

* \b ISIS\b0  Hates Our Saint Because He Belongs to Everyone

Pakistani police investigators on Sunday surveying the area near a Sufi shrine on the outskirts of Sargodha, Pakistan, where 20 people were hacked and beaten to death and four were injured. | Reuters.. | Rescue workers and security officials gathered on Sunday around the bodies of people killed at a shrine in Sargodha, Pakistan. | Israrul Haq/European Pressphoto Agency | Relatives of the victims waited for information. At least 20 disciples, including four women, were hacked or beaten to death. | Israrul Haq/European Pressphoto Agency | The Sufi shrine where at least 20 people were killed with batons and knives in Punjab Province in Pakistan. | Fatiq Bukhari/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170402ed42001up



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Will Shift Egypt's Rights Record to Sidelines

By PETER BAKER; Declan Walsh contributed reporting from Cairo. 
1,414 words
1 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The White House signaled on Friday that it would no longer allow human rights issues to become a public point of conflict with Egypt, another striking shift away from years of American foreign policy by presidents of both parties.

As President Trump prepares to host President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt on Monday for his first visit to the White House since seizing power in Cairo in a military takeover in 2013, aides said the two leaders would focus on security and economic matters. Although the aides said human rights remained a concern, Mr. Trump prefers to deal with those issues in private.

A White House statement released Friday praised Mr. Sisi for waging a vigorous war against terrorists and making efforts to strengthen Egypt's economy, while making no mention of his crackdown on domestic opponents. ''President Al Sisi has taken a number of bold steps since becoming president in 2014, including calling for the reform and moderation of Islamic discourse and initiating courageous and historic economic reforms,'' it said.

The decision to sideline human rights issues in Egypt publicly comes just days after the Trump administration told Congress that it would lift human rights conditions imposed by President Barack Obama and resume arms sales to Bahrain, another critical ally in the Middle East and host country of the United States Navy 's Fifth Fleet.

Taken together, the moves reinforce the message that Mr. Trump plans to make security cooperation the cornerstone of his approach to the region, without human rights becoming an obstacle, unlike President George W. Bush , who also emphasized the development of democracy, or Mr. Obama, who pressed autocratic states to ease repression.

''A blank check from President Trump on human rights concerns in Egypt isn't surprising but it does mean Congress will have to step in and continue using its authorities to limit U.S. support given how serious the scale of repression and abuse is under President Sisi,'' said Sarah Margon , the Washington director of Human Rights Watch.

Tom Malinowski, an assistant secretary of state in charge of human rights issues under Mr. Obama, said American aid to Egypt had never translated into the expected support for American policy. ''We've given Egypt $70 billion over the years, and last I checked there are no Egyptian F-16s helping us fight ISIS over Raqqa or Mosul,'' he said. ''All we get from the Egyptians is political repression that radicalizes its youth and gives terrorist groups new life.''

Five senators announced that they would introduce a resolution urging Egypt to ease its suppression of dissent. Senator Marco Rubio , Republican of Florida, urged Mr. Trump to ''press for the release of political prisoners in Egypt, including jailed Americans, and encourage Egypt to allow greater space for civil society and freedom of expression for all.''

As an army general, Mr. Sisi helped lead the overthrow of President Mohamed Morsi's democratically elected government and then won the presidency himself in an election tainted by the wide-scale arrest of opposition figures. Since taking power, Mr. Sisi has targeted Mr. Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood and others who oppose his government.

The annual State Department human rights report, which Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson chose not to present in person as his predecessors did, criticized Mr. Sisi's government for suppression of civil liberties and denial of due process. It cited the disappearance of dissidents, harsh prison conditions, torture, arbitrary arrests and killings, harassment of civil society groups and curbs on academic freedom, religious liberty and independent media.

Several American citizens figure among the tens of thousands of people jailed under Mr. Sisi, most notably Aya Hjazi, a humanitarian worker arrested in May 2014 on what have been widely viewed as trumped-up charges of trafficking and child abuse.

Human rights groups say the charges are part of a wider crackdown on foreign-funded aid groups in Egypt that has drawn sharp criticism from some quarters in Congress. In December, Senators Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and John McCain of Arizona, both Republicans, said they would support new restrictions on aid to Egypt if a proposed new law there restricting aid groups is approved -- a measure of the possible limits of Mr. Trump's embrace of Mr. Sisi.

Both Mr. Bush and Mr. Obama struggled to balance their concerns about domestic conditions in Egypt and the country's longstanding alliance with the United States. Under the authoritarian rule of the longtime president, Hosni Mubarak , Egypt squelched dissent at home but was a reliable partner to the United States in guaranteeing peace with Israel and fighting terrorist groups, for which it receives about $1.3 billion a year in American military aid.

After deciding to make the promotion of democracy a major theme of his presidency, Mr. Bush kept Mr. Mubarak at a distance and pushed him to release opponents and hold elections, although he made only halting progress and eased up later in his tenure.

When Arab Spring protests erupted in 2011, Mr. Obama pressed Mr. Mubarak to step down and supported the election that led to Mr. Morsi's ascension. After Mr. Sisi ousted Mr. Morsi, Mr. Obama refused to call it a military coup but cut off some arms sales in hopes of moderating a crackdown. Ultimately, it yielded no results, so Mr. Obama lifted the arms freeze, but he changed some financing rules and declined to invite Mr. Sisi to the White House.

At a briefing on Friday, White House officials said Mr. Trump did not consider it constructive to air disputes over human rights publicly. His approach, they said, would be to handle such issues in a more discreet way. In the case of Ms. Hjazi, they said, Mr. Trump's team aims to address her captivity in a way that would maximize the chances of its being resolved. The officials were not allowed to be identified under ground rules set by the White House.

At the same time, the officials said the White House could not commit to maintaining Egypt's aid package at current levels, citing a budget review. Mr. Trump has proposed deep cuts in the State Department budget, and while officials have said military assistance to Israel will remain untouched, reductions in aid to Egypt are under consideration.

Also on the table is aid to another crucial regional ally, Jordan, whose King Abdullah II will visit the White House on Wednesday. Like Egypt, Jordan has a peace treaty with Israel and has been a vital intelligence partner to the United States. Aid to Jordan has been increased substantially in recent years as it has absorbed hundreds of thousands of refugees from the civil war in Syria.

Aside from aid, Mr. Trump and Mr. Sisi are likely to discuss the Muslim Brotherhood , which Egypt has outlawed. Mr. Sisi has lobbied Washington to designate the brotherhood a terrorist organization, which Mr. Obama refused to do. Mr. Trump's advisers have been debating such a designation since taking office in January, but internal momentum for the move has slowed over concern that it would alienate more moderate Muslims and drive them toward violent groups like Al Qaeda, the Islamic State and the Shabab.

At their briefing on Friday, the White House officials indicated that no decision had been made to designate the Muslim Brotherhood a terrorist organization, but they anticipated Mr. Sisi would raise the matter.

The White House written statement said terrorism posed a major threat to Egypt's stability. ''The United States is fully committed to helping Egypt take the necessary steps to defeat Sinai-based terrorist groups,'' it said.

The Washington trip has been keenly anticipated in Egypt, where Mr. Sisi's supporters see a public handshake in the White House as a symbolic validation of a leader long spurned for his human rights record. A trade delegation is expected to accompany Mr. Sisi, hoping to attract urgently needed foreign investment.

But privately, Egyptian officials have been alarmed at talk of a cut in American aid, Western officials say, and have sought to temper expectations over what the trip can produce in concrete terms.

Follow Peter Baker on Twitter @peterbakernyt .

Abdel Fattah el-Sisi in Cairo in 2014. Now president, he is to visit the White House on Monday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KHALED DESOUKI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170401ed4100069



U.S.; Politics
Coalition Fighting  ISIS  Says 229 Civilians Killed Since Start of Mission

By MICHAEL R. GORDON 
898 words
1 April 2017
21:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —acing mounting pressure over civilian casualties in American airstrikes, the United States-led coalition fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria said on Saturday that it was likely that at least 229 civilians had been unintentionally killed since the start of the operations in August 2014.

In February, the last month covered by the report and the first full month of the Trump administration, four such civilians were killed, the coalition said. The assessment, issued monthly, does not include the March 17 strike against a building in Mosul in which up to 200 civilians were killed, according to Iraqi witnesses. That strike is under investigation.

The coalition’ overall count is far less than estimates by some human rights groups. Airwars, a nongovernment organization that monitors reports of civilian casualties in international airstrikes, has asserted that at least 2,831 civilians are likely to have been killed by the coalition’ air attacks since August 2014.

The worries about civilian casualties have grown as Iraqi forces push to take western Mosul from the Islamic State with the help of American and allied air power, rockets and artillery. President Trump has vowed to step up the fight against the militants, though the basic strategy in Mosul was set by American commanders during the Obama administration.

“e take the issue of civilian casualties seriously, every day, not just when it makes news,”aid Col. John J. Thomas, the spokesman for the United States Central Command, which oversees American military operations in the Middle East. Colonel Thomas added that the command, in an effort to be “ully transparent,”as sharing information on unresolved cases and was even describing episodes that military personnel had reported up the chain of command but had not previously received public attention.

Chris Woods, the director of Airwars, asserted that while the Central Command had been working to improve its casualty counts, it was still lagging behind. “ertainly, both Centcom and the coalition have put a lot of effort into improving their casualty monitoring process, and we have been in extensive dialogue with them,”r. Woods said in a telephone interview from London.

“ut despite these improved resources, both Centcom and the coalition appear unable to keep up with the number of allegations,”r. Woods added. “iven the intensity of operations in Mosul and around Raqqa, that gap continues to grow.”aqqa, in Syria, is the Islamic State’ self-declared capital.

In western Mosul, hundreds of thousands of civilians are trapped, and airstrikes are an essential part of the operation. The Iraqi military has suffered enormous casualties —84 Iraqi troops were killed during the first 37 days of the offensive to take western Mosul —nd it depends on American firepower to advance. American military officials also allege that Islamic State fighters have herded Iraqi residents into buildings, calculating that escalating civilian casualties would prompt American commanders to slow the pace of airstrikes.

But critics say that the firepower that is being applied is so extensive that civilians are being put in danger. During a recent week in Mosul, the United States-led coalition carried out attacks with 700 bombs and rockets and another 400 strikes with satellite-guided Himars missiles, according to military officials.

With the United States unwilling to play a major ground combat role in Iraq and Syria, air power has become increasingly important. Between August 2014 and February 2017, the American-led coalition carried out 18,645 strikes. According to data made public by the command on Saturday, there were 37 reports of possible civilian casualties related to the operation to evict the Islamic State from the eastern half of Mosul, which began in mid-October. But 12 of these were deemed upon investigation to be “oncredible,”ometimes because no coalition strikes had been carried out in the area.

In five cases, the command found that the reports of civilian casualties were “redible.”n a Feb. 16 strike on a site that the military said was being used to make or hide an Islamic State car bomb, two civilians were killed when they entered the target area after the munition was released.

Forty-three cases of possible civilian casualties are still being assessed, including an April 2015 strike near Mosul. That case was reopened after new information was received.

In the March 17 strike in western Mosul, which led to the collapse of the building, American officials have acknowledged that the United States had a role, but said that the munition used should not have been powerful enough to bring down a building. They are examining whether the American strike might have set off a larger blast from explosives set by militants in or near the building.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* New \b ISIS\b0  Tactic: Gather Mosul’ Civilians, Then Lure an Airstrike

* At Site of Deaths, Our Reporters Find Cost of U.S.-\b ISIS\b0  Battle

* Trump’ \b ISIS\b0  Plan, as Described by Tillerson, Sounds Like Obama’

* Devices Banned on Flights From 10 Countries Over \b ISIS\b0  Fears

Iraqis bathed in a sulfur pond not far from the southern outskirts of Mosul on Saturday. Iraqi forces are pushing to take western Mosul from the Islamic State. | Ahmad Gharabli/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170401ed41005bp



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Trump Accepts 'Reality' of Assad's Grip on Power

By MICHAEL R. GORDON 
1,033 words
1 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Trump has abandoned the goal of pressing President Bashar al-Assad of Syria to leave power, marking a sharp departure from the Middle East policy that guided the Obama administration for more than five years, the White House said on Friday.

''With respect to Assad, there is a political reality that we have to accept,'' said Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary.

''The United States has profound priorities in Syria and Iraq, and we've made it clear that counterterrorism, particularly the defeat of ISIS, is foremost among those priorities,'' he added, using the acronym for the Islamic State.

In a sense, Mr. Spicer's comments -- and similar comments on Thursday by Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson and Nikki R. Haley, the United States ambassador to the United Nations -- have merely made explicit an assumption that has guided the Trump administration's policy toward the region in recent months.

But the comments have also stirred criticism, including from some Republican lawmakers, who assert that Syria will continue to be a magnet for extremists as long as Mr. Assad is in control of the country.

''Trying to fight ISIS while pretending that we can ignore the Syrian civil war that was its genesis and fuels it to this day is a recipe for more war, more terror, more refugees, and more instability,'' Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona and chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, said Thursday night.

By any measure, the latest Trump administration statements on Syria codify a remarkable reversal of American foreign policy. President Barack Obama outlined a starkly different approach in August 2011 when he declared that Mr. Assad had lost legitimacy, and urged him to relinquish power.

''We have consistently said that President Assad must lead a democratic transition or get out of the way,'' Mr. Obama said then, in a statement that was coordinated with European allies. ''For the sake of the Syrian people, the time has come for President Assad to step aside.''

That pronouncement came at a time when Mr. Obama and some members of his inner circle thought Mr. Assad's hold on power was shaky. But as Mr. Assad dug in his heels, Mr. Obama's policy for Syria was marked by a chronic gap between ends and means.

The White House was slow to embrace a plan from David H. Petraeus, the former CIA director, and Hillary Clinton, Mr. Obama's first secretary of state, to train and arm the moderate Syrian opposition. And while the Obama administration was not prepared to use airpower to protect the Syrian opposition, Russia began to send its warplanes to Syria in September 2015 to shore up the Assad government and help it reclaim lost ground.

During his final year as secretary of state, John Kerry sought to enlist Russia's support for a diplomatic solution that would quell the fighting and provide for a political transition in which Mr. Assad would eventually leave power. But President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia decided instead to help Mr. Assad enlarge the territory he controlled. With Russian air support, the Assad government retook Aleppo in December.

The Assad government has also drawn support from Iran's paramilitary Quds force, as well as Iranian-backed militias from Iraq, Shiite fighters from Afghanistan and Hezbollah, and the Lebanese militia.

During the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump said that he while he did not like Mr. Assad, he was glad the Syrian leader was ''killing ISIS.'' Since taking office, however, Mr. Trump has shied away from forging a military alliance in Syria with Russia, let alone with Mr. Assad. Instead, the administration's single-minded focus has been to help Syrian fighters oust the Islamic State from the northern city of Raqqa, which the extremists have declared the capital of their self-styled caliphate.

Still, major questions loom, including which political authorities in Syria will control Raqqa after ISIS fighters are evicted and how the international community might establish safe zones, or what Mr. Tillerson recently called ''interim zones of stability,'' to stem the flow of refugees. Another important question is whether it might be possible to negotiate a broader political accommodation for Syria; despite his gains, Mr. Assad lacks the military manpower to control the entire country.

None of those answers had been provided in recent days by administration officials, though they have signaled that the American policy is no longer to press for a new transitional government that does not include Mr. Assad.

''Do we think he's a hindrance? Yes,'' Ms. Haley told reporters on Thursday, according to Reuters. ''Are we going to sit there and focus on getting him out? No.''

''What we are going to focus on is putting the pressure in there so that we can start to make a change in Syria,'' she added.

Mr. Tillerson was more vague during a Thursday appearance in Ankara, Turkey, saying only that ''the longer-term status of President Assad will be decided by the Syrian people.''

Mr. Spicer suggested on Friday that much of the potential leverage over Mr. Assad was now gone, ''since there is not the opposition that existed last time.'' At the same time, he said, there is ''a need to de-escalate violence and to have a political process through which Syrians will decide their own political future.''

Frederic C. Hof, director of the Middle East center at the Atlantic Council and an adviser on Syria to Mrs. Clinton when she was secretary of state, asserted that tough questions on Mr. Assad's political fate could not be deferred forever.

''The implications of not trying diplomatically to neutralize Bashar al-Assad are serious,'' he said. ''The reason we have ISIS is because of Assad's political survival strategy of using mass homicide. The point is not only to kill ISIS, but also to keep it dead. And you are not going to get there as long as Assad is in power.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Michael R. Gordon on Twitter @gordonnyt .

Document NYTF000020170401ed410005z



Foreign Desk; SECT
Turkey's Wars: Quelling Kurdish Uprisings, and Suffering From Terror Attacks

By PATRICK KINGSLEY 
1,099 words
1 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

In Kurdish areas of Turkey, fear and destruction have returned as facts of life after government offensives leveled parts of rebellious cities. And a barrage of terrorist attacks by the Islamic State and Kurdish groups is changing people's sense of personal safety. This is the fourth part in the State of Emergency series, in which our correspondent takes us behind the scenes of today's Turkey, a nation in crisis.

_____

'We're Trapped Between Two Forces'

You're looking at what I saw this month as I drove into the heart of Sirnak, once a busy provincial capital in southeastern Turkey. Government tanks rolled in last year to crush a Kurdish uprising here and in several other places, leaving little behind -- some of these city centers are practically ghost towns, and the Kurds who still live here seem haunted, too.

Just a few years ago, after securing a truce with Kurdish separatists, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan seemed destined to become the leader who finally put a halt to decades of bloodshed here. But the negotiations broke down in 2015, and Mr. Erdogan now presides over the resumption of one of the country's most traumatic wars.

It is hard to reach this part of Turkey, near the Syrian and Iraqi borders, at all these days, as the area is still under lockdown. There are now seven government checkpoints between Sirnak and the closest airport. When I reached the third, at the entrance to a town called Cizre, my passport was confiscated and I was questioned for an hour. Who am I? What am I doing here?

''You are crazy,'' the senior officer concluded. ''This place is very dangerous.''

He rolled up his sleeve to show the scar he carries after one attack here by the P.K.K., the Kurdish separatist group that encouraged last year's uprisings in this region and is widely listed as a terrorist organization. He said he pined for his placid hometown, far away on the shores of the Mediterranean. ''Psychologically, this is very difficult,'' he said before finally letting me go.

As I left Cizre, I passed the basements where dozens of Kurds burned to death in unclear circumstances during a government raid in February 2016.

Just before dusk, I arrived at a village on the outskirts of Sirnak. The mayor here was recently arrested and replaced by a state ''trustee,'' one of more than 80 elected Kurds who have recently been replaced by government edict.

Unlike in Sirnak or Cizre, tanks did not fire on the village last year, or destroy its houses. As a result, it became a shelter for some of the estimated 500,000 people displaced by last year's fighting. After sunset, and amid a power failure, I met with one family.

The father, a 53-year-old janitor, said they were from Sirnak. When the rebellion began in late 2015, he, his wife and their eight children fled to a different city. But their new landlord later needed their apartment for his own displaced family, so they moved to this village. Fearing that both the security forces and Kurdish militants might harass them if the family were identified, they asked me not to use their names.

For months they lived in a shed, sleeping next to chickens and cows, before a neighbor found them a cleaner place to stay. In the meantime, their home in Sirnak was destroyed, along with much of the city center.

As we spoke, the power came back on, allowing their youngest daughter to do her homework. ''This room is for everything,'' her mother said. ''Studying, sleeping, eating.''

They say they resent both the insurgents, who prolonged a fight they were never going to win, and the state, which left three of their relatives buried in the Sirnak rubble. ''We're trapped between two forces,'' the mother said.

''Our lives are the lives of refugees,'' the father added. ''We're just waiting.''

_____

After Attack, Night Life Catches a Chill

Turkey is suffering from two different terrorism campaigns: one led by the Islamic State, and the other by Kurdish separatists. One big attack in particular -- when an ISIS gunman killed 39 people early New Year's Day at Reina, a noted Istanbul nightclub -- seemed to strike right at the city's reputation as a hub for night life. Wondering how this had affected people's attitudes, I went on a recent Friday night to a collection of chic clubs, restaurants and bars in a former Istanbul beer factory.

''We went to a concert two weeks ago, but I imagined that there might be someone with a gun. It was scary for me. ... Crowded places, we try to avoid. Malls, we try to avoid. ... Here, it's nearer our houses so we feel safe.''

-- Ezgi Ates, a 32-year-old teacher, who said it was only the second time she and her friends had been out for the evening since the New Year's Day attack.

_____

''When we're using the metro, it's always on our minds that something might happen. ... I'm not feeling comfortable, but we've gotten used to it because it's been happening so frequently.''

-- Mine Ak, a 19-year-old student, who for safety reasons canceled plans to see a favorite band.

_____

''I think the economic crisis is also affecting night life. I'm a bartender, and the amount of money people pay has diminished. People are still going out, but they're drinking less.''

-- Ugur Berber, a 21-year-old bartender, who wondered if there were other reasons for a downturn.

_____

''Even when I was just entering the place, I wondered if there would be some guy shooting here. I've started not reading the news. It depresses us, affects our psychology. It makes us unhappy.''

-- Can, a 29-year-old government employee, who asked not to be photographed or fully named for fear of falling victim to a continuing purge of dissidents.

_____

''I don't know if it's related to the terror attacks, but I'm not going out as much as before. It's something to do with the people in society. ... Either they're not interested in what's going on or they're just repeating the same talking points -- and that includes us, too!''

-- Denis Barsdemir, a 20-year-old worker for a tech start-up, who wondered if Turks were staying away from clubs because they wanted to stay inside their own bubbles.

Document NYTF000020170401ed410006b



U.S.; Politics
White House Accepts ‘olitical Reality’f Assad’ Grip on Power in Syria

By MICHAEL R. GORDON 
1,115 words
1 April 2017
03:17
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —resident Trump has abandoned the goal of pressing President Bashar al-Assad of Syria to leave power, marking a sharp departure from the Middle East policy that guided the Obama administration for more than five years, the White House said on Friday.

“ith respect to Assad, there is a political reality that we have to accept,”aid Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary.

“he United States has profound priorities in Syria and Iraq, and we’e made it clear that counterterrorism, particularly the defeat of \b ISIS\b0 , is foremost among those priorities,”e added, using the acronym for the Islamic State.

In a sense, Mr. Spicer’ comments —nd similar comments on Thursday by Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson and Nikki R. Haley, the United States ambassador to the United Nations —ave merely made explicit an assumption that has guided the Trump administration’ policy toward the region in recent months.

But the comments have also stirred criticism, including from some Republican lawmakers, who assert that Syria will continue to be a magnet for extremists as long as Mr. Assad is in control of the country.

“rying to fight ISIS while pretending that we can ignore the Syrian civil war that was its genesis and fuels it to this day is a recipe for more war, more terror, more refugees, and more instability,”enator John McCain, Republican of Arizona and chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, said Thursday night.

By any measure, the latest Trump administration statements on Syria codify a remarkable reversal of American foreign policy. President Barack Obama outlined a starkly different approach in August 2011 when he declared that Mr. Assad had lost legitimacy, and urged him to relinquish power.

“e have consistently said that President Assad must lead a democratic transition or get out of the way,”Mr. Obama said then, in a statement that was coordinated with European allies. “or the sake of the Syrian people, the time has come for President Assad to step aside.”

That pronouncement came at a time when Mr. Obama and some members of his inner circle thought Mr. Assad’ hold on power was shaky. But as Mr. Assad dug in his heels, Mr. Obama’ policy for Syria was marked by a chronic gap between ends and means.

The White House was slow to embrace a plan from David H. Petraeus, the former CIA director, and Hillary Clinton, Mr. Obama’ first secretary of state, to train and arm the moderate Syrian opposition. And while the Obama administration was not prepared to use airpower to protect the Syrian opposition, Russia began to send its warplanes to Syria in September 2015 to shore up the Assad government and help it reclaim lost ground.

During his final year as secretary of state, John Kerry sought to enlist Russia’ support for a diplomatic solution that would quell the fighting and provide for a political transition in which Mr. Assad would eventually leave power. But President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia decided instead to help Mr. Assad enlarge the territory he controlled. With Russian air support, the Assad government retook Aleppo in December.

The Assad government has also drawn support from Iran’ paramilitary Quds force, as well as Iranian-backed militias from Iraq, Shiite fighters from Afghanistan and Hezbollah, and the Lebanese militia.

During the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump said that he while he did not like Mr. Assad, he was glad the Syrian leader was “illing ISIS.”ince taking office, however, Mr. Trump has shied away from forging a military alliance in Syria with Russia, let alone with Mr. Assad. Instead, the administration’ single-minded focus has been to help Syrian fighters oust the Islamic State from the northern city of Raqqa, which the extremists have declared the capital of their self-styled caliphate.

Still, major questions loom, including which political authorities in Syria will control Raqqa after ISIS fighters are evicted and how the international community might establish safe zones, or what Mr. Tillerson recently called “nterim zones of stability,”o stem the flow of refugees. Another important question is whether it might be possible to negotiate a broader political accommodation for Syria; despite his gains, Mr. Assad lacks the military manpower to control the entire country.

None of those answers had been provided in recent days by administration officials, though they have signaled that the American policy is no longer to press for a new transitional government that does not include Mr. Assad.

“o we think he’ a hindrance? Yes,”s. Haley told reporters on Thursday, according to Reuters. “re we going to sit there and focus on getting him out? No.”

“hat we are going to focus on is putting the pressure in there so that we can start to make a change in Syria,”he added.

Mr. Tillerson was more vague during a Thursday appearance in Ankara, Turkey, saying only that “he longer-term status of President Assad will be decided by the Syrian people.”

Mr. Spicer suggested on Friday that much of the potential leverage over Mr. Assad was now gone, “ince there is not the opposition that existed last time.”t the same time, he said, there is “ need to de-escalate violence and to have a political process through which Syrians will decide their own political future.”

Frederic C. Hof, director of the Middle East center at the Atlantic Council and an adviser on Syria to Mrs. Clinton when she was secretary of state, asserted that tough questions on Mr. Assad’ political fate could not be deferred forever.

“he implications of not trying diplomatically to neutralize Bashar al-Assad are serious,”e said. “he reason we have ISIS is because of Assad’ political survival strategy of using mass homicide. The point is not only to kill ISIS, but also to keep it dead. And you are not going to get there as long as Assad is in power.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* U.S. War Footprint Grows in Middle East, With No Endgame in Sight

* Syrian Defectors Urge Trump to Fulfill Vow to Create Safe Zones

* U.S. Is Sending 400 More Troops to Syria

* Syria’ Assad Sends Signals to Trump in Interview

Syrians fled from fighting involving the Islamic State near Raqqa on Thursday. | European Pressphoto Agency | Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson, left, with Mevlut Cavusoglu, Turkey’ foreign minister, at a news conference in Ankara on Thursday. | Adem Altan/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170401ed410012x



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. War Footprint Grows, With No Endgame in Sight

By BEN HUBBARD and MICHAEL R. GORDON; Ben Hubbard reported from Beirut, and Michael R. Gordon from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Anne Barnard from Beirut; Helene Cooper and Eric Schmitt from Washington; Rod Nordland from Kabul, Afghanistan; and an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria. 
1,972 words
30 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- The United States launched more airstrikes in Yemen this month than during all of last year. In Syria, it has airlifted local forces to front-line positions and has been accused of killing civilians in airstrikes. In Iraq, American troops and aircraft are central in supporting an urban offensive in Mosul, where airstrikes killed scores of people on March 17.

Two months after the inauguration of President Trump, indications are mounting that the United States military is deepening its involvement in a string of complex wars in the Middle East that lack clear endgames.

Rather than representing any formal new Trump doctrine on military action, however, American officials say that what is happening is a shift in military decision-making that began under President Barack Obama. On display are some of the first indications of how complicated military operations are continuing under a president who has vowed to make the military ''fight to win.''

In an interview on Wednesday, Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the commander of United States Central Command, said the new procedures made it easier for commanders in the field to call in airstrikes without waiting for permission from more senior officers.

''We recognized the nature of the fight was going to change and that we had to ensure that authorities were down to the right level and that we empowered the on-scene commander,'' General Votel said. He was speaking specifically about discussions that he said began in November about how the fights in Syria and Iraq against the Islamic State were reaching critical phases in Mosul and Raqqa.

Concerns about the recent accusations of civilian casualties are bringing some of these details to light. But some of the shifts have also involved small increases in the deployment and use of American forces or, in Yemen, resuming aid to allies that had previously been suspended.

And they coincide with the settling in of a president who has vowed to intensify the fight against extremists abroad, and whose budgetary and rhetorical priorities have indicated a military-first approach even as he has proposed cuts in diplomatic spending.

To some critics, that suggests that much more change is to come, in difficult situations in a roiled Middle East that have never had clear solutions.

Robert Malley, a former senior official in the Obama administration and now vice president for policy at the International Crisis Group, said the uptick in military involvement since Mr. Trump took office did not appear to have been accompanied by increased planning for the day after potential military victories.

''The military will be the first to tell you that a military operation is only as good as the diplomatic and political plan that comes with it,'' Mr. Malley said.

The lack of diplomacy and planning for the future in places like Yemen and Syria could render victories there by the United States and its allies unsustainable.

''From harsh experience, we know that either U.S. forces will have to be involved for the long term or victory will dissipate soon after they leave,'' he said.

Others fear that greater military involvement could drag the United States into murky wars and that increased civilian deaths could feed anti-Americanism and jihadist propaganda.

Some insist that this has already happened.

''Daesh is happy about the American attacks against civilians to prove its slogans that the Americans want to kill Muslims everywhere and not only the Islamic State's gunmen,'' a resident of the Syrian city of Raqqa wrote via WhatsApp, using the Arabic acronym for the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. He gave only his first name, Abdul-Rahman, for fear of the jihadists.

The shift toward greater military involvement extends into one of Mr. Obama's central legacies: the prolonged American presence in Afghanistan, where more than 8,400 American soldiers and 5,924 troops from NATO and other allies remain, and where the Taliban have been resurgent.

Plans have been announced to send 300 United States Marines to Helmand Province, their first deployment there since 2014. And the American commander, Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., told Congress in February that he would like another ''few thousand'' American and coalition troops.

But the changes have also been notable in Yemen, Syria and Iraq, all home to overlapping conflicts in failed states where jihadist groups like Al Qaeda and the Islamic State have taken advantage of the chaos to step up operations.

Even while being drawn more deeply into those conflicts, the Obama administration sought to limit American engagement while pushing -- mostly in vain -- for diplomatic solutions. It also launched frequent airstrikes to kill individual jihadists or to destroy their facilities and sent thousands of American troops back to Iraq to train and advise Iraqi forces, and also provide firepower, so they could ''degrade and ultimately destroy'' the Islamic State.

But under Mr. Obama, the White House often spent weeks or even months deliberating certain raids and airstrikes out of concern for American service members and civilians -- and often to the frustration of commanders and American allies.

Mr. Trump's tough statements before coming into office, and the rise in civilian deaths in recent American strikes, have raised questions about whether the new president has removed constraints from the Pentagon on how it wages war.

But administration officials say that has not yet happened. And military officials insist that the streamlined process for airstrikes does not exempt commanders from strict protocols meant to avoid civilian casualties.

Speaking before the House Armed Services Committee on Wednesday, General Votel said the Pentagon had not relaxed its rules of engagement. He called the mounting toll of civilian deaths in Iraq and Syria ''absolutely tragic and heartbreaking'' and said Central Command was investigating their cause.

The complexity of these wars and the American role in them is clear in Yemen, where the United States has two distinct roles, both of which have increased under Mr. Trump.

The country, the Arab world's poorest, has been split in half since militants known as the Houthis allied with parts of the military and seized the capital, pushing the internationally recognized government into exile.

Two years ago, a military coalition led by Saudi Arabia began bombing the rebels, hoping to weaken them militarily and restore the government. They have made little progress, while more than 10,000 people have been killed and large parts of the country are on the verge of famine, according to the United Nations.

Under Mr. Obama, the United States provided military support to the Saudi-led coalition, but halted the sale of precision-guided munitions over concerns that airstrikes by Saudi Arabia and its allies were killing too many civilians.

But since Mr. Trump took office, his administration has advanced some arms deals for coalition countries, while approving the resumption of sales of precision-guided munitions to Saudi Arabia, according to an American official familiar with Yemen policy.

Mr. Trump's more muscular approach has been hailed by Gulf leaders, who felt betrayed by Mr. Obama's outreach to Iran and who hope that they now have an ally in the White House to help them push back against their regional foe.

''It understands that it is uniquely positioned to play a unique role in bringing some stability to the region, and I think there is a meeting of the minds between the Saudi leadership and the Trump administration,'' said Fahad Nazer, a political consultant to the Saudi Embassy in Washington who said he was speaking on his own behalf.

At the same time, since Mr. Trump's inauguration, the United States has stepped up its long-running drone campaign against the Yemeni branch of Al Qaeda, believed to be the organization's most dangerous.

Mr. Trump granted a Pentagon request to declare parts of three provinces in Yemen as an ''area of active hostilities,'' giving commanders greater flexibility to strike. Later, a Special Operations raid in late January led to the death of many civilians and an American commando.

So far this month, the United States has also launched more than 49 strikes across Yemen, most of them during one five-day period, according to data gathered by the Critical Threats Project at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think tank. That is more strikes than the United States had carried out during any other full year on record.

Some analysts note that this military surge has not brought with it a clear strategy to end Yemen's war or uproot Al Qaeda.

''As the military line has surged, there has not been a surge in diplomacy,'' said Katherine Zimmerman, a research fellow at the American Enterprise Institute.

The United States faces a similarly complex set of overlapping conflicts in Syria, where a brutal civil war opened up opportunities for Al Qaeda to infiltrate the rebels seeking to topple the government while the Islamic State seized an area of territory that extended over the border into Iraq.

While intervening covertly to support the rebels, the United States has ordered airstrikes on the jihadists -- alone in the case of Al Qaeda and as part of a coalition against the Islamic State. It has also built ties with the Iraqi security forces, and with Kurdish and Arab fighters in Syria to battle the jihadists on the ground.

But recently, a string of airstrikes have exposed the United States to allegations of killing large numbers of civilians. More than 60 people were killed in a strike on a mosque complex where local residents said a religious gathering was taking place. The United States said it was targeting Qaeda leaders. The military has been accused of killing about 30 Syrians in an airstrike on a school, but has insisted that the early indications show it hit Islamic State fighters. A strike in Mosul killed scores of civilians, although the military is investigating whether militants herded the people into the building or possibly rigged it with bombs.

The rise in reports of civilian deaths linked to the United States and its allies has been so significant that Airwars, a group that tracks airstrikes, said last week that it was suspending its investigations into Russian airstrikes to avoid falling behind on those by the United States.

American officials have attributed the rising number of strikes and the danger to civilians to the urban battlefields in Mosul and Raqqa and the high concentration of civilians in areas held by the jihadists. They say they try to avoid civilian casualties while the Islamic State deliberately kills anybody who stands in its way.

This month, American officials also said they would send an additional 400 troops to Syria to help prepare for the assault on Raqqa, the Islamic State's self-proclaimed capital, nearly doubling the total there.

In Iraq, General Votel said that in just the past 37 days, as the fight moved into the denser western side of Mosul, 284 of the Iraqi forces had been killed and 1,600 more wounded, underlining the ferocity of the battles.

Follow Ben Hubbard @NYTBen and Michael R. Gordon @gordonnyt on Twitter.

Civilians in Mosul waited for aid this month. American forces have stepped up airstrikes in support of Iraqi forces' fight for the city. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Volunteers moved rubble after an airstrike this month on a mosque complex in Al Jinah, Syria. (PHOTOGRAPH BY OMAR HAJ KADOUR/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A6) 

Document NYTF000020170330ed3u0006l



World; Middle East
U.S. War Footprint Grows in Middle East, With No Endgame in Sight

By BEN HUBBARD and MICHAEL R. GORDON 
1,967 words
30 March 2017
02:59
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon —he United States launched more airstrikes in Yemen this month than during all of last year. In Syria, it has airlifted local forces to front-line positions and has been accused of killing civilians in airstrikes. In Iraq, American troops and aircraft are central in supporting an urban offensive in Mosul, where airstrikes killed scores of people on March 17.

Two months after the inauguration of President Trump, indications are mounting that the United States military is deepening its involvement in a string of complex wars in the Middle East that lack clear endgames.

Rather than representing any formal new Trump doctrine on military action, however, American officials say that what is happening is a shift in military decision-making that began under President Barack Obama. On display are some of the first indications of how complicated military operations are continuing under a president who has vowed to make the military “ight to win.”

In an interview on Wednesday, Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the commander of United States Central Command, said the new procedures made it easier for commanders in the field to call in airstrikes without waiting for permission from more senior officers.

“e recognized the nature of the fight was going to change and that we had to ensure that authorities were down to the right level and that we empowered the on-scene commander,”eneral Votel said. He was speaking specifically about discussions that he said began in November about how the fights in Syria and Iraq against the Islamic State were reaching critical phases in Mosul and Raqqa.

Concerns about the recent accusations of civilian casualties are bringing some of these details to light. But some of the shifts have also involved small increases in the deployment and use of American forces or, in Yemen, resuming aid to allies that had previously been suspended.

And they coincide with the settling in of a president who has vowed to intensify the fight against extremists abroad, and whose budgetary and rhetorical priorities have indicated a military-first approach even as he has proposed cuts in diplomatic spending.

To some critics, that suggests that much more change is to come, in difficult situations in a roiled Middle East that have never had clear solutions.

Robert Malley, a former senior official in the Obama administration and now vice president for policy at the International Crisis Group, said the uptick in military involvement since Mr. Trump took office did not appear to have been accompanied by increased planning for the day after potential military victories.

“he military will be the first to tell you that a military operation is only as good as the diplomatic and political plan that comes with it,”r. Malley said.

The lack of diplomacy and planning for the future in places like Yemen and Syria could render victories there by the United States and its allies unsustainable.

“rom harsh experience, we know that either U.S. forces will have to be involved for the long term or victory will dissipate soon after they leave,”e said.

Others fear that greater military involvement could drag the United States into murky wars and that increased civilian deaths could feed anti-Americanism and jihadist propaganda.

Some insist that this has already happened.

“aesh is happy about the American attacks against civilians to prove its slogans that the Americans want to kill Muslims everywhere and not only the Islamic State’ gunmen,” resident of the Syrian city of Raqqa wrote via WhatsApp, using the Arabic acronym for the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL. He gave only his first name, Abdul-Rahman, for fear of the jihadists.

The shift toward greater military involvement extends into one of Mr. Obama’ central legacies: the prolonged American presence in Afghanistan, where more than 8,400 American soldiers and 5,924 troops from NATO and other allies remain, and where the Taliban have been resurgent.

Plans have been announced to send 300 United States Marines to Helmand Province, their first deployment there since 2014. And the American commander, Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., told Congress in February that he would like another “ew thousand”merican and coalition troops.

But the changes have also been notable in Yemen, Syria and Iraq, all home to overlapping conflicts in failed states where jihadist groups like Al Qaeda and the Islamic State have taken advantage of the chaos to step up operations.

Even while being drawn more deeply into those conflicts, the Obama administration sought to limit American engagement while pushing —ostly in vain —or diplomatic solutions. It also launched frequent airstrikes to kill individual jihadists or to destroy their facilities and sent thousands of American troops back to Iraq to train and advise Iraqi forces, and also provide firepower, so they could “egrade and ultimately destroy”he Islamic State.

But under Mr. Obama, the White House often spent weeks or even months deliberating certain raids and airstrikes out of concern for American service members and civilians —nd often to the frustration of commanders and American allies.

Mr. Trump’ tough statements before coming into office, and the rise in civilian deaths in recent American strikes, have raised questions about whether the new president has removed constraints from the Pentagon on how it wages war.

But administration officials say that has not yet happened. And military officials insist that the streamlined process for airstrikes does not exempt commanders from strict protocols meant to avoid civilian casualties.

Speaking before the House Armed Services Committee on Wednesday, General Votel said the Pentagon had not relaxed its rules of engagement. He called the mounting toll of civilian deaths in Iraq and Syria “bsolutely tragic and heartbreaking”nd said Central Command was investigating their cause.

The complexity of these wars and the American role in them is clear in Yemen, where the United States has two distinct roles, both of which have increased under Mr. Trump.

The country, the Arab world’ poorest, has been split in half since militants known as the Houthis allied with parts of the military and seized the capital, pushing the internationally recognized government into exile.

Two years ago, a military coalition led by Saudi Arabia began bombing the rebels, hoping to weaken them militarily and restore the government. They have made little progress, while more than 10,000 people have been killed and large parts of the country are on the verge of famine, according to the United Nations.

Under Mr. Obama, the United States provided military support to the Saudi-led coalition, but halted the sale of precision-guided munitions over concerns that airstrikes by Saudi Arabia and its allies were killing too many civilians.

But since Mr. Trump took office, his administration has advanced some arms deals for coalition countries, while approving the resumption of sales of precision-guided munitions to Saudi Arabia, according to an American official familiar with Yemen policy.

Mr. Trump’ more muscular approach has been hailed by Gulf leaders, who felt betrayed by Mr. Obama’ outreach to Iran and who hope that they now have an ally in the White House to help them push back against their regional foe.

“t understands that it is uniquely positioned to play a unique role in bringing some stability to the region, and I think there is a meeting of the minds between the Saudi leadership and the Trump administration,”aid Fahad Nazer, a political consultant to the Saudi Embassy in Washington who said he was speaking on his own behalf.

At the same time, since Mr. Trump’ inauguration, the United States has stepped up its long-running drone campaign against the Yemeni branch of Al Qaeda, believed to be the organization’ most dangerous.

Mr. Trump granted a Pentagon request to declare parts of three provinces in Yemen as an “rea of active hostilities,”iving commanders greater flexibility to strike. Later, a Special Operations raid in late January led to the death of many civilians and an American commando.

So far this month, the United States has also launched more than 49 strikes across Yemen, most of them during one five-day period, according to data gathered by the American Enterprise Institute’ Critical Threats Project. That is more strikes than the United States had carried out during any other complete year on record.

Some analysts note that this military surge has not brought with it a clear strategy to end Yemen’ war or uproot Al Qaeda.

“s the military line has surged, there has not been a surge in diplomacy,”aid Katherine Zimmerman, a research fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think tank.

The United States faces a similarly complex set of overlapping conflicts in Syria, where a brutal civil war opened up opportunities for Al Qaeda to infiltrate the rebels seeking to topple the government while the Islamic State seized an area of territory that extended over the border into Iraq.

While intervening covertly to support the rebels, the United States has launched airstrikes against the jihadists —lone in the case of Al Qaeda and as part of a military coalition against the Islamic State. It has also built ties with the Iraqi security forces, and with Kurdish and Arab fighters in Syria to battle the jihadists on the ground.

But recently, a string of airstrikes have exposed the United States to allegations of killing large numbers of civilians. More than 60 people were killed in a strike on a mosque complex where local residents said a religious gathering was taking place. The United States said it was targeting Qaeda leaders. A strike in eastern Syria killed at least 33 people, and a strike in Mosul killed scores more.

The rise in reports of civilian deaths linked to the United States and its allies has been so significant that Airwars, a group that tracks airstrike deaths, said last week that it was suspending its investigations into Russian airstrikes in order to avoid falling behind on those by the United States.

“lmost 1,000 civilian noncombatant deaths have already been alleged from coalition actions across Iraq and Syria in March — record claim,”he organization said in a statement.

American officials have attributed the rising number of strikes and the danger to civilians to the urban battlefields in Mosul and Raqqa and the high concentration of civilians in areas held by the jihadists.

This month, American officials also said they would send an additional 400 troops to Syria to help prepare for the assault on Raqqa, the Islamic State’ self-proclaimed capital, nearly doubling the total there.

In Iraq, General Votel said that in just the past 37 days, as the fight moved into the denser western side of Mosul, 284 of the Iraqi forces had been killed and 1,600 more wounded, underlining the ferocity of the battles.

Ben Hubbard reported from Beirut, and Michael R. Gordon from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Anne Barnard from Beirut; Helene Cooper and Eric Schmitt from Washington; Rod Nordland from Kabul, Afghanistan; and an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria.

* U.S. ‘robably Had a Role’n Mosul Deaths, Commander Says

* U.S. to Send Over 200 More Soldiers to Iraq to Help Retake Mosul

* Using Special Forces Against Terrorism, Trump Seeks to Avoid Big Ground Wars

Civilians in Mosul waited for aid this month. American forces have stepped up airstrikes in support of Iraqi forces’ight for the city. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | Volunteers moved rubble after an airstrike this month on a mosque complex in Al Jinah, Syria. | Omar Haj Kadour/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170330ed3u000m9



world
U.S. War Footprint Grows in Middle East, With No Endgame in Sight

By BEN HUBBARD and MICHAEL R. GORDON 
2,036 words
29 March 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon —he United States launched more airstrikes in Yemen this month than during all of last year. In Syria, it has airlifted local forces to front-line positions and has been accused of killing civilians in airstrikes. In Iraq, American troops and aircraft are central in supporting an urban offensive in Mosul, where airstrikes killed scores of people on March 17.

Two months after the inauguration of President Trump, indications are mounting that the United States military is deepening its involvement in a string of complex wars in the Middle East that lack clear endgames.

Rather than representing any formal new Trump doctrine on military action, however, American officials say that what is happening is a shift in military decision-making that began under President Barack Obama. On display are some of the first indications of how complicated military operations are continuing under a president who has vowed to make the military “ight to win.”

In an interview on Wednesday, Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the commander of United States Central Command, said the new procedures made it easier for commanders in the field to call in airstrikes without waiting for permission from more senior officers.

“e recognized the nature of the fight was going to change and that we had to ensure that authorities were down to the right level and that we empowered the on-scene commander,”eneral Votel said. He was speaking specifically about discussions that he said began in November about how the fights in Syria and Iraq against the Islamic State were reaching critical phases in Mosul and Raqqa.

Concerns about the recent accusations of civilian casualties are bringing some of these details to light. But some of the shifts have also involved small increases in the deployment and use of American forces or, in Yemen, resuming aid to allies that had previously been suspended.

And they coincide with the settling in of a president who has vowed to intensify the fight against extremists abroad, and whose budgetary and rhetorical priorities have indicated a military-first approach even as he has proposed cuts in diplomatic spending.

To some critics, that suggests that much more change is to come, in difficult situations in a roiled Middle East that have never had clear solutions.

Robert Malley, a former senior official in the Obama administration and now vice president for policy at the International Crisis Group, said the uptick in military involvement since Mr. Trump took office did not appear to have been accompanied by increased planning for the day after potential military victories.

“he military will be the first to tell you that a military operation is only as good as the diplomatic and political plan that comes with it,”r. Malley said.

The lack of diplomacy and planning for the future in places like Yemen and Syria could render victories there by the United States and its allies unsustainable.

“rom harsh experience, we know that either U.S. forces will have to be involved for the long term or victory will dissipate soon after they leave,”e said.

Others fear that greater military involvement could drag the United States into murky wars and that increased civilian deaths could feed anti-Americanism and jihadist propaganda.

Some insist that this has already happened.

“aesh is happy about the American attacks against civilians to prove its slogans that the Americans want to kill Muslims everywhere and not only the Islamic State’ gunmen,” resident of the Syrian city of Raqqa wrote via WhatsApp, using the Arabic acronym for the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL. He gave only his first name, Abdul-Rahman, for fear of the jihadists.

The shift toward greater military involvement extends into one of Mr. Obama’ central legacies: the prolonged American presence in Afghanistan, where more than 8,400 American soldiers and 5,924 troops from NATO and other allies remain, and where the Taliban have been resurgent.

Plans have been announced to send 300 United States Marines to Helmand Province, their first deployment there since 2014. And the American commander, Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., told Congress in February that he would like another “ew thousand”merican and coalition troops.

But the changes have also been notable in Yemen, Syria and Iraq, all home to overlapping conflicts in failed states where jihadist groups like Al Qaeda and the Islamic State have taken advantage of the chaos to step up operations.

Even while being drawn more deeply into those conflicts, the Obama administration sought to limit American engagement while pushing —ostly in vain —or diplomatic solutions. It also launched frequent airstrikes to kill individual jihadists or to destroy their facilities and sent thousands of American troops back to Iraq to train and advise Iraqi forces, and also provide firepower, so they could “egrade and ultimately destroy”he Islamic State.

But under Mr. Obama, the White House often spent weeks or even months deliberating certain raids and airstrikes out of concern for American service members and civilians —nd often to the frustration of commanders and American allies.

Mr. Trump’ tough statements before coming into office, and the rise in civilian deaths in recent American strikes, have raised questions about whether the new president has removed constraints from the Pentagon on how it wages war.

But administration officials say that has not yet happened. And military officials insist that the streamlined process for airstrikes does not exempt commanders from strict protocols meant to avoid civilian casualties.

Speaking before the House Armed Services Committee on Wednesday, General Votel said the Pentagon had not relaxed its rules of engagement. He called the mounting toll of civilian deaths in Iraq and Syria “bsolutely tragic and heartbreaking”nd said Central Command was investigating their cause.

The complexity of these wars and the American role in them is clear in Yemen, where the United States has two distinct roles, both of which have increased under Mr. Trump.

The country, the Arab world’ poorest, has been split in half since militants known as the Houthis allied with parts of the military and seized the capital, pushing the internationally recognized government into exile.

Two years ago, a military coalition led by Saudi Arabia began bombing the rebels, hoping to weaken them militarily and restore the government. They have made little progress, while more than 10,000 people have been killed and large parts of the country are on the verge of famine, according to the United Nations.

Under Mr. Obama, the United States provided military support to the Saudi-led coalition, but halted the sale of precision-guided munitions over concerns that airstrikes by Saudi Arabia and its allies were killing too many civilians.

But since Mr. Trump took office, his administration has advanced some arms deals for coalition countries, while approving the resumption of sales of precision-guided munitions to Saudi Arabia, according to an American official familiar with Yemen policy.

Mr. Trump’ more muscular approach has been hailed by Gulf leaders, who felt betrayed by Mr. Obama’ outreach to Iran and who hope that they now have an ally in the White House to help them push back against their regional foe.

“t understands that it is uniquely positioned to play a unique role in bringing some stability to the region, and I think there is a meeting of the minds between the Saudi leadership and the Trump administration,”aid Fahad Nazer, a political consultant to the Saudi Embassy in Washington who said he was speaking on his own behalf.

At the same time, since Mr. Trump’ inauguration, the United States has stepped up its long-running drone campaign against the Yemeni branch of Al Qaeda, believed to be the organization’ most dangerous.

Mr. Trump granted a Pentagon request to declare parts of three provinces in Yemen as an “rea of active hostilities,”iving commanders greater flexibility to strike. Later, a Special Operations raid in late January led to the death of many civilians and an American commando.

So far this month, the United States has also launched more than 49 strikes across Yemen, most of them during one five-day period, according to data gathered by the Critical Threats Project at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think tank. That is more strikes than the United States had carried out during any other full year on record.

Some analysts note that this military surge has not brought with it a clear strategy to end Yemen’ war or uproot Al Qaeda.

“s the military line has surged, there has not been a surge in diplomacy,”aid Katherine Zimmerman, a research fellow at the American Enterprise Institute.

The United States faces a similarly complex set of overlapping conflicts in Syria, where a brutal civil war opened up opportunities for Al Qaeda to infiltrate the rebels seeking to topple the government while the Islamic State seized an area of territory that extended over the border into Iraq.

While intervening covertly to support the rebels, the United States has ordered airstrikes on the jihadists —lone in the case of Al Qaeda and as part of a coalition against the Islamic State. It has also built ties with the Iraqi security forces, and with Kurdish and Arab fighters in Syria to battle the jihadists on the ground.

But recently, a string of airstrikes have exposed the United States to allegations of killing large numbers of civilians. More than 60 people were killed in a strike on a mosque complex where local residents said a religious gathering was taking place. The United States said it was targeting Qaeda leaders. The military has been accused of killing about 30 Syrians in an airstrike on a school, but has insisted that the early indications show it hit Islamic State fighters. A strike in Mosul killed scores of civilians, although the military is investigating whether militants herded the people into the building or possibly rigged it with bombs.

The rise in reports of civilian deaths linked to the United States and its allies has been so significant that Airwars, a group that tracks airstrikes, said last week that it was suspending its investigations into Russian airstrikes to avoid falling behind on those by the United States.

American officials have attributed the rising number of strikes and the danger to civilians to the urban battlefields in Mosul and Raqqa and the high concentration of civilians in areas held by the jihadists. They say they try to avoid civilian casualties while the Islamic State deliberately kills anybody who stands in its way.

This month, American officials also said they would send an additional 400 troops to Syria to help prepare for the assault on Raqqa, the Islamic State’ self-proclaimed capital, nearly doubling the total there.

In Iraq, General Votel said that in just the past 37 days, as the fight moved into the denser western side of Mosul, 284 of the Iraqi forces had been killed and 1,600 more wounded, underlining the ferocity of the battles.

Follow Ben Hubbard @NYTBen and Michael R. Gordon @gordonnyt on Twitter.Ben Hubbard reported from Beirut, and Michael R. Gordon from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Anne Barnard from Beirut; Helene Cooper and Eric Schmitt from Washington; Rod Nordland from Kabul, Afghanistan; and an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria.

PHOTOS: Civilians in Mosul waited for aid this month. American forces have stepped up airstrikes in support of Iraqi forces’ight for the city. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Volunteers moved rubble after an airstrike this month on a mosque complex in Al Jinah, Syria. (PHOTOGRAPH BY OMAR HAJ KADOUR/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE —GETTY IMAGES) (A6)

* U.S. ‘robably Had a Role’n Mosul Deaths, Commander Says

* U.S. to Send Over 200 More Soldiers to Iraq to Help Retake Mosul

* At Site of Deaths, Our Reporters Find Cost of U.S.-\b ISIS\b0  Battle

* U.S.-Led Coalition Confirms Strikes Hit Mosul Site Where Civilians Died

* Using Special Forces Against Terrorism, Trump Seeks to Avoid Big Ground Wars

Document INHT000020170331ed3t00010



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Concedes It Played a Role in Iraqi Deaths

By MICHAEL R. GORDON; Nick Cumming-Bruce contributed reporting from Geneva. 
1,384 words
29 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The senior United States commander in Iraq said on Tuesday that an American airstrike most likely led to the collapse of a building in Mosul that killed scores of civilians this month.

But the commander, Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, indicated that an investigation would also examine whether the attack might have set off a larger blast from explosives set by militants inside the building or nearby.

It was the fullest acceptance of responsibility by an American commander since the March 17 airstrike.

''My initial assessment is that we probably had a role in these casualties,'' said General Townsend, who commands the American-led task force that is fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. But he asserted that ''the munition that we used should not have collapsed an entire building.''

''That is something we have got to figure out,'' he added.

With an increase in reports of civilian casualties from the American bombing of Islamic State targets in Iraq and Syria, some human rights groups have questioned whether the rules of engagement have been loosened since President Trump took office.

Pentagon officials said this week that the rules had not changed. But General Townsend said on Tuesday that he had won approval for ''minor adjustments'' to rules for the use of combat power, although he insisted they were not a factor in the Mosul attack.

General Townsend acknowledged, however, that steps had been taken to speed up the process of providing air power to support Iraqi troops and their American Special Operations advisers at the leading edge of the offensive to recapture Mosul from the Islamic State. The goal, he said, was to ''decentralize'' decision-making.

General Townsend did not describe the changes in detail, but he cast them as a return to the military's standard offensive doctrine, in contrast to the ''very centralized'' approach he said was initially put in place after President Barack Obama sent American forces back to Iraq to combat the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

Maj. Gen. Maan al-Saadi, an Iraqi special forces commander, has said that his men called in a coalition airstrike to take out snipers on the roofs of three houses in a Mosul neighborhood called Mosul Jidideh. The Iraqi forces, General Saadi said, were unaware that at least some of the houses were filled with civilians.

General Townsend said he did not have information on the Iraqi commander's specific role, but explained that the United States had been training Iraqi military officers how to call in airstrikes that are carried out by Iraqi aircraft.

Any American airstrike requested by the Iraqis, General Townsend said, would need to be approved by American officers.

''If he said his guy was calling for fire, he could have been,'' he said. ''Now how that works is that they don't call directly to a U.S. fighter overhead and suddenly a U.S. fighter is rolling in on their grid coordinates.''

Iraqi forces have been eager for the help of American air power as they take on the toughest phase of the more than five-month battle to retake Mosul. American officials have said that 500 Iraqi troops were killed and about 3,000 wounded in taking the eastern half of the city.

General Townsend said the battle for the western half of the city was even more difficult because of what he called its ''claustrophobically close terrain'' of narrow streets and buildings. He repeated several times that the house-to-house fighting was the most intense urban combat since World War II.

Adding to the challenge is a factor he did not mention: the decision by Iraq's governments to urge Mosul's residents to shelter in place instead of trying to flee. When American troops retook Falluja in 2004, the fierce urban fighting took place in a city that had already been abandoned by most civilians.

Though the Iraqis are doing the main fighting on the ground in Mosul, American and coalition forces have been playing an essential role.

United States Army Paladin howitzers have been firing rounds into Mosul from their positions outside the city. Task Force Thor, which is based at Qayyarah West Airfield 40 miles south of Mosul, has been firing Himars satellite-guided rockets into the city. American Apache attack helicopters have added to the firepower.

This year, the United States increased the number of soldiers who have been advising Iraqi troops as they have pushed into the city. While the mission of the advisers is not to directly engage in combat, many are in harm's way as they advise Iraqi units carrying out the fight.

On Monday, American military officials said that two infantry companies from the 82nd Airborne Division were being sent to help protect those United States advisers and that a ''route clearance'' platoon was also being deployed to clear away roadside bombs. Together, the deployment adds about 240 troops to the mission.

The troop cap that the Obama administration established for the operation in Iraq -- what the Pentagon calls the ''force manning level''-- is 5,260.

But that formal limit, which the Trump administration is likely to eliminate, does not count temporary deployments. The actual number of troops in Iraq is certainly higher.

With more American forces in Iraq, and more United States advisers near the front lines, the need for timely airstrikes is much greater.

Brig. Gen. Matthew C. Isler, an Air Force officer who serves as deputy to General Townsend, is in charge of the investigation into the Mosul airstrike. A team of American experts has visited the site to collect evidence to determine what caused the significant loss of civilian life.

American officials said they were investigating a number of possibilities, including whether the militants herded the civilians into the building to use as human shields; whether the building was rigged with explosives; or whether a nearby car bomb exploded.

''My initial impression is the enemy had a hand in this, and there's also a fair chance that our strike had some role in it,'' General Townsend said in a briefing broadcast to the Pentagon from Iraq. ''I think it's probably going to play out to be some sort of combination. But you know what, I can't really say for sure, and we've just got to let the investigation play out.''

General Townsend said the results of the investigation would be reported publicly, ''unlike our enemy.''

While General Townsend acknowledged an American role in the Mosul strike, he said the allegations that the United States had bombed a school full of refugees in Syria were not credible.

That airstrike, which has garnered considerable attention, occurred during an operation in which American-backed Syrian fighters were trying to seal off the western approaches to Raqqa, the Islamic State's self-proclaimed capital. But General Townsend said that the evidence he had seen indicated that it was about 30 Islamic State fighters who were killed in that attack.

''I think that was a clean strike,'' he said.

He also dismissed reports, publicized by the Islamic State, that an American airstrike had endangered the Tabqa Dam west of Raqqa, saying that the structure was not in imminent danger.

''If something happens to the Tabqa Dam, it will be at the hands of ISIS, not the coalition,'' he said.

Still, the reports of desperate civilians in Mosul prompted Zeid Ra'ad al-Hussein, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, to urge on Tuesday that the American-led coalition reconsider its tactics.

The United Nations has said that at least 61 people were killed in the March 17 strike in Mosul. Amnesty International said as many as 150 might have died.

''The fact that Iraqi authorities repeatedly advised civilians to remain at home, instead of fleeing the area, indicates that coalition forces should have known that these strikes were likely to result in a significant number of civilian casualties,'' Donatella Rovera of Amnesty International said in a statement.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Michael R. Gordon on Twitter @gordonnyt .

Document NYTF000020170329ed3t0005n



World; Middle East
Engulfed in Battle, Mosul Civilians Run for Their Lives

Photographs and Text by IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES 
1,716 words
28 March 2017
16:27
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The photojournalist Ivor Prickett spent three weeks documenting the battlefront and humanitarian crisis in west Mosul.

The war to drive the Islamic State from its last strongholds in western Mosul has come to this: With every advance by Iraqi forces, every missile rained down by coalition aircraft, a flood of Iraqi civilians hits the streets.

It is no longer a question of waiting between salvos —here are few, if any, breaks that make it obvious when to run, so the people of Mosul are simply running whenever they can.

As we traveled with Iraqi special forces deep in western Mosul last week, in the mostly residential Mosul Jidideh neighborhood, we saw desperate families start out right at daybreak. Families carried their young children and propped up their aging relatives, and they all moved as quickly as they could along streets where the sounds of battle were all too close: a cacophony of gunfire, the dull thud of mortar rounds, the deafening roar of Islamic State car bombs and American airstrikes.

Nearly everyone frantically asked which way was safe for them to flee. One route forced people to file past a destroyed building on the corner of the square where fighters with the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, had been targeted the night before. One of the militants lay visible in the rubble near the crowd of silent refugees, his crumpled body almost camouflaged among the stone and twisted metal.

In their state of anxious flight, many didn’ even notice the corpse. But occasionally, children would gawk in horror as they were whisked past by elder siblings and parents.

Around a half-million people are still thought to be trapped in an ever-shrinking area of the city along with an estimated 2,000 remaining Islamic State fighters. There, they are caught in a frightening crossfire. As Iraqi forces have advanced, American airstrikes have at times leveled entire blocks —ncluding the one in Mosul Jidideh this month that residents said left as many as 200 civilians dead. At the same time, the Islamic State fighters have used masses of civilians as human shields, and have been indiscriminate about sniper and mortar fire.

Near one position held by Iraqi forces, this woman screamed out in horror after the loss of her son in an ISIS mortar attack, right on her doorstep.

Nearby, neighbors loaded those wounded in the same attack into the back of a small truck, hoping to get them to a first-aid station.

The Islamic State’ seemingly endless supply of car bombs has taken a fearsome toll in the battle. As we moved with the Iraqi troops into the neighborhood of Shuhada, scenes of immense destruction and the acrid smell of explosives bore testament to the fierce battle that had taken place the day before between Iraqi special forces and the militants.

And then, another blast, close to us. This car bomb had actually failed to detonate after being abandoned by its driver. The explosion was from a coalition airstrike called in to remove it as a threat.

On the corner of a main square in Shuhada, we found an ISIS car bomb that had partly detonated. The front part of the armored vehicle was a burned-out mess, but the back was still loaded with explosive canisters.

The charred and severed body of a suicide car bomber whose vehicle had failed to fully detonate sat on the corner of an intersection beside his half-destroyed vehicle. Another body of an Islamic State fighter sat in the middle of the road, splayed out on a wooden cart.

With heavy ordnance going off all around, Iraq’ specialized counterterrorism forces have been tasked with painstakingly clearing neighborhoods like Mosul Jidideh.

The Islamic State is not giving up ground quickly, and seems to be able to mount counterattacks everywhere.

After one car bomb disabled two Iraqi special forces vehicles, ISIS snipers hidden nearby began shooting at the soldiers. Some Iraqi commandos raced up to the top of a tall building nearby, and it suddenly became a battle for the rooftops that lasted for hours.

Even with fighting all around them, many Mosul residents have heeded the government’ requests to stay home as long they can hold out. But after months of being trapped, most are in dire need of food and water. With the fighting still heavy, international groups have been unable to reach some of the worst off.

Government aid distribution is overseen by local militia fighters. They take place irregularly and very often descend into chaos as desperate people fight for bags of rice and sugar, as prices have skyrocketed over the past four months since the offensive began. Here, western Mosul residents begged for help at an aid distribution location in the Mamun neighborhood.

Even those who have been able to break away from the worst fighting find themselves in acute need, like this family waiting for help on the side of the road in Mamun.

The accounts of losses within families are grim. Mohammed Hamed, 5, and his sister Amina, 4, were hastily buried together in a shallow grave in the courtyard of a school in Mosul Jidideh. They were hurt at home by an airstrike that struck Islamic State positions at a nearby house, the family said, and died hours after the blast because the family was unable to reach medical help.

Friends and family members struggled to dig a hole big enough for their tiny bodies, interrupted by a sudden and terrifying new round of airstrikes nearby.

After the rushed burial, their mother, Amira, stood and waved at the grave, saying over and over: “oodbye, my children! Travel safely to God!”he family quickly set out for the safety of a camp outside the city.

Within Mosul Jidideh, the grinding nature of the fighting stood out. At every corner there seemed to be some fresh wreckage or rubble.

Behind the front line in the neighborhood, Iraqi fighters moved along devastated streets.

Seeking to cover clearing operations around them, Iraqi soldiers are always climbing, seeking the high ground of rooftops and corners.

In one area, special forces soldiers searched a house that had been used by Islamic State fighters up until the day before. A hole in the wall in the front garden led to the neighbors’ard next door, made so that the fighters could move through the area without being seen. Inside there was very little trace of the men who had lived there, except for some daggers, a large black baton and an ISIS flag hanging above a double bed in the master bedroom.

Even in places that seem cleared, snipers are a constant threat. This man was brought to a special forces outpost in Mosul Jidideh after being hit in the leg.

Some of the destruction carries the clear hallmark of the Islamic State’ heavy car-bombing campaign.

This man called out to his family after discovering that his father was among those killed in one attack.

The moments after those attacks are always fraught with anxiety. Is another bomb on the way? Will sniper fire or some heavier ground assault unfold now, as is often seen from the Islamic State? After the car-bombing, this Iraqi federal police officer ran toward the explosion to fight off any potential follow-up and look for survivors.

Last week, after all that had happened in Mosul Jidideh, Iraqi forces said they had nearly cleared the last pockets of Islamic State fighters from the neighborhood. But it is just one of many in western Mosul, and the toll here is staggering.

Even if a government triumph finally and permanently comes to this district, it will forever be the place where coalition airstrikes killed dozens of people seeking safety; where families left so many dead behind while fleeing the terror of ISIS; where victory looked like destruction.

Civilians lined up for aid distribution in the Mamun neighborhood of Mosul. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | Civilians passing the body of an Islamic State fighter. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | A grieving mother in western Mosul. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | Civilians being taken for treatment after a mortar strike. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | A coalition airstrike blew up a car bomb that had failed to explode. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | Iraqi special forces soldiers cleared the last pockets held by the Islamic State in Mosul Jidideh. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | An Iraqi special forces soldier fired on Islamic State positions from a rooftop in the Shuhada neighborhood. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | People waiting for aid in the Mamun neighborhood. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | A family in western Mosul who had fled their home in the city. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | The aftermath of fierce fighting between Iraqi special forces and the Islamic State in western Mosul. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | Iraqi special forces soldiers in western Mosul. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | An Iraqi soldier carried a rocket launcher to the roof of a house in the Shuhada neighborhood. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | A man who had been shot in the leg by an Islamic State sniper. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | A man who learned that his father had been killed in a suicide car bombing. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | An Iraqi federal police officer ran into the smoke after a suicide car bombing. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | An Iraqi soldier during an early morning operation in the Mosul Jidideh neighborhood. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | A vehicle that had failed to fully detonate sat at an intersection, unexploded gas canisters still in the trunk. | By IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES | Friends and family members dug a grave for Mohammed Hamed, 5, and his sister Amina, 4, in the courtyard of a school in western Mosul near the front line. | By IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES 

Document NYTFEED020170328ed3s004bm



world
Engulfed in Battle, Mosul Civilians Run for Their Lives

Photographs and Text by IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES 
1,449 words
28 March 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The photojournalist Ivor Prickett spent three weeks documenting the battlefront and humanitarian crisis in west Mosul.

The war to drive the Islamic State from its last strongholds in western Mosul has come to this: With every advance by Iraqi forces, every missile rained down by coalition aircraft, a flood of Iraqi civilians hits the streets.

It is no longer a question of waiting between salvos —here are few, if any, breaks that make it obvious when to run, so the people of Mosul are simply running whenever they can.

As we traveled with Iraqi special forces deep in western Mosul last week, in the mostly residential Mosul Jidideh neighborhood, we saw desperate families start out right at daybreak. Families carried their young children and propped up their aging relatives, and they all moved as quickly as they could along streets where the sounds of battle were all too close: a cacophony of gunfire, the dull thud of mortar rounds, the deafening roar of Islamic State car bombs and American airstrikes.

Nearly everyone frantically asked which way was safe for them to flee. One route forced people to file past a destroyed building on the corner of the square where fighters with the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL, had been targeted the night before. One of the militants lay visible in the rubble near the crowd of silent refugees, his crumpled body almost camouflaged among the stone and twisted metal.

In their state of anxious flight, many didn’ even notice the corpse. But occasionally, children would gawk in horror as they were whisked past by elder siblings and parents.

Around a half-million people are still thought to be trapped in an ever-shrinking area of the city along with an estimated 2,000 remaining Islamic State fighters. There, they are caught in a frightening crossfire. As Iraqi forces have advanced, American airstrikes have at times leveled entire blocks —ncluding the one in Mosul Jidideh this month that residents said left as many as 200 civilians dead. At the same time, the Islamic State fighters have used masses of civilians as human shields, and have been indiscriminate about sniper and mortar fire.

Near one position held by Iraqi forces, this woman screamed out in horror after the loss of her son in an ISIS mortar attack, right on her doorstep.

Nearby, neighbors loaded those wounded in the same attack into the back of a small truck, hoping to get them to a first-aid station.

The Islamic State’ seemingly endless supply of car bombs has taken a fearsome toll in the battle. As we moved with the Iraqi troops into the neighborhood of Shuhada, scenes of immense destruction and the acrid smell of explosives bore testament to the fierce battle that had taken place the day before between Iraqi special forces and the militants.

And then, another blast, close to us. This car bomb had actually failed to detonate after being abandoned by its driver. The explosion was from a coalition airstrike called in to remove it as a threat.

On the corner of a main square in Shuhada, we found an ISIS car bomb that had partly detonated. The front part of the armored vehicle was a burned-out mess, but the back was still loaded with explosive canisters.

The charred and severed body of a suicide car bomber whose vehicle had failed to fully detonate sat on the corner of an intersection beside his half-destroyed vehicle. Another body of an Islamic State fighter sat in the middle of the road, splayed out on a wooden cart.

With heavy ordnance going off all around, Iraq’ specialized counterterrorism forces have been tasked with painstakingly clearing neighborhoods like Mosul Jidideh.

The Islamic State is not giving up ground quickly, and seems to be able to mount counterattacks everywhere.

After one car bomb disabled two Iraqi special forces vehicles, ISIS snipers hidden nearby began shooting at the soldiers. Some Iraqi commandos raced up to the top of a tall building nearby, and it suddenly became a battle for the rooftops that lasted for hours.

Even with fighting all around them, many Mosul residents have heeded the government’ requests to stay home as long they can hold out. But after months of being trapped, most are in dire need of food and water. With the fighting still heavy, international groups have been unable to reach some of the worst off.

Government aid distribution is overseen by local militia fighters. They take place irregularly and very often descend into chaos as desperate people fight for bags of rice and sugar, as prices have skyrocketed over the past four months since the offensive began. Here, western Mosul residents begged for help at an aid distribution location in the Mamun neighborhood.

Even those who have been able to break away from the worst fighting find themselves in acute need, like this family waiting for help on the side of the road in Mamun.

The accounts of losses within families are grim. Mohammed Hamed, 5, and his sister Amina, 4, were hastily buried together in a shallow grave in the courtyard of a school in Mosul Jidideh. They were hurt at home by an airstrike that struck Islamic State positions at a nearby house, the family said, and died hours after the blast because the family was unable to reach medical help.

Friends and family members struggled to dig a hole big enough for their tiny bodies, interrupted by a sudden and terrifying new round of airstrikes nearby.

After the rushed burial, their mother, Amira, stood and waved at the grave, saying over and over: “oodbye, my children! Travel safely to God!”he family quickly set out for the safety of a camp outside the city.

Within Mosul Jidideh, the grinding nature of the fighting stood out. At every corner there seemed to be some fresh wreckage or rubble.

Behind the front line in the neighborhood, Iraqi fighters moved along devastated streets.

Seeking to cover clearing operations around them, Iraqi soldiers are always climbing, seeking the high ground of rooftops and corners.

In one area, special forces soldiers searched a house that had been used by Islamic State fighters up until the day before. A hole in the wall in the front garden led to the neighbors’ard next door, made so that the fighters could move through the area without being seen. Inside there was very little trace of the men who had lived there, except for some daggers, a large black baton and an ISIS flag hanging above a double bed in the master bedroom.

Even in places that seem cleared, snipers are a constant threat. This man was brought to a special forces outpost in Mosul Jidideh after being hit in the leg.

Some of the destruction carries the clear hallmark of the Islamic State’ heavy car-bombing campaign. This man called out to his family after discovering that his father was among those killed in one attack.

The moments after those attacks are always fraught with anxiety. Is another bomb on the way? Will sniper fire or some heavier ground assault unfold now, as is often seen from the Islamic State? After the car-bombing, this Iraqi federal police officer ran toward the explosion to fight off any potential follow-up and look for survivors.

Last week, after all that had happened in Mosul Jidideh, Iraqi forces said they had nearly cleared the last pockets of Islamic State fighters from the neighborhood. But it is just one of many in western Mosul, and the toll here is staggering.

Even if a government triumph finally and permanently comes to this district, it will forever be the place where coalition airstrikes killed dozens of people seeking safety; where families left so many dead behind while fleeing the terror of ISIS; where victory looked like destruction.

PHOTOS: Above, fierce fighting between Iraqi special forces and the Islamic State has decimated parts of western Mosul. Below, a man who had been shot in the leg by an ISIS sniper. (A8); Clockwise from top: Civilians in the Mamun neighborhood of Mosul lined up for government aid distribution, which takes place irregularly and often descends into chaos; an Iraqi soldier during an early-morning operation in the Mosul Jidideh neigh- borhood; a coalition airstrike blowing up a car bomb, a common weapon of the Is- lamic State, that had failed to explode and was abandoned by its driver. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A8-A9)

Document INHT000020170329ed3s0000d



U.S.; Politics
Right and Left: Partisan Writing You Shouldn’ Miss

By ANNA DUBENKO 
1,119 words
28 March 2017
22:28
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The political news cycle is fast, and keeping up can be overwhelming. Trying to find differing perspectives worth your time is even harder. That’ why we have scoured the internet for political writing from the right and left that you might not have seen.

We would love to hear your thoughts on this collection. Send your feedback to ourpicks@nytimes.com

_____

From the Right

•rom National Review:

“o claim that something is technically legal is not to say that it is appropriate.”

For Andrew McCarthy, the question is not whether it was legal to monitor President Trump or his associates during the campaign, but whether it was a political abuse of power. Read More »

_____

•rom The Weekly Standard:

“he distribution of benefits is deeply contrary to the principles of republican government.”

Jay Cost evaluates the Trump administration’ federal budget along moral and historical lines, arguing that the Founding Fathers would have balked at the ease with which modern administrations —oth Democratic and Republican —orrow money. Mr. Cost argues that high levels of debt betray the ideals of the Constitution and our moral obligation to future generations. Read more »

_____

•rom The American Spectator:

“...] is developing a work force for corporations what schools should be about?”

Emmett McGroarty and Jane Robbins, senior fellows at the American Principles Project, argue that the Common Core and other progressive education policies focus, incorrectly, on preparing students for industry. School should instead instill the tenets of “raditional, classical education”hat prepare students to be knowledgeable citizens. Read more »

_____

•rom Red State:

“...] the pre-existing conditions requirement is not some perk that we can keep while ditching the rest of Obamacare.”

Using a blog post by Senator Ted Cruz as a jumping-off point, a writer for Red State outlines the contours of a proposed bill for Republicans who have vowed to repeal the Affordable Care Act. It begins, appropriately, with some bitter pills to swallow. Read more »

_____

From The National Interest:

“t defies logic that if we have made a bad investment we must continue to do so.”

Amitai Etzioni, a professor of international relations at George Washington University, recommends that President Trump abandon the nation-building attempts of the two previous administrations and deny a request to send more troops into Afghanistan. Read more »

_____

From the Left

•rom The Intercept:

“ight fewer wars and for narrower reasons, but be more barbaric and criminal in prosecuting the ones that are fought.”

One should not mistake Mr. Trump’ “nti-interventionism”or “acifism,”lenn Greenwald warns. That distinction, according to Mr. Greenwald, helps to explain the precipitous increase in civilian casualties in the Middle East since Mr. Trump took office. Read more »

_____

•rom TruthDig:

“is policies haven’ sprung from thin air.”

Bill Blum traces a line from President Trump’ executive orders concerning immigration back to specific legislation from an unlikely predecessor: President Bill Clinton. Read more »

_____

•rom Salon:

“overnment will never run the way Silicon Valley runs because, by definition, democracy is messy.”

Now that Mr. Trump’ son-in-law, Jared Kushner, has been tapped to lead a “WAT team of strategic consultants”o reform the federal government, Simon Maloy reminds us of why we might not want the government to be more like a business. Read more »

_____

From In These Times:

“he fundamental failures of Obamacare stem from the law’ reliance on the private market.”

Miles Kampf-Lassin and Mr. Trump agree on one thing: Obamacare is going to get worse for millions of Americans. But according to Mr. Kampf-Lassin, the only way forward for Democrats after the failure of the Republican-proposed American Health Care Act is to embrace a single-payer system. Read more »

_____

And Finally: From the Center

•rom Politico:

“he demise of the Republican plan [...] could open the door for bipartisan efforts to rescue the individual market. Don’ laugh; it’ possible.”

Sometimes, you need a mediator to help you find common ground. That’ why, hoping to encourage bipartisan cooperation, Timothy Stoltzfus Jost, a former law professor and consumer representative to the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, identifies pieces of the American Health Care Act that could have earned support from moderate Democrats. Read more »

_____

•rom BuzzFeed:

“now your enemy and stop giving them ammunition.”

On this week’ “0 Minutes,”cott Pelley interviewed the pro-Trump blogger Mike Cernovich for a segment about fake news. But Charlie Warzel writes that Mr. Pelley was out maneuvered by the far-right figure when the discussion turned to “lternate universes.”r. Warzel argues that reporters in traditional media must educate themselves about the new media ecosystem and not play into the hands of “he New Right media,” collective armed with its own facts and reality. Read more »

_____

•rom Washingtonian:

“art of Ham’ appeal is her commitment to ideology over party.”

Meet Mary Katherine Ham, a conservative pundit whose star has risen in recent months. The secret to her success? She’ rather persuade than entertain. Read more »

_____

From The Atlantic:

“ take no pride or pleasure in saying ‘ told you so.’”

In today’ political climate, it’ sometimes difficult to identify precisely where the “enter”s. That’ why we offer this piece by the Republican commentator David Frum with a bit of qualification. Here the former speechwriter for George W. Bush (who is also a staunch never-Trump-er, writing for the left-leaning Atlantic) speaks to members of his own party to explain how the refusal to accept universal health care as a right has led to a “epublican Waterloo.”Read more »

_____

* Right and Left: Partisan Writing You Shouldn’ Miss

President Trump on Monday at a discussion with women who own small businesses. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | Sixth-graders going over an assignment with their teacher in a news literacy class. | Yana Paskova for The New York Times | Gen. John Nicholson, commander of United States forces in Afghanistan, testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee in February. | Alex Wong/Getty Images | Iraqi fighters looked for bodies of civilians under the rubble on Monday after an airstrike against ISIS set off an explosion in Mosul. | Reuters | President Trump signing a series of bills on Monday. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | A patient recieving a blood pressure check. | Whitten Sabbatini for The New York Times | Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, taking questions from reporters in February. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | House Speaker Paul D. Ryan spoke to reporters last week about the withdrawal of the American Health Care Act. | Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170328ed3s007sl



The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
‘he Daily’ Two Views From Mosul

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
557 words
28 March 2017
11:48
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen to ‘he Daily’ On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

Eleven days ago, an entire city block in Mosul, Iraq, was demolished. In the week and a half since, the cause of that devastation has been murky, clouded by competing narratives of what happened on that day.

On today’ episode:

Confusion surrounds a devastating airstrike believed to have killed at least 200 civilians in Iraq’ last ISIS stronghold. We present two views of what happened. One, an unspoken change in strategy inside the Trump administration. The other, a push for this change from America’ partners in Iraq frustrated by the restraint of President Barack Obama.

New York Times reporters Tim Arango and Rukmini Callimachi make sense of the situation.

Background reading:

•r. Arango on the cost of the U.S.-\b ISIS\b0  battle in Mosul.

•What we know about the airstrike that might have killed hundreds in Mosul.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if that isn’ enough, we can even text.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

On your iPhone or iPad:

Open the preloaded app called “odcasts” it has a purple icon. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “he Daily.”

Once you’e on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “ubscribe”utton to have new episodes sent to your phone free.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

On your Android phone or tablet:

You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, senior producer; Andy Mills, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director; Pedro Rosado, studio manager.

Residents gather around the body of a man killed in Mosul in March. | Felipe Dana/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170328ed3s002jp



business
For Some Fliers, Electronics Ban Makes for a Bumpy Ride; Itineraries

By MARTHA C. WHITE 
1,316 words
27 March 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Although it went into effect only on Saturday,  a ban on electronic devices like laptops and tablets on certain overseas flights bound for the United States and Britain has already prompted business travelers to rethink their travel plans.

For travelers who frequently cross through the Middle East and North Africa, the choices put them between a rock and a hard place: They can check their devices and lose a day or more of productive work, as well as run the risk of damage or theft, or trade a nonstop flight on a high-end Persian Gulf carrier for connecting flights on one of the major American or European airlines, where amenities and leg room are likely to be skimpier.

The gulf carriers are scrambling to accommodate their most lucrative customers, but there is only so much they can do. They cannot, for example, accommodate travelers who work at companies that prohibit checking electronic devices for security reasons.

“here are a lot of policies out there that basically say you can’ be separated from your laptop,”aid Greeley Koch, executive director at the Association of Corporate Travel Executives.

Companies that deal with proprietary or sensitive data, including government contractors, often require that company devices remain with the employee at all times. These travelers will have to forgo the gulf airlines that fly directly to the United States and spend more time making connections and waiting out layovers in European cities.

“e’e going to see people shifting routes to get to other carriers,”aid Brian Jenkins, an aviation security expert at the RAND Corporation.

Airlines like Emirates, Etihad Airways and Qatar Airways, which in recent years have come to dominate parts of the long-haul market, stand to lose market share, especially among high-paying business travelers unwilling or unable to fly halfway around the world without their electronic devices.

Before the bans on devices took effect, some gulf carriers had taken steps to try to mitigate any falloff in business travel bookings. Emirates, Etihad Airways and Turkish Airlines established procedures allowing travelers to check laptops and tablets at the gate.

“ur aim is to ensure compliance with the new rules, while minimizing disruption to passenger flow and impact on customer experience,”Tim Clark, the president of Emirates, said in a statement. He added that the free offering “nables passengers, particularly those flying for business, to have the flexibility to use their devices until the last possible moment.”

Nikita Maruvanda, an internal consultant for General Electric who is based in Atlanta and described her travel schedule as “4/7,”aid it would be impossible to travel without her electronic devices on business trips.

In some cases, she said, her total flight time can be as long as 20 hours. “ have a laptop and an iPad for work, and we’e generally always working on our flight,”he said. “ou generally have a full workday on that flight.”

For a coming trip, Ms. Maruvanda said, she will probably choose a European carrier so she can work while en route. “ think now I’ just going to get a KLM flight,”he said, referring to the Dutch airline.

Industry experts predict this will become more common as long as the ban is in place. “his will impact people’ ability to travel nonstop,”aid Jeremy Quek, the air practice line lead of the Global Business Consulting division of American Express Global Business Travel.

Mr. Koch, of the corporate travel association, said he had heard from more than 100 of his members since the ban was announced. “t speaks to the level of concern that the travel managers and companies and travelers have about the device ban,”e said.

These concerns, Mr. Koch said, are twofold: the safety of travelers as well as the logistical headache of complying with the ban.

Mr. Quek said he had heard similar fears. “ight now, the conversation with clients is around getting clarity around the rules and the scope and knowing that it’ extremely fluid,”e said. “t’ a very real challenge.”

Part of the difficulty are the parameters of the ban, which prohibits in-cabin electronic devices on United States-bound flights from 10 airports in Muslim-majority nations, based on fears that terrorists could smuggle bombs aboard inside larger devices. Although it specifies that travelers are prohibited from taking devices larger than a mobile phone or smartphone into the cabin, it does not include dimensions.

“t’ a guideline,”aid Lisa Farbstein, a spokeswoman for the Transportation Security Administration. “t’ really a judgment on the part of the airline.”

For corporate travel managers overseeing a global work force, the other wrinkle is that Britain imposed a similar in-cabin electronics ban shortly after the United States acted, but the details, including affected airports and airlines, are different. The American ban affects direct flights to the United States from designated airports in Egypt, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates. The British ban covers all flights from six Mideast and North African nations: Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia and Turkey.

The inclusion of the gulf states is likely to be the biggest pain point for American business travelers. Some in the Middle East suggested that the decision had been prompted by a desire to assist domestic air carriers. In a statement, the Department of Homeland Security said the motivation was “errorists’ngoing interest in targeting commercial aviation.”

Naim Alkhouri, an American doctor who oversees part of an annual medical conference in Dubai, said leaving his own computer behind wasn’ an option. “ou need your laptop to work at the conference,”e said, and hours of down time on a flight would be more irritant than respite.

“t’ more about doing meaningful work instead of just waiting for 14 hours,”e said.

Dan McKone, head of the travel and transportation practice and global airline lead at the consulting firm LEK, said, “f you think about where a lot of money is made —n the front of the cabin —hat’ a huge blow to productivity.”

He added, “ was on a flight from Singapore to Boston, and roughly 50 percent of the cabin on the Dubai-to-Boston leg was on their laptop at some point in that journey.”

For travelers in professional services that bill by the hour, the prospect of a day’ work lost for every trip also means a significant loss of productivity.

Technology professionals in Silicon Valley or Seattle will also be inconvenienced. “he gulf carriers have a leading position in a very large and important market, which is the high-tech market between India and the U.S.,”aid Craig Jenks, the president of the industry consulting firm Airline/Aircraft Projects.

“he U.S.-India high-tech travel market will be motivated to go to Plan B, which will be to use U.S. carriers,”e added, along with legacy European carriers.

One final indignity for travelers dreading the thought of sharing a long-haul flight with children deprived of their electronic entertainment: Don’ count on blocking the din with noise-canceling headphones.

“n general, noise-canceling headphones are electronics,”s. Farbstein, of the T.S.A., said. While some small earbud styles may pass muster more readily than the bulky, over-the-ear models, there are no guarantees.

“gain,”he said, “hat would be a determination for the airline.”

PHOTO: Travelers arriving in January at Kennedy International Airport from Dubai, one of the countries included in a new electronics ban. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW KELLY/REUTERS)

* What Travelers Should Know About New Restrictions on Devices

* Devices Banned on Flights From 10 Countries Over \b ISIS\b0  Fears

* Crossing the Border? Here’ How to Safeguard Your Data From Searches

Document INHT000020170329ed3r0000v



world
At Site of Deaths, Our Reporters Find Cost of U.S.- ISIS  Battle

By TIM ARANGO 
1,926 words
27 March 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

MOSUL, Iraq —ozens of Iraqi civilians, some of them still alive and calling out for help, were buried for days under the rubble of their homes in western Mosul after American-led airstrikes flattened almost an entire city block.

At the site on Sunday, more than a week after the bombing runs, reporters for The New York Times saw weary survivors trying to find bodies in the wreckage. Iraqi officials said the final death toll could reach 200 or more, potentially making it one of the worst civilian tolls ever in an American military strike in Iraq.

The fighting against the Islamic State here has grown more urgent, with Iraqi officers saying the American-led coalition has been quicker to strike urban targets from the air with less time to weigh the risks for civilians. They say the change reflects a renewed push by the American military under the Trump administration to speed up the battle for Mosul.

American military officials insist there have been no changes to its rules of engagement that lessen the risk for civilians. They say the reports of greater civilian casualties have come at a time of more intense operations both by Iraqi forces in Mosul and by forces fighting the Islamic State in Syria. Starting with the surge into Mosul in December, they say, American military advisers have been given more authority to call in some airstrikes that do not have to be approved through headquarters.

Right now, the battle for Mosul is in its most dangerous phase for civilians, with the fight reaching into the twisting alleys and densely populated areas of the old city. Hundreds of thousands of civilians are pinned down here in tight quarters with Islamic State fighters who do not care if they live or die.

At the same time, more American Special Operations troops, some dressed in black uniforms and driving black vehicles —he colors of their Iraqi counterparts —re closer to the front lines. That way, in theory, the targeting of Islamic State fighters should become more precise for the coalition. Another 200 American soldiers, from the 82nd Airborne Division, are heading to Iraq to support that battle over the next few days.

Many Iraqi commanders welcome the more aggressive American role, saying that coalition officers were too risk averse under the Obama administration. Iraqis also say fighting for the dense, urban spaces of western Mosul requires more airpower, even if that means more civilians will die.

When those decisions turn tragic, it looks like this: a panorama of destruction in the neighborhood of Mosul Jidideh so vast one resident compared the destruction to that of Hiroshima, Japan, where the United States dropped an atomic bomb in World War II. There was a charred arm, wrapped in a piece of red fabric, poking from the rubble; rescue workers in red jump suits who wore face masks to avoid the stench, some with rifles slung over their shoulders, searched the wreckage for bodies.

One of the survivors, Omar Adnan, stood near his destroyed home on Sunday and held up a white sheet of paper with 27 names of his extended family members, either dead or missing, written in blue ink.

Nearby were two men. One of them, Ashraf Mohammed, said, “ lost all of my family except this guy, my brother.”

The civilian deaths have not been limited to the battle for Mosul, which is about 220 miles north of Baghdad. Across large areas of Syria and Iraq, more American ground troops are being committed to the fight, and more American airstrikes are being ordered. In Syria, the battle has intensified in large part around Raqqa, the Islamic State’ declared capital. The campaigns in both countries intend to deprive the Islamic State of its biggest cities, while keeping pressure on the group across its holdings.

Allegations of civilian casualties in both countries from American-led airstrikes have increased so much in recent months that, for the first time, the number of coalition strikes affecting civilians has surpassed those carried out by Russia in Syria, according to Airwars, a monitoring organization based in London that tracks international airstrikes and their effect on civilians.

The group said the increase in reported civilian deaths began under President Barack Obama and accelerated after President Trump took office in January.

American officials have confirmed that the coalition conducted airstrikes in Mosul Jidideh on March 17 and that they are investigating whether it was to blame for the dozens of deaths there. They insist that they are doing everything they can to protect civilian lives while pushing the fight in Mosul.

Jim Mattis, the Defense secretary, told reporters at the Pentagon on Monday that military leaders “re keenly aware that every battlefield where an enemy hides behind women and children”ould lead to civilian casualties. “e go out of our way to always do everything humanly possible to reduce loss of life or injury among innocent people,”e said.

The east side of Mosul, a city of 1.8 million that is Iraq’ second largest, was mostly secured by Iraqi forces in January. Much of it remained intact, and everyday life resumed. But on the west, the fight has become more brutal, with sections that look like moonscapes.

Maj. Gen. Maan al-Saadi, an Iraqi special forces commander, said his men had called in the American airstrikes that caused the civilian deaths, adding of the victims, “e feel sad for them.”

But he called the episode an unfortunate outcome in a nasty war. He said that Iraqi forces had lost thousands of men fighting the Islamic State, and that to lose so many civilians in a single attack “n return for liberating the entire city of Mosul — think it is a normal thing.”

“his is a war, and mistakes can happen, and there can be losses,”e said. “ut we are fighting the most dangerous terrorist organization in the world, with huge, unprecedented support from the international coalition.”

Gen. Ali Jamil, an intelligence officer with the Iraqi special forces, said he had been fighting the Islamic State for more than two years with the support of American air power.

“ have not seen such a quick response with high coordination from the coalition as I am seeing now,”e said. Before, when Iraqis requested airstrikes, he said, “here used to be a delay, or no response sometimes, on the excuse of checking the location or looking for civilians.”

On Sunday, a bulldozer pushed debris so rescuers could reach bodies. When one body was found, a man nearby identified it as that of his nephew, and another man wrote the name down in a leather-bound notebook. The body was then zipped up in a blue plastic bag and placed inside a garage alongside others. Many of the dead had already been buried in the gardens of homes that were only partially destroyed.

Residents who were in the neighborhood during the fighting suggested that there had been every reason to believe the area was filled with civilians at the time of the airstrikes —specially because the Iraqi government and its American allies had dropped leaflets asking civilians to remain in their homes rather than risk fleeing into the middle of the battle.

But the battle has come to them now.

As the fight for this west Mosul neighborhood raged 10 days ago, Islamic State fighters were dashing between homes across courtyards and passing through holes punched in concrete walls that allowed them to move their positions without showing themselves on the streets. Advancing Iraqi soldiers, who called in the airstrikes, were in earshot of civilians.

“hey were very close,”aid Mubishar Thanoon, a resident in his late 30s, standing on Sunday at the bedside of his brother, who was wounded in the attack, at a hospital in Erbil, the capital of the autonomous Kurdish region. “ was hearing their voices. They knew exactly that we were there.”

Another man, Ziad Suleyman, 27, said he could see an Iraqi special forces sniper on a nearby building, who was wearing a baseball cap and ear muffs and communicated with him using hand signals. “e was waving to me,”aid Mr. Suleyman, also at the Erbil hospital, where he was visiting a wounded relative. “ was seeing him, he was seeing us.”

Residents and Iraqi officers said that Islamic State fighters, some speaking Russian, according to residents, had taken sniper positions on the rooftops of homes, pinning down some advancing Iraqi forces. Hundreds of residents, trying to escape indiscriminate artillery and rocket fire and fearful of airstrikes, took refuge in basements.

It was there that they died, from airstrikes targeting the snipers that caused entire buildings to collapse, survivors recounted.

“ot all of the houses had Daesh on the roof,”aid Ali Abdulghani, a resident of the neighborhood, using another name for Islamic State fighters. “hy, just because of one Daesh, kill everyone?”

American military officials have said that their investigation so far has found that one building collapsed days after the strikes in the neighborhood, raising the possibility that the Islamic State blew up the building after the bombing runs, killing many civilians.

In interviews, survivors and local residents dismissed that, saying airstrikes brought the buildings down. Survivors and Iraqi officers said that fighting raged in the neighborhood for days after the strikes, delaying the arrival of rescuers.

A few among the lucky are now lying, injured but alive, in hospital beds in Erbil, about 50 miles east of Mosul.

Mr. Thanoon’ brother, Ali, was one of them. He survived days under the wreckage, emerging with a broken arm and many cuts and bruises. He recalled lying under the rubble never thinking he would die there, and speaking to another man nearby, who did not survive.

“t was a conversation between two dying men,”e said.

He said he had hid in a basement not because Islamic State fighters forced him to, but because of the “error and fear”f artillery and airstrikes.

“or me and my family, we thought this was the safest place,”e said.

When asked what happened to his family, Ali’ brother quickly changed the subject.

A few moments later, in the hallway outside the room, Mr. Thanoon confided that he had not yet told his brother, who he said was delirious from his ordeal and from painkillers, that his family —is two wives, four daughters, two sons and two grandchildren —ad all been killed.

Reporting was contributed by Falih Hassan from Mosul; Helene Cooper and Michael R. Gordon from Washington; and Anne Barnard from Beirut, Lebanon.

Correction: March 27, 2017, Monday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misspelled the family name of a resident of Mosul who was quoted about Islamic State snipers in the city. He is Ali Abdulghani, not Adbulghani.

PHOTOS: Iraqi forces and Islamic State militants clashed Monday in Mosul. New York Times reporters were on the ground in the city. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KHALID AL-MOUSILY/REUTERS) (A1); A man stood Friday near bodies recovered from a house that was destroyed in the Mosul Jidideh neighborhood. American-led strikes hit the area this month.; Iraqis on Friday near a destroyed home in the Mosul Jidideh neighborhood. A resident compared the destruction to that of Hiroshima, Japan, after the United States dropped an atomic bomb. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY FELIPE DANA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A7)

Document INHT000020170328ed3r0000n



FIRST WORDS
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
Second Nature

By BEVERLY GAGE 
1,628 words
26 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Conservatives have long complained that ''I don't recognize my country anymore.'' In Trump's America, though, it's liberals who see something insufficiently, well, American. Issues once assumed to be settled -- the desirability of racial tolerance, a general preference for democratic processes -- now appear, suddenly and ominously, to be up for debate. For many, this has created a sense of rupture, a disconnect between what they had assumed would be happening at this moment in history and what is actually taking place -- as if the 2016 election shifted the nation into some dystopian reality that was never meant to be.

This, at least, is the feeling reflected in the growing popularity of a word once used to browbeat liberals and leftists. Today's White House, according to Trump's critics, is not only wrongheaded or meanspirited but ''un-American.''

''America is a nation of immigrants,'' Bruce Springsteen declared from a stage in Australia in the wake of Trump's first travel ban. ''And we find this antidemocratic and fundamentally un-American.'' When the White House introduced a revised version of the order earlier this month, the newly chosen Democratic National Committee chairman, Tom Perez, warned that ''this ban on Muslims is just as dangerous and un-American as the last one.'' Others have invoked the word to assail the president's name-calling, attacks on judges and contempt for the media. ''This White House does not seem to value an independent press,'' CNN 's Jake Tapper declared last month. ''There is a word for that line of thinking. The word is un-American.''

This line of attack remains just as popular on the right, and Trump staff members have been quick to use it. On the day after Trump's speech to Congress, Sebastian Gorka, a deputy assistant to the president, called for unwavering support of the president's initiatives on behalf of ''immigration crime'' victims: ''If you object to that, you are in favor of pain, in favor of tragedy and in favor of chaos,'' he told one interviewer, ''and that is un-American.'' The president himself has joined in, too. ''The real scandal here is that classified information is illegally given out by 'intelligence' like candy,'' he tweeted in mid-February, responding to accusations about his campaign's ties to Russia. ''Very un-American!''

The charge can come across as an empty one, ready to be attached to any given outrage. But its re-emergence reflects something far more serious about the state of national discourse. On the surface, ''un-American'' implies consensus: It carries a punch only when everybody agrees what ''American'' is. But the word has historically gained traction at moments when national consensus seems the most wobbly and uncertain. It signals an urgent desire to find something -- anything -- that Americans can still agree on.

For Trump's critics, it is aspirational, pointing toward an American dream of liberty and equality that has never quite been realized on the ground. For the administration, the word is a way of designating insiders and outsiders, the righteous and the nonrighteous, those who deserve the privileges of citizenship and those who do not. Coming from the White House, it also carries an implied threat: Those who are ''un-American'' -- leakers, critics, reporters -- may need to be dealt with as ''enemies of the people,'' another worrisome Trump phrase.

To label something ''un-American'' is to imagine America as it should have been or as it might yet be but not as it ever was. Far from bringing back a meaningless insult, the revival of the charge suggests that something very big is now at stake: not only the direction of federal policy or the partisan balance of power but America's identity as a nation.

In his farewell speech, Barack Obama paid homage to ''the beating heart of our American idea,'' describing how the promise of ''freedom to chase our individual dreams'' has long inspired the nation's citizens. This notion -- that America is not simply another nation-state but an ''idea'' -- is itself the big American idea, the ''beating heart'' of what's known as American exceptionalism. It's what allows Americans to label certain things un-American even when those things have existed for centuries within the territorial boundaries of the United States. ''America is capable of being un-American,'' lamented Richard Cahan, one of the authors of a recent book on Japanese internment -- a seemingly absurd claim but, within the exceptionalist tradition, an entirely plausible one.

Americans have been denouncing each other in this manner almost since the dawn of the republic. By the early 20th century, the accusation encompassed a vast and incoherent range of political convictions. ''Americans are very fond of classing as un-American anything they don't like,'' The St. Louis Post-Dispatch complained in 1909, ticking off tariffs and trusts, prohibition and social drinking, boycotts and ''the intimidation of workingmen'' as just a few of the positions declared ''un-American'' by their opponents.

The First World War only raised the stakes of this rhetorical clash. In an attempt to mobilize a divided country, President Woodrow Wilson called for ''100 percent Americanism,'' effectively marginalizing anyone not 100 percent on board with the war effort -- including thousands of German immigrants (whose noncitizenship made them candidates for internment) and antiwar dissenters like the Socialist leader Eugene Debs (who was sentenced to 10 years in prison under Wilson's new Espionage Act). After the war, the impulse to enforce ''Americanism'' helped to justify deportation raids and the rapid growth of the Ku Klux Klan. By 1924, the same impulse had yielded the nation's first comprehensive immigration law, which largely banned immigrants from Asia, Africa and the Middle East and restricted entry from the heavily Catholic and Jewish countries of southern and eastern Europe.

Throughout these years, the burgeoning civil liberties movement clung to ''un-American'' as a useful critique, insisting that restrictive speech and immigration laws violated essential American principles. By the 1930s, though, ''un-American'' had begun to harden as a language of repression, not resistance. In 1938, the House of Representatives created its infamous Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC). After brief forays into investigating domestic fascism, the committee focused almost exclusively on American communists, deemed dangerous both for their suspected ties to the Soviet Union and for their ''un-American'' ideas about labor rights and racial equality.

The committee did target a few suspected spies, but HUAC's tribunals served primarily to decimate the American left, creating an atmosphere in which communists and noncommunists alike feared expressing their political opinions. Even at the height of this conflict, though, a few dissenters held on to an alternate view. By 1948, one F.B.I. memo noted, some Americans were starting to see ''the House Committee on Un-American Activities as being un-American, itself.''

For today's Democratic leadership, this viewpoint appears to hold considerable appeal. In her now-notorious 2013 speech at Goldman Sachs , Hillary Clinton warned against demagogues who ''play on people's fears'' to promote their ''backward-looking'' agenda. ''They have to be rejected,'' she declared, ''because they are fundamentally un-American.'' Two years later, Obama made a speech championing the children of undocumented immigrants: ''When I hear folks talking as if somehow these kids are different than my kids or less worthy in the eyes of God, that somehow they are less worthy of our respect and consideration and care, I think that's un-American,'' he said. ''I think we should do better, because that's how America was made.''

The problem, of course, is that this is not how America was made. As a point of strategy, it may behoove Democrats to embrace patriotic or nationalistic language -- to insist that there is more than one way to make America great. As a matter of history, however, this tends to obscure the bitter and enduring conflicts of the past. During election season, many Democrats apparently believed their own story, assuming that Americans were too dedicated to the expansion of liberty to elect Donald Trump . His victory is a reminder that, despite the country's fondness for aspirational rhetoric, our illiberal traditions have serious staying power, too.

Today's Republicans seem to recognize this perfectly well. In the past three years, Attorney General Jeff Sessions has praised the 1924 immigration act as a matter of national self-preservation. Newt Gingrich has called for a revival of HUAC to contend with ISIS sympathizers. And the Ku Klux Klan and American fascist movements have experienced levels of attention and influence not seen since before World War II. Trump complains that he is being subjected to ''witch hunts'' and ''McCarthyism'' but has advocated policies -- like a ''registry'' for Muslims -- that hark back to the list-making and name-naming of the HUAC era.

For the president's opponents, it may be comforting to believe that such policies are un-American. But as the editors of The St. Louis Post-Dispatch noted more than a century ago, ''the things we hurry to denounce as un-American'' are often ''peculiarly and distinctly American.''

''A better and broader view,'' they concluded, ''seems to be that these problems are of our own creation, and are to be solved only by ourselves.''

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Beverly Gage is a professor of American political history at Yale. She is the author of ''The Day Wall Street Exploded: A Story of America in Its First Age of Terror'' and is currently writing a biography of the former F.B.I. director J. Edgar Hoover.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY DEREK BRAHNEY) (MM12) 

Document NYTF000020170326ed3q0007s



Briefing
Health Care, London, Mosul: Your Weekend Briefing

By RICK ROJAS and ANDREW HINDERAKER 
1,269 words
26 March 2017
12:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Here are the week’ top stories, and a look ahead.

1. Republican infighting has led to the biggest defeat yet for President Trump’ young administration.

The G.O.P. plan to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act collapsed as the House leaders pulled the legislation in the face of a revolt among Republicans. The decision exposed the civil war within the party and raised questions about the consequences for the Trump administration’ aggressive agenda and next year’ midterm elections.

The president, in a telephone interview, argued that the situation would turn out in his favor. “he best thing that could happen is exactly what happened —atch,”e said.

His administration also granted a construction permit for the Keystone XL pipeline, reversing the Obama administration’ policy.

_____

2. London suffered its most serious terrorist attack in more than 10 years.

Investigators have been trying to learn how a 52-year-old former English teacher and Muslim convert was set on the path of extremism and whether others were involved in planning his attack.

He plowed a sport-utility vehicle into a group of pedestrians on a bridge outside Parliament on Wednesday, then got out wielding a knife. He killed four people and injured dozens before being fatally shot.

_____

3. The U.S.-led military coalition in Iraq confirmed that scores of civilians were killed at the site of recent airstrikes in Mosul, the Islamic State’ last stronghold in Iraq.

But the deaths occurred a few days after the strikes, they said, when a targeted building fell. They are trying to determine whether the collapse was caused by the strikes —r perhaps by an ISIS bomb.

U.S. officials said a surge of reported civilian deaths from strikes in Iraq and Syria reflect the intensified campaign against ISIS, not a change to strict rules of engagement.

_____

4. “hy are you doing this? What are you doing?”

Those were among the last words of Timothy Caughman, a 66-year-old New Yorker who lost his life in one of the week’ notably troubling episodes.

He was scavenging for cans when, the authorities say, he was killed by this sword-wielding 28-year-old white man who had come from Baltimore on a mission to kill black men in the most public way possible.

_____

5. Senate Democrats are vowing to filibuster the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Neil Gorsuch, whose confirmation hearings ended on Thursday.

Republican leaders have accused Democrats of using “bstructionist tactics”o thwart a vote.

Last year, the Republicans refused to consider President Barack Obama’ nominee to replace Antonin Scalia, Judge Merrick Garland.

_____

6 . Landmark internet privacy protections are nearly certain to be dismantled.

Within days, the House is expected to pass a measure that the Senate approved last week. It would allow internet service providers to track and share customers’rowsing and app activity without obtaining their permission.

Republican supporters of the legislation said the regulations, created during the final days of the Obama administration, were onerous and stifled innovation.

_____

7. For a year, our reporters have been following Syrian refugee families and the Canadians who have helped them resettle in Toronto. Now, in Month 13, thesponsors are trying to let go.

The everyday Canadians who stepped up to help are stumbling, as are the Syrian families trying to go forward on their own. “he honeymoon is over,”aid one sponsor, a retired teacher.

_____

8 . Very good news for California: A wet winter has blanketed the ridges of the Sierra Nevada range with a remarkably thick snowpack, which is beyond welcome after years of drought.

The snowmelt will trickle down to irrigate crops, fill glasses and help sustain life in an arid state. Our collection of maps and photographs lets you share in the relief.

_____

9 . Arkansas’lans for the rapid-fire executions of eight inmates next month have hit an snag.

State law requires at least six witnesses to an execution, as a guarantee of proper procedures. Coming up with enough for all eight cases, scheduled over just 10 days, isn’ easy.

The state corrections director has had to begin personally seeking volunteers.

_____

1 0 . “oney.”

That’ what the comedian Dave Chappelle said when Jimmy Kimmel asked why he decided to end a 13-year gap between standup specials with not one, but two last week. (Netflix reportedly paid him $60 million.)

Our critic said the specials showed that the long-absent Mr. Chappelle had changed: He “ot only has a new kind of gravitas, but he has also embraced his status as an older comic with mature worries, like schools for his kids and growing old with his wife.”

_____

11. Odds are your bracket has bust or is on the brink of it at this point. Even so, N.C.A.A. basketball is rolling on toward the Final Four next weekend.

In the men’ tournament, Gonzaga will be there for the first time, and Oregon for the first time since 1939. The last two spots will be decided today: Florida takes on South Carolina (2:20 p.m. Eastern on CBS), and top-seeded North Carolina faces Kentucky (5:05 p.m. on CBS).

In the women’ tournament, it’l be UConn against Oregon on Monday. For the other three spots, top-seeded Notre Dame faces No. 2 Stanford today (12 p.m. on ESPN) and No. 1 Baylor faces second-seeded Mississippi State (7:30 p.m. on ESPN). Florida State will play South Carolina on Monday.

_____

12. Think you’e having a rough morning? As hard as getting out of bed on a Sunday may seem, it’ nothing compared to what our science writer found about when animals rouse from the torpor of hibernation.

For instance, the black bear goes through weeks of feeling lethargic, eating bugs and plants before building up an appetite for salmon.

But perhaps there’ one thing to envy: The bears wake up having shed up to a third of their body weight.

____

13. In other bear news , Bao Bao, the 3-year-old panda born at the National Zoo in Washington, stepped out on Friday for her first public appearance at her new home in China.

When it comes to cuteness, if there is anything than can rival a young panda playing and climbing, it might be the children who dressed as pandas to celebrate Bao Bao’ debut at the Dujiangyan base of the China Conservation and Research Center for the Giant Panda in Sichuan Province.

Have a great week.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Weekend Briefing is published Sundays at 6 a.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Evening Briefing, weeknights at 6 p.m. Eastern.

Want to look back? Here’ Friday’ Evening Briefing.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

* London, Donald Trump, Keystone Pipeline: Your Evening Briefing

Al Drago/The New York Times | Sergey Ponomarev for The New York Times | Felipe Dana/Associated Press | Pool photo by Steven Hirsch | Eric Thayer for The New York Times | Todd Heisler/The New York Times | Damon Winter/The New York Times | Jim Wilson/The New York Times | Danny Johnston/Associated Press | Lester Cohen/Netflix | Sue Ogrocki/Associated Press | Jim Wilson/The New York Times | Gilles Sabriéor The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170326ed3q00105



EDITORIALS
Editorial Desk; SECTSR
Congress's Duty in the War With  ISIS 

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
659 words
26 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

On the verge of driving the Islamic State out of Mosul, once Iraq's second-largest city, the United States and its allies are beginning a push to recapture Raqqa, the Syrian city that is the de facto capital of the self-declared caliphate.

Hundreds of Syrian rebels and their American military advisers, backed by American artillery and attack helicopters, have started shutting down the western approaches to the city. There is talk of reinforcing the roughly 900 American troops who are now in the country. Instead of conducting airstrikes and relying on Syrian and Kurdish forces for ground operations, as they have done for months, the Americans are now involved with tanks and troops, a more direct and far riskier role.

But as the American military is doing its job, Congress is refusing to do its duty. Nearly three years into the war against ISIS, lawmakers have ducked their constitutional responsibility for making war by not passing legislation authorizing the anti-ISIS fight. This is not merely a bureaucratic issue. While the president has the power to order troops into battle, the founders were adamant about ensuring that only Congress could commit the nation to protracted overseas military actions.

Since President Obama began the fight against ISIS in 2014, the Pentagon has operated under the 2001 authorization for the use of military force that was passed after Al Qaeda's 9/11 attacks. But that justification is of questionable legality because ISIS did not exist when the authorization was approved.

The United States can claim a legal basis for its involvement in Iraq because Baghdad sought American help, which includes airstrikes, drones and thousands of troops, some of whom trained Iraqi units and others who are advisers now positioned close to the fighting. But there has been no such request from the Syrian government, which believes that a U.S.-led attack on Raqqa would be illegitimate unless it were coordinated with Damascus, the chief Syrian negotiator to peace talks in Geneva, Bashar Ja'afari, said on Friday. Such coordination is unlikely, given how little the Pentagon thinks of President Bashar al-Assad and his Russian backers.

Past efforts to enact a new ISIS-related authorization of military force, by Senator Tim Kaine, a Virginia Democrat, and others, have been stymied because of congressional fecklessness. But Mr. Kaine is quietly soliciting support for a new proposal. The issue received fresh attention last week when Senator Tom Udall, a New Mexico Democrat, told Defense Secretary Jim Mattis that it could be argued that the United States had ''effectively invaded northern Syria, violating the sovereignty of a country in the Middle East.''

Mr. Mattis replied that because ISIS had basically erased the border between Iraq and Syria, the United States could not ''draw that imaginary line in the midst of an enemy'' and say it's safe on one side. Even so, he said he would ''take no issue'' if Congress passed a new authorization, viewing it as a ''statement of the American people's resolve'' to fight ISIS.

More than just a political endorsement of the troops, however, a new authorization of force could make Congress seriously debate how the rest of the war against ISIS will be fought, and to consider a crucial decision the administration must make soon on whether to arm Syrian Kurds for the Raqqa fight and risk alienating Turkey, a NATO ally.

Congressional inaction may invite an even bigger problem. The Trump administration intends to bring future ISIS detainees to the Guantáamo Bay prison. Once that happens, as the former Bush administration lawyer Jack Goldsmith wrote on the Lawfare blog, court challenges could lead to findings that the war against ISIS is unlawful.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY BRIAN STAUFFER) 

Document NYTF000020170326ed3q0009f



BITS
Business/Financial Desk; SECT
Farhad's and Mike's Week in Tech: YouTube's Problematic Advertising

By FARHAD MANJOO and MIKE ISAAC 
1,141 words
26 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week's news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.

Farhad: Hey Mike, how are you? What a week of news it was. There was lots of serious, deep stuff--terrorism, counterintelligence, a farewell for a genius -- but there were some pretty fun moments, too.

At one point, for instance, President Trump got into a big rig and honked its horn a couple of times, really putting all of his effort into it. It looked quite satisfying, to tell the truth. Next time I have a hard day at the office, I'm going to go look for a big truck.

Mike: Remember when you were a little kid in the back seat of your parents' car, and every time you passed a truck on the highway you did the ''pull-the-chain horn honking'' hand signal at the driver? This was like that, but with a guy who has control of our nuclear arsenal. Frankly, I feel good about it.

Farhad: Thank you for that reminder. O.K., let's talk tech.

Let's start with Washington. The Senate passed a bill this week to overturn Obama-era broadband privacy rules.

Under rules created last October by the Federal Communications Commission, Verizon, Comcast, AT&T and other broadband providers had to ask your permission to track your online behavior to sell for advertising purposes. On a party-line vote, Republicans in the Senate decided that was too onerous. If the measure passes the House and gets President Trump's signature, broadband companies will be free to track you without your permission.

Mike: Um, this sounds ... bad?

Farhad: Why is it a good idea to let broadband oligopolies automatically track people's browsing behavior? I don't think consumers want this, and I haven't heard a single rational reason for removing the rules other than the cult of deregulation. Also, I feel bad for the N.S.A. analyst who has to pore over your web history.

Mike: My guess is that a senator defending this would parrot a talking point from one of the companies advocating for this overturning. So something like, ''Look, if we let them track you that means you'll receive more relevant advertising rather than bad ads. That's a good thing, right?'' That's usually the message these companies give when you go into your settings and turn on the ''do not track'' feature.

This whole thing is clearly in no way justifiable in the name of consumer protection. The reason there isn't more outrage about this, in my opinion, is that it's far too technical of an issue for normal people to get up in arms about unless translated into plain English and publicized.

Farhad: Speaking of policy directives with no clear purpose, the United States and Britain issued a surprise ban this week on electronics in the air. Under the new rule, passengers on U.S.-bound flights from many Middle Eastern cities are not allowed to carry any devices larger than a cellphone on board. Large electronics -- tablets, laptops, e-readers, basically everything you need to keep your sanity on a long flight -- must now be checked.

The American government says these rules are meant to counter a security threat and have nothing to do with President Trump's immigration policies. But given the White House's track record on banning stuff from other countries, lots of people were skeptical about the aims for this policy. If the government was simply trying to punish Middle Eastern airlines, making their long-haul flights far less comfortable would be a good way to go about it.

Mike: What's next?

Farhad: Well, several companies, including AT&T and Johnson & Johnson, announced that they'd be pulling down their ads from YouTube because of fears that their brands were appearing next to ISIS videos and other hate speech. It's not clear that this will amount to a big financial problem for YouTube and Google, its parent company, but these companies' fears do highlight a larger problem with the online ad business.

More and more ads are being sold ''programmatically'' -- that is, through financial algorithms run by computers rather than by human marketers determining the exact placement of any given spot. But it's not clear that the big programmatic companies, of which Google is the largest and most powerful, have perfected ways to keep prominent brands off some of the seedier corners of the internet.

Mike: I imagine Taco Bell probably doesn't want its brand new chalupas brought to viewers alongside alt-right Pepe frogs.

Farhad: I suspect this is a short-term problem. Google is good at search and mining content for meaning; it should be able to come up with a way, soon, to identify the worst parts of its network, and keep its biggest brands far away from that content. So as long as Google acts fast, I see this is a temporary blip. What do you think?

Mike: I have a different take on this. Here's the thing: This has been a problem ever since programmatic advertising existed in the first place. YouTube is great at taking down copyrighted content; it pioneered a system called ''ContentID,'' and it's been a huge savior in dealing with copyright concerns from content owners.

But how do you deal with ads that appear on videos that have racist or xenophobic content in them? Doesn't that get into the realm of sentiment analysis? Isn't that difficult to handle in the long term? I feel like that requires the aid of artificial intelligence, a field that C.E.O.s have admitted still needs help understanding very human issues.

The other side of this lies with the folks who have to write up the community guidelines around what constitutes racism and hate speech, an area into which companies like Google and Facebook have increasingly been drawn as reluctant arbiters of speech. That's the last place they want to be headed, but I think they won't have much of a choice.

My guess on how this plays out: A bunch of brands will yank ads. YouTube will come out with some rewritten policy on community guidelines that's somewhat more hardline against certain kinds of speech, but still relatively squishy. Brand advertisers will reinsert their ads on YouTube. The heat will go away. Life will steadily march on.

Speaking of that, I'm going to go enjoy life and find a truck horn to honk. See you.

Farhad: Honk on!

Document NYTF000020170326ed3q0009k



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S.-Led Coalition Confirms Airstrikes Hit Mosul Site Where Civilians Died

By MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT and TIM ARANGO; Michael S. Schmidt reported from Washington, and Tim Arango from Erbil, Iraq. Helene Cooper contributed reporting from Washington. 
844 words
26 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The American-led military coalition in Iraq said Saturday that an initial review of recent airstrikes in Mosul, the Islamic State's last stronghold in Iraq, had confirmed that the strikes hit a site where scores of civilians were killed.

The inquiry, military officials said, found that a building had collapsed a few days after strikes by American forces. United States officials are seeking to determine whether the airstrikes brought down the building, leaving many Iraqis dead, or the Islamic State used the strikes as an opportunity to detonate an explosive in the building.

The Pentagon had acknowledged on Friday that it was investigating reports that its airstrikes had caused deaths in Mosul. The next phase of the investigation, military officials said, is likely to take about three weeks.

The March 17 airstrikes -- which Iraqis said had led to the deaths of possibly 200 people -- could have produced among the highest civilian death tolls in an American air mission since the United States invaded Iraq in 2003.

The reports of heavy civilian casualties have come at a critical point in the military campaign to defeat the Islamic State. Iraqi officials said that the Trump administration had appeared to loosen restrictions on the rules of engagement, making it easier for the Iraqis to call in airstrikes. The Iraqis had been frustrated by the Obama administration's deliberate approach.

Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said that the rules had not been loosened.

The coalition said in a statement on Saturday that the airstrikes had been conducted ''at the request of the Iraqi security forces,'' and that it believed it was hitting Islamic State fighters and equipment.

''The coalition respects human life, which is why we are assisting our Iraqi partner forces in their effort to liberate their lands from ISIS brutality,'' the statement said. ''Our goal has always been for zero civilian casualties, but the coalition will not abandon our commitment to our Iraqi partners because of ISIS's inhuman tactics terrorizing civilians, using human shields, and fighting from protected sites such as schools, hospitals, religious sites and civilian neighborhoods.''

It added: ''Coalition forces work diligently and deliberately to be precise in our airstrikes. Coalition forces comply with the Law of Armed Conflict and take all reasonable precautions during the planning and execution of airstrikes to reduce the risk of harm to civilians.''

The civilian deaths occurred in the recently liberated neighborhood of Mosul Jidideh, and reports of mass casualties began emerging on Thursday, six days after the coalition said it had struck the area. That lapse may have been a result of delays in getting rescue workers to the area, some of whom traveled from Baghdad, 250 miles away.

Iraqis on Saturday continued to pull bodies from the rubble, as families held hastily arranged funerals for the victims, some of whom were buried in mass graves, shrouded by blue tarpaulins, according to photographs and videos shared on social media.

In one video, Basma Basim, the head of Mosul's provincial council, stood in front of destroyed buildings where the strikes occurred and said that dozens ''of innocent women, men, old men and children's bodies, are in these homes and shops behind me -- we couldn't save them.''

She added, ''All the men I met had a wife, sister or children buried under the rubble, at least 20 persons died for each.''

The battle for Mosul, now in its sixth month, has taken a heavy toll on civilians, with the Islamic State gathering civilians to use as human shields and, lately, with reports of growing numbers of deaths from airstrikes.

The Iraqi Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group, said in a statement that more than 3,800 civilians had been killed in the battle for western Mosul, which began in January. On the eastern side of the city, which was declared liberated in January after months of fighting, 2,190 civilians were killed, the group said.

In a statement on Saturday, Lise Grande, the United Nations' top humanitarian official for Iraq, said, ''We are stunned by this terrible loss of life and wish to express our deepest condolences to the many families who have reportedly been impacted by this tragedy.''

She added: ''Parties to the conflict -- all parties -- are obliged to do everything possible to protect civilians. This means that combatants cannot use people as human shields and cannot imperil lives through indiscriminate use of firepower.''

Iraq's Ministry of Defense, which works closely with the American military, broke two days of silence on Saturday when it said that it was opening an investigation into the civilian deaths. At the same time, the speaker of the Iraqi Parliament, Salim al-Jubouri, ordered commanders of Iraq's security forces to give lawmakers a report on the matter and to appear before the assembly.

Document NYTF000020170326ed3q0008e



FUTURE TENSE
Style Desk; SECTST
The Perverse Thrill of Chaos

By TEDDY WAYNE 
1,382 words
26 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
2
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

For all the rational appeal of peace and stability, Americans have a powerful attraction to calamity and disruption. World War II veterans commonly speak of their time in the military, when they felt deeply connected to a meaningful goal, as the best years of their lives. For many baby boomers, the late 1960s, with all its sturm und drang over an unpopular war and antiquated social policies, remains on their personal highlight reels (the free love and drugs may have had something to do with it, too). People who came of age in the pacific '90s just don't speak as reverently of seeing Stone Temple Pilots play Lollapalooza as flower children do of watching Hendrix at Woodstock.

Now, as Donald J. Trump helms arguably the most turbulent presidency since Richard M. Nixon's, the nation is entering an era of volatility unseen for decades (post-9/11 excepted). And for some people (even the president's opponents), the climate of crisis inspires a perverse thrill.

It has been posited that a number of Trump voters supported him out of an anarchic desire to destroy a system that has not worked for them, or even just to see what would happen with the nuclear codes (or, as an Onion video headline in 2011 astutely put it, ''Morbid Curiosity Leading Many Voters to Support Palin''). I doubt many liberals have similar inclinations.

Nevertheless, the atmosphere of Trumpian turmoil makes a lot of people across the political spectrum feel as though they are part of something bigger than themselves.

''We've come to equate drama and crisis with history,'' said Kevin Rozario, an associate professor of American studies at Smith College. ''We know we're in the presence of history when things are blowing up. There's an intensification of emotions when you're living in historical times, as if it's more real.''

Indeed, political journalism -- itself under attack by the president -- hasn't been this ardent since Sept. 11.

''We are living through the most dangerous challenge to the free government of the United States that anyone alive has encountered,'' wrote David Frum, a former speechwriter for George W. Bush, in the final sentences of ''How to Build an Autocracy,'' his widely read article in The Atlantic. ''What happens next is up to you and me. Don't be afraid. This moment of danger can also be your finest hour as a citizen and an American.''

When I read this Churchillian echo, I was duly scared -- yet also stirred. Not being a member of the military, and generally opposed to its actions, I have never been called upon to defend the United States. Like most sheltered civilians, I've had no finest hours, just a streak of fine ones on the sidelines as others make far greater sacrifices. But now, with alarms clanging all around me, I can see why patriotism exerts such a strong pull.

Just about anyone opposed to the current president would gladly trade his administration for the no-drama-Obama years or even a monotonously efficient Mitt Romney reign. But consider whether you have ever looked through Mr. Trump's Twitter feed, hoping to find something inflammatory, and been disappointed to see only mundane announcements. Or whether you've gotten giddy over the prospect of how ''Saturday Night Live'' will satirize his and his staff's highly abnormal comportment during news conferences and interviews. Or even experienced an illicit frisson of suspense over the setting of this year's doomsday clock.

Those who are under direct threat from the president's policies or who have experienced firsthand the horrors of life under authoritarian regimes will find little titillation in any of this. There is also a major difference between executive orders and statements from Mr. Trump that affect the defenseless, and impulsively tweeted claims that compromise his own credibility and don't necessarily hurt anyone. And sometimes laughter is the best way to hold off tears and speak truth to power.

The way liberals see it, the United States enjoyed eight essentially scandal-free years (conservative publications beg to differ) after the two previous administrations were embroiled in too many governmental and salacious kerfuffles to name. The Trump advocate and adviser Peter Thiel may have risibly overstated this idea when he told The New York Times that ''no corruption can be a bad thing,'' as ''it can mean that things are too boring,'' but he was onto something about the public's ravenous appetite for shock value that propelled his choice for president into the spotlight and kept him there.

Moreover, without a military draft or a major economic downturn since the '70s, the middle class, though it has certainly had its problems, has not had to deal with the pronounced suffering on a national scale that previous generations periodically faced. Those born into enough means and not from a marginalized demographic have been able to lead, relatively speaking, politically uneventful lives the past four decades in America. That wasn't always the case in 1918, 1929, 1942, 1950, 1968 or even the Cold War '80s; I would rather worry about an isolated ISIS attack than a Soviet nuclear strike. For all the fear it puts into the hearts of progressives, the news surrounding Mr. Trump will, to state it callously, make for fascinating history books in the future.

Hollywood has been preparing us for a presidency like this for years. Disaster movies have always been popular, but in the late '90s, there was a conspicuous streak of threatening comets, asteroids, volcanoes and twisters. In a decade without an obvious foreign enemy, natural disaster functioned as both a convenient antagonist and reflected our anxieties over environmental depredation. This was the earth's revenge for climate change, and we went to the theater to receive a visual lashing for not recycling.

Then Sept. 11 ushered in the era of the superhero, with desire for American might to overcome evil projected onto a single figure. Mr. Trump rode the wave of this jingoistic strongman fantasy to the Oval Office, frequently depicting himself as the only one able to rescue the country.

But a darker vision has simultaneously taken shape in the past 15 years: the post-apocalyptic and dystopian. If we childishly imagine that Iron Man will save us, then movies like ''The Hunger Games,'' ''Snowpiercer'' and ''Mad Max: Fury Road'' betray our concerns over where the world is actually heading: toward massive economic inequality and a barely habitable planet.

The common denominator in all these films is that we safely watch the cataclysm from afar. And nearly all of us saw the Kennedy assassination and other national tragedies on a screen, not in person. (A common observation after Sept. 11 was that the destruction of the World Trade Center seemed out of a movie.)

In Professor Rozario's 2007 book, ''The Culture of Calamity,'' he argues that visual media transforms all events -- even real-life violent ones -- into entertainment, and that our fascination with disaster narratives stems from our barely repressed fear of death and a romantic desire to confront destruction. Onscreen calamities allow us a spine-tingling brush with death without subjecting ourselves to real danger, much like a roller coaster or horror movie.

But Mr. Trump himself is no Reaganesque star of the silver screen; he's the as-seen-on-TV president. ''Television has always been attracted to the intimacy of character or spectacle,'' Professor Rozario said, adding: ''He knows how to play that game. And he's mesmerizing.''

He has mesmerically disrupted our other media devices, too. We can immediately access Mr. Trump's latest diatribe on our phones, survey on social media the instant response to them, watch satirical mash-ups and GIFs and sketches. Never mind ''S.N.L.''; 2017 more closely resembles some A.D.H.D. version of ''1984.''

The running time is the length of a tweet. The genre is pre-apocalyptic and near dystopian. The entire country is riveted.

Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook (Styles and Modern Love), Twitter (Styles, Fashion and Weddings) and Instagram.

Teddy Wayne is the author of three novels, most recently ''Loner.''

DRAWING (DRAWING BY ANTHONY FREDA AND DAN ZOLLINGER) 

Document NYTF000020170326ed3q00049



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Investigates as Iraqis Claim Strikes Killed Up to 200 Civilians

By TIM ARANGO and HELENE COOPER; Falih Hassan contributed reporting from Baghdad, and an employee of The New York Times from Mosul, Iraq. 
1,494 words
25 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDBAGHDAD -- The American-led military coalition in Iraq said Friday that it was investigating reports that scores of civilians -- perhaps as many as 200, residents said -- had been killed in recent American airstrikes in Mosul, the northern Iraqi city at the center of an offensive to drive out the Islamic State.

If confirmed, the series of airstrikes would rank among the highest civilian death tolls in an American air mission since the United States went to war in Iraq in 2003. And the reports of civilian deaths in Mosul came immediately after two recent incidents in Syria, where the coalition is also battling the Islamic State from the air, in which activists and local residents said dozens of civilians had been killed.

Taken together, the surge of reported civilian deaths raised questions about whether once-strict rules of engagement meant to minimize civilian casualties were being relaxed under the Trump administration, which has vowed to fight the Islamic State more aggressively.

American military officials insisted on Friday that the rules of engagement had not changed. They acknowledged, however, that American airstrikes in Syria and Iraq had been heavier in an effort to press the Islamic State on multiple fronts.

Col. John J. Thomas, a spokesman for the United States Central Command, said that the military was seeking to determine whether the explosion in Mosul might have been prompted by an American or coalition airstrike, or was a bomb or booby trap placed by the Islamic State.

''It's a complicated question, and we've literally had people working nonstop throughout the night to understand it,'' Colonel Thomas said in an interview. He said the explosion and the reasons behind it had ''gotten attention at the highest level.''

As to who was responsible, he said, ''at the moment, the answer is: We don't know.''

Iraqi officers, though, say they know exactly what happened: Maj. Gen. Maan al-Saadi, a commander of the Iraqi special forces, said that the civilian deaths were a result of a coalition airstrike that his men had called in, to take out snipers on the roofs of three houses in a neighborhood called Mosul Jidideh. General Saadi said the special forces were unaware that the houses' basements were filled with civilians.

''After the bombing we were surprised by the civilian victims,'' the general said, ''and I think it was a trap by ISIS to stop the bombing operations and turn public opinion against us.''

General Saadi said he had demanded that the coalition pause its air campaign to assess what happened and to take stricter measures to prevent more civilian victims. Another Iraqi special forces officer, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the subject, said that there had been a noticeable relaxing of the coalition's rules of engagement since President Trump took office.

Before, Iraqi officers were highly critical of the Obama administration's rules, saying that many requests for airstrikes were denied because of the risk that civilians would be hurt. Now, the officer said, it has become much easier to call in airstrikes.

Some American military officials had also chafed at what they viewed as long and onerous White House procedures for approving strikes under the Obama administration. Mr. Trump has indicated that he is more inclined to delegate authority for launching strikes to the Pentagon and commanders in the field.

This is the second time this week that the military has opened an investigation into civilian deaths reported to have been caused by American airstrikes. On Tuesday, Central Command said it was investigating an American airstrike in Syria on March 16 that officials said killed dozens of Qaeda operatives at a meeting place that activists and local residents maintain was part of a religious complex.

While Defense Department officials acknowledged that the building was near a mosque, they called it an ''Al Qaeda meeting site'' in Jina, in Aleppo Province.

Pentagon officials said that intelligence had indicated that Al Qaeda used the partly constructed community meeting hall as a gathering place and as a place to educate and indoctrinate fighters.

But the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said that 49 people had been killed in what the group described as a massacre of civilians who were undergoing religious instruction in an assembly hall and dining area for worshipers. The group has produced photos taken at the site after the strike that show a black sign outside a still-standing adjoining structure that identified it as part of the Omar ibn al-Khatab mosque.

Chris Woods, director of Airwars, a nonprofit group that monitors civilian deaths from coalition airstrikes in Syria and Iraq, said that in March alone the number of reported civilian fatalities has shot up to 1,058, from 465 in December, the last full month of the Obama administration.

''We don't know whether that's a reflection of the increased tempo of the campaign or whether it reflects changes in the rules of engagement,'' he said. But, he added, the recent spike in numbers ''does suggest something has shifted.''

American military officials said that what has shifted is that the Iraqi military, backed by the American-led coalition, is in the middle of its biggest fight so far -- the battle to retake Mosul from the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

In particular, the campaign for West Mosul has involved block-by-block fighting in an urban environment.

''There's been no loosening of the rules of engagement,'' said Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman. ''There are three major offensives going on right now, at the same time,'' he said, citing the battle for West Mosul; the encirclement of Raqqa, Syria, the Islamic State's de facto capital; and the fight for the Tabqa Dam in Syria.

Captain Davis said that the investigation was looking into whether Islamic State fighters were responsible for the explosion in Mosul, or if an airstrike set something off.

''There are other people on the battlefield, too,'' he said. ''It's close quarters.''

American officials said that even the timing of the strike was still in question. Col. Joseph E. Scrocca, a spokesman for the American-led command in Baghdad, said in a statement Friday that the strike under investigation happened between March 17 and Thursday.

The civilian death toll in Mosul was already widely described as heavy on account of Islamic State snipers and bombs, and intensified urban fighting in which artillery has been used. But there have been numerous reports from witnesses, including rescue workers and residents fleeing the fighting, about bodies being buried under rubble after heavy air bombardment.

Many of the reports centered on the Mosul Jidideh neighborhood, where residents said airstrikes hit a number of houses in recent days, killing dozens, including many children.

Capt. Ahmed Nuri, a soldier with Iraq's elite counterterrorism forces, who work closely with the American military and call in airstrikes, said on Thursday that his men, facing heavy sniper fire, helped collect five bodies from the rubble of a destroyed home. He said four of them were brothers -- named Ali, Omar, Khalid and Saad -- whose bodies were delivered to their grieving mother.

The mother, Captain Nuri said, identified the fifth dead body as that of an Islamic State sniper who had been firing at advancing Iraqi forces from the roof of their house.

Local officials have reacted with outrage at the latest civilian deaths, warning that they will make it more difficult to fully take the city, and will alienate civilians still in Mosul, whom the Iraqi government is counting on for assistance.

''The repeated mistakes will make the mission to liberate Mosul from Daesh harder, and will push civilians still living under Daesh to be uncooperative with the security forces,'' said Abdulsattar Alhabu, the mayor of Mosul, using the Arabic acronym for the Islamic State.

Mr. Alhabu estimated that at least 200 civilians had been killed in airstrikes in recent days in Mosul.

Correction: March 28, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday 25 about an American investigation of airstrikes in Mosul, Iraq, misidentified the monitoring group led by Chris Woods, who said that reported civilian fatalities from coalition airstrikes had increased. He is the director of Airwars, which tracks airstrike casualties in both Syria and Iraq, not the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which tracks only those in Syria.

Follow Tim Arango @tarangoNYT and Helene Cooper @helenecooper on Twitter.

Scores of residents in western Mosul are reported to have been killed by coalition airstrikes this month. Residents there removed the bodies of victims on Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FELIPE DANA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A9) 

Document NYTF000020170328ed3p00013



U.S.; Politics
U.S.-Led Coalition Confirms Strikes Hit Mosul Site Where Civilians Died

By MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT 
416 words
25 March 2017
18:14
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —he American-led military coalition in Iraq said Saturday that an initial review of recent airstrikes in Mosul, the Islamic State’ last stronghold in Iraq, had confirmed that the strikes hit a site where scores of civilians were killed.

The inquiry, military officials said, found that a building had collapsed a few days after strikes by American forces. United States officials are seeking to determine whether the airstrikes brought down the building, leaving many Iraqis dead, or the Islamic State used the strikes as an opportunity to detonate an explosive in the building.

The Pentagon had acknowledged on Friday that it was investigating reports that its airstrikes had caused deaths in Mosul. The next phase of the investigation, military officials said, is likely to take about three weeks.

The March 17 airstrikes —hich Iraqis said had led to the deaths of possibly 200 people —ould have produced among the highest civilian death tolls in an American air mission since the United States invaded Iraq in 2003.

The reports of heavy civilian casualties have come at a critical point in the military campaign to defeat the Islamic State. Iraqi officials said that the Trump administration had appeared to loosen restrictions on the rules of engagement, making it easier for the Iraqis to call in airstrikes. The Iraqis had been frustrated by the Obama administration’ deliberate approach.

Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said that the rules had not been loosened.

The coalition said in a statement on Saturday that the airstrikes had been conducted “t the request of the Iraqi security forces,”nd that it believed it was hitting Islamic State fighters and equipment.

“he coalition respects human life, which is why we are assisting our Iraqi partner forces in their effort to liberate their lands from ISIS brutality,”he statement said. “ur goal has always been for zero civilian casualties, but the coalition will not abandon our commitment to our Iraqi partners because of ISIS’ inhuman tactics terrorizing civilians, using human shields, and fighting from protected sites such as schools, hospitals, religious sites and civilian neighborhoods.”

It added: “oalition forces work diligently and deliberately to be precise in our airstrikes. Coalition forces comply with the Law of Armed Conflict and take all reasonable precautions during the planning and execution of airstrikes to reduce the risk of harm to civilians.”

Helene Cooper contributed reporting.

Document NYTFEED020170325ed3p004jx



Future Tense
Fashion & Style
The Perverse Thrill of Chaotic Times

By TEDDY WAYNE 
1,434 words
25 March 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

For all the rational appeal of peace and stability, Americans have a powerful attraction to calamity and disruption. World War II veterans commonly speak of their time in the military, when they felt deeply connected to a meaningful goal, as the best years of their lives. For many baby boomers, the late 1960s, with all its sturm und drang over an unpopular war and antiquated social policies, remains on their personal highlight reels (the free love and drugs may have had something to do with it, too). People who came of age in the pacific ’0s just don’ speak as reverently of seeing Stone Temple Pilots play Lollapalooza as flower children do of watching Hendrix at Woodstock.

Now, as Donald J. Trump helms arguably the most turbulent presidency since Richard M. Nixon’, the nation is entering an era of volatility unseen for decades (post-9/11 excepted). And for some people (even the president’ opponents), the climate of crisis inspires a perverse thrill.

It has been posited that a number of Trump voters supported him out of an anarchic desire to destroy a system that has not worked for them, or even just to see what would happen with the nuclear codes (or, as an Onion video headline in 2011 astutely put it, “Morbid Curiosity Leading Many Voters to Support Palin”. I doubt many liberals have similar inclinations.

Nevertheless, the atmosphere of Trumpian turmoil makes a lot of people across the political spectrum feel as though they are part of something bigger than themselves.

“e’e come to equate drama and crisis with history,”aid Kevin Rozario, an associate professor of American studies at Smith College. “e know we’e in the presence of history when things are blowing up. There’ an intensification of emotions when you’e living in historical times, as if it’ more real.”

Indeed, political journalism —tself under attack by the president —asn’ been this ardent since Sept. 11.

“e are living through the most dangerous challenge to the free government of the United States that anyone alive has encountered,”rote David Frum, a former speechwriter for George W. Bush, in the final sentences of “How to Build an Autocracy,”is widely read article in The Atlantic. “hat happens next is up to you and me. Don’ be afraid. This moment of danger can also be your finest hour as a citizen and an American.”

When I read this Churchillian echo, I was duly scared —et also stirred. Not being a member of the military, and generally opposed to its actions, I have never been called upon to defend the United States. Like most sheltered civilians, I’e had no finest hours, just a streak of fine ones on the sidelines as others make far greater sacrifices. But now, with alarms clanging all around me, I can see why patriotism exerts such a strong pull.

Just about anyone opposed to the current president would gladly trade his administration for the no-drama-Obama years or even a monotonously efficient Mitt Romney reign. But consider whether you have ever looked through Mr. Trump’ Twitter feed, hoping to find something inflammatory, and been disappointed to see only mundane announcements. Or whether you’e gotten giddy over the prospect of how “Saturday Night Live”ill satirize his and his staff’ highly abnormal comportment during news conferences and interviews. Or even experienced an illicit frisson of suspense over the setting of this year’ doomsday clock.

Those who are under direct threat from the president’ policies or who have experienced firsthand the horrors of life under authoritarian regimes will find little titillation in any of this. There is also a major difference between executive orders and statements from Mr. Trump that affect the defenseless, and impulsively tweeted claims that compromise his own credibility and don’ necessarily hurt anyone. And sometimes laughter is the best way to hold off tears and speak truth to power.

The way liberals see it, the United States enjoyed eight essentially scandal-free years (conservative publications beg to differ) after the two previous administrations were embroiled in too many governmental and salacious kerfuffles to name. The Trump advocate and adviser Peter Thiel may have risibly overstated this idea when he told The New York Times that “o corruption can be a bad thing,”s “t can mean that things are too boring,”ut he was onto something about the public’ ravenous appetite for shock value that propelled his choice for president into the spotlight and kept him there.

Moreover, without a military draft or a major economic downturn since the ’0s, the middle class, though it has certainly had its problems, has not had to deal with the pronounced suffering on a national scale that previous generations periodically faced. Those born into enough means and not from a marginalized demographic have been able to lead, relatively speaking, politically uneventful lives the past four decades in America. That wasn’ always the case in 1918, 1929, 1942, 1950, 1968 or even the Cold War ’0s; I would rather worry about an isolated ISIS attack than a Soviet nuclear strike. For all the fear it puts into the hearts of progressives, the news surrounding Mr. Trump will, to state it callously, make for fascinating history books in the future.

Hollywood has been preparing us for a presidency like this for years. Disaster movies have always been popular, but in the late ’0s, there was a conspicuous streak of threatening comets, asteroids, volcanoes and twisters. In a decade without an obvious foreign enemy, natural disaster functioned as both a convenient antagonist and reflected our anxieties over environmental depredation. This was the earth’ revenge for climate change, and we went to the theater to receive a visual lashing for not recycling.

Then Sept. 11 ushered in the era of the superhero, with desire for American might to overcome evil projected onto a single figure. Mr. Trump rode the wave of this jingoistic strongman fantasy to the Oval Office, frequently depicting himself as the only one able to rescue the country.

But a darker vision has simultaneously taken shape in the past 15 years: the post-apocalyptic and dystopian. If we childishly imagine that Iron Man will save us, then movies like “he Hunger Games,”“nowpiercer”nd “ad Max: Fury Road”etray our concerns over where the world is actually heading: toward massive economic inequality and a barely habitable planet.

The common denominator in all these films is that we safely watch the cataclysm from afar. And nearly all of us saw the Kennedy assassination and other national tragedies on a screen, not in person. (A common observation after Sept. 11 was that the destruction of the World Trade Center seemed out of a movie.)

In Professor Rozario’ 2007 book, “The Culture of Calamity,”e argues that visual media transforms all events —ven real-life violent ones —nto entertainment, and that our fascination with disaster narratives stems from our barely repressed fear of death and a romantic desire to confront destruction. Onscreen calamities allow us a spine-tingling brush with death without subjecting ourselves to real danger, much like a roller coaster or horror movie.

But Mr. Trump himself is no Reaganesque star of the silver screen; he’ the as-seen-on-TV president. “elevision has always been attracted to the intimacy of character or spectacle,”rofessor Rozario said, adding: “e knows how to play that game. And he’ mesmerizing.”

He has mesmerically disrupted our other media devices, too. We can immediately access Mr. Trump’ latest diatribe on our phones, survey on social media the instant response to them, watch satirical mash-ups and GIFs and sketches. Never mind “.N.L.” 2017 more closely resembles some A.D.H.D. version of “984.”

The running time is the length of a tweet. The genre is pre-apocalyptic and near dystopian. The entire country is riveted.

Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook (Styles and Modern Love), Twitter (Styles, Fashion and Weddings) and Instagram.

Teddy Wayne is the author of three novels, most recently “oner.”

* The ‘-Bomb’izzles: The Harvard Brand Takes a Hit

* The Trauma of Violent News on the Internet

* What Is a TinyLetter? Like Ye Olde Blog, but Less Public

* The Right to Privacy for Children Online

* A Certain Word Is Really Getting on My Nerves

* Holdouts of the Social Media Age

* The Culture of Nastiness

Anthony Freda and Dan Zollinger 

Document NYTFEED020170325ed3p0030f



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Raid on Militants' Base Is Deadly for Both Sides

By NOUR YOUSSEF and DECLAN WALSH 
609 words
24 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CAIRO -- Ten Egyptian soldiers and 15 militants were killed during a raid on an Islamist insurgent base in the restive Sinai Peninsula, a military spokesman said Thursday.

The deaths underscored the strength of the Sinai insurgency, led by an Islamic State affiliate, despite almost four years of concerted Egyptian counterterrorism operations. In recent months Sinai militants have expanded their area of operations, targeted Christian civilians and fired rockets into Israel.

In a statement posted on Facebook , Tamer el-Refai, an Egyptian military spokesman, said the Egyptian soldiers died in two roadside blasts on Wednesday during an operation that had targeted two Islamist storehouses in the deserts of central Sinai, outside their stronghold in the north of the peninsula.

Among the soldiers killed were three officers and seven enlisted men, Mr. Refai said.

Seven militants were arrested, he said, and explosives, medical supplies, cellphones and four-wheel-drive vehicles were seized.

The death totals and other details from the operation could not be independently corroborated as most journalists, Egyptian or foreign, are prohibited from working in Sinai.

The raid came a month after a series of attacks by militants targeting minority Christians in northern Sinai forced more than 250 people to flee the area, mostly to the nearby city of Ismailia.

The sectarian violence drew sharp criticism of Egypt's president, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, from angry Christians and some human rights groups, who said it highlighted the military's failure to protect citizens against kidnapping and killing. More broadly, the violence seemed to indicate the government's wavering grip on the area.

Mr. Sisi has insisted that his forces are winning the fight. Describing the violence against Christians as ''a cowardly plan by evil people,'' he last month vowed to intensify counterterrorism efforts in Sinai.

Such tough talk has been praised by President Trump, who has described Mr. Sisi as a ''fantastic guy'' and invited him to visit the White House on April 3. It will be Mr. Sisi's first visit since coming to power in a 2013 military takeover.

International human rights groups have accused Egyptian forces of numerous violations in Sinai, including extrajudicial killings.

On March 16, Human Rights Watch said it had evidence that Egyptian security forces might have summarily executed up to 10 men in January in what the group described as a fake counterterrorism raid meant to disguise the killings. Some of the dead had been arrested months earlier, the group said.

Describing the deaths as part of a long-running pattern of abuses against civilians in Sinai by the military and the internal security forces, Human Rights Watch called for an independent investigation.

The Egyptian military routinely denies any abuses.

The fighting in Sinai began in 2013 after the military overthrew the country's first democratically elected president, Mohamed Morsi, a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood , and killed hundreds of Islamist supporters who had protested his ouster.

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, has a much smaller presence in Sinai than in Iraq and Syria, but it has been increasingly active across Egypt in recent months. In December, the group claimed responsibility for the bombing of a Coptic cathedral in Cairo that killed more than 25 people.

Last month, rockets fired from Egypt landed inside the border with Israel, the second such attack in a month.

The rocket attacks followed Islamic State claims that an Israel drone had killed four of its members in a missile strike just inside the Egyptian border, near Rafah.

Follow Declan Walsh on Twitter @declanwalsh .

Document NYTF000020170324ed3o0004n



World; Europe
Man in Antwerp, Belgium, Tries to Drive Into Crowd

By MILAN SCHREUER 
541 words
23 March 2017
16:54
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

PARIS — French resident tried to drive over pedestrians on a crowded shopping street in the Belgian port city of Antwerp on Thursday, and a rifle and several knives were found in the vehicle, prosecutors said.

With tensions already high in Europe after a similar attack involving an a vehicle the previous day near Parliament in London, Belgian prosecutors identified the suspect only as Mohamed R., in keeping with traditional practice — 39-year-old French resident of North African ancestry.

No injuries were reported, but a bomb disposal unit was sweeping the car for explosives and inspecting an unidentified canister of liquid that was also found in the car.

“e remain vigilant,”aid the Belgian prime minister, Charles Michel, on Twitter. “ur security services did an outstanding job in Antwerp.”

Bart De Wever, the mayor of Antwerp, increased the state of alert and added police security in busy neighborhoods, including shopping areas, transportation hubs, monuments and museums. The ministry of defense was sending additional troops to patrol.

It was one day after Belgium observed the first anniversary of the deadliest attack on its soil, when suicide bombers in Brussels assaulted the main airport and a subway station, killing 32 people.

Antwerp is the second most important hub for radicalization in Belgium, and only Brussels has sent more people from the country to fight for Islamists in Syria.

The city is home to the now-banned and defunct terrorist group Sharia4Belgium, but Antwerp has so far averted a large-scale terrorist attack, and the local authorities have succeeded in foiling several plots and convicting dozens of terrorists in court over the last three years.

Around 10:45 a.m. Thursday, the authorities said, a red car with French plates sped through a shopping area in central Antwerp, forcing pedestrians in the Meir, Belgium’ biggest shopping area, to dive out of the way.

Soldiers on a routine patrol noticed the vehicle and signaled to the driver to stop, but he ignored them and drove through a red light, again putting pedestrians in danger.

A rapid response team was called in and chased the car, stopping it less than a mile away and arresting the driver on the banks of the Scheldt River.

Once the car stopped, the suspect did not resist as he was taken into custody, bystanders told local news media.

The investigation was being handled by the federal prosecutor’ office, an indication that the attack would be treated as a terrorist case unless proved otherwise.

President Françis Hollande of France said the attack “eemed to involve a French national,”dding that the suspect “as looking to kill or at the very least create a dramatic incident.”

Claire Barthelemy and Michael Wolgelenter contributed reporting from London.

* Brussels Commemorates Attack Anniversary With Both Silence and Noise

* U.K. Parliament Attacker Is Identified as Khalid Masood

* Terrorism Response Puts Belgium in a Harsh Light

* Brussels Attacks Underscore Vulnerability of an Open European Society

* Strikes Claimed by \b ISIS\b0  Shut Brussels and Shake European Security

A forensics expert working next to the car that tried to drive over pedestrians on Antwerp’ main shopping street. | Marc De Roeck/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170323ed3n0063h



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Major Assault Opens a New Frontier in Syria

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ANNE BARNARD; Michael R. Gordon reported from Washington, and Anne Barnard from Beirut, Lebanon. 
1,264 words
23 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Hundreds of Syrian fighters and their American military advisers, backed by American artillery and attack helicopters, have begun a major operation to cut off the western approaches to Raqqa, the city the Islamic State has proclaimed as its capital, officials said Wednesday.

It was the first time that the United States had carried out an air assault in Syria in its campaign against the Islamic State, and the mission, which began Tuesday, reflected the leeway the Trump administration has given its commanders to carry out operations without prolonged review in Washington.

In a significant commitment of American forces, American helicopters ferried fighters across enemy lines while Marine Corps howitzers, Army Apache attack helicopters and American warplanes provided firepower for the operation. Army surface-to-surface Himars rockets, which are based in northern Syria, are also part of the mission. American Special Operations forces were advising the Syrian fighters on the ground, although a military spokesman said they were not involved in direct, front-line combat.

The mission represented a new stage in the broader offensive to cut off and seize Raqqa. Its objective was to take control of the Tabqa Dam on the Euphrates River near Lake Assad, the nearby town of Tabqa and a local airfield. An immediate goal was to take the dam intact, but the structure was still under the control of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, and officials said that the fighting was intense.

''The fighting is raging on as I speak and is expected to last several weeks until the dam, airfield and city are free from ISIS control,'' said Col. Joseph E. Scrocca, a spokesman for the American-led command in Baghdad.

As the operation unfolded, Syrian state television and local residents asserted that at least 30 Syrian civilians were killed in an airstrike that hit a school where they had taken shelter in a rural area of Raqqa Province on Tuesday. American military officials acknowledged that the United States had been carrying out airstrikes in the area. These officials said they could not confirm the reports of civilian casualties, but would investigate.

As the battle for Raqqa has accelerated, the number of airstrikes has climbed. Colonel Scrocca said that over the past four months the American-led coalition had conducted more than 300 such strikes around Tabqa and west of Raqqa, and that enemy fighters, fortifications and vehicles had been targeted.

Describing the Tabqa operation, American officials said that a ground force of Syrian fighters was approaching the dam from the north. The airlift was carried out south of the dam, Colonel Scrocca said, and appeared to take the militants by surprise, Colonel Scrocca said.

Important details of the operation, including how many Syrian fighters and American advisers were involved, were not disclosed. News reports suggested 500 Syrian fighters had been deployed, but American officials hinted it could be much more.

''It could be 500; it could be a heck of a lot more,'' Colonel Scrocca said in a briefing that was broadcast into the Pentagon.

American artillery and attack helicopters have not previously been employed in Syria. With this Tabqa operation, the American strategy in Syria has come to resemble the operation to retake Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, where conventional American military forces have been combined with the use of advisers to support local forces who are doing the main fighting on the ground.

One big difference, however, is the complexity of the local forces with which the United States is aligning itself.

In Iraq, the United States is supporting Iraqi government forces, namely Iraq's Counterterrorism Service and its Army and Federal Police. In Syria, in contrast, the United States has been working with Arab fighters, the Kurdish Y.P.G. militia and local tribes.

Adding another layer of complexity, Turkey had objected vociferously to the role of the Kurdish Y.P.G. While American military commanders believe the Y.P.G. has some of the most experienced and proficient fighters, Turkey has denounced the organization as a terrorist group.

With Turkey's concerns in mind, American military officials emphasized that Syrian Arabs made up 75 percent of the fighters in the Tabqa operation -- while acknowledging that Syrian Kurds were also involved in the assault.

President Trump, who asserted during his campaign that he had a secret plan to defeat the Islamic State, has yet to outline a new strategy to ''demolish and destroy'' the militant group, as he told a joint session of Congress last month.

So far, the Trump administration has been operating within the broad contours of the approach by the Obama administration, which called for training and equipping local fighters, supporting them with American firepower and advisers -- and, when deemed critically important, sending American commandos to hit high-value targets.

But the Trump White House has dispensed with the detailed and often prolonged review of operations and tactics that were conducted under the Obama administration. The change has allowed American commanders to step up the pace of their operations.

Pentagon officials said that Defense Secretary Jim Mattis was informed of the Tabqa operation, as was the White House, but the assault was being carried out within the authority that has been delegated to American military commanders.

More flexibility for American commanders appears to be coming. Representative Mac Thornberry, Republican of Texas Republican and the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, told reporters Wednesday that he expected the White House to remove ''artificial troop caps'' in Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan.

The current ''force manning level'' for Syria sets a limit on the number of American military personnel in Syria at 503. But the limit does not count temporary reinforcements, like the roughly 400 personnel who were deployed in Syria when the Marine artillery battery and Army Rangers were sent to the country.

There was another telling indication on Wednesday that American Special Operations would continue to play an important role. Col. Jonathan P. Braga, the chief of staff of the Joint Special Operations Command and the former deputy commander of Delta Force, has been named as the next senior operations officer for the American-led command that is leading the campaign against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

With the stepped-up pace of military operations against the Islamic State and Al Qaeda, which is also operating in Syria, there has also been an increase in reports of civilian casualties. In the Tuesday episode, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said that at least 33 civilians were killed when a school in Mansoura, a town 15 miles from Raqqa, was struck.

The United States Central Command is investigating an airstrike last week in Al Jinah, a village in western Aleppo Province.

American military officials said they had struck a gathering of Qaeda leaders and operatives and had killed dozens of militants. But residents said the airstrike had struck a mosque that was used by civilians for a weekly religious meeting and that civilians had been killed and wounded.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Michael R. Gordon @gordonnyt and Anne Barnard @ABarnardNYT on Twitter.

Syrian fighters northeast of Raqqa last month. On Tuesday, the United States began bringing in hundreds of Syrian fighters to seize a dam, a town and an airfield. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DELIL SOULEIMAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170323ed3n00062



Foreign Desk; SECT
U.S. Airstrike in Syria Is Said to Kill Dozens of Civilians

By ANNE BARNARD 
559 words
23 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- At least 30 Syrian civilians were killed in an airstrike by the United States-led coalition fighting Islamic State militants in a rural area of Raqqa Province early Tuesday, according to residents, activists and state television.

The coalition said it had no indications that an airstrike hit civilians, but in its daily report on coalition strikes, the United States military acknowledged that strikes were carried out in the area. It said that coalition warplanes carried out 19 airstrikes on Tuesday -- an unusually high number for a single day -- on a range of Islamic State facilities near the city of Raqqa.

The attack, which hit a school in the town of Mansoura, where civilians had taken shelter on Tuesday night, was the second time in a week that Syrians had accused the United States of involvement in a strike that killed dozens of noncombatants.

Forty-nine people died last week when American warplanes fired on a target in Al Jinah, a village in western Aleppo Province. United States officials said the attack had hit a building where Qaeda operatives were meeting, but residents said the warplanes had struck a mosque where hundreds of people had gathered for a weekly religious meeting.

The United States military said it was investigating whether civilians had been killed in that airstrike.

In Raqqa, the Islamic State's self-declared capital, hundreds of people who fled their homes in other parts of Syria were sheltering in the school, according to residents and to the group Raqqa Is Being Slaughtered Silently, a team of activists originally from Raqqa who monitor the conflict.

The two airstrikes have raised concerns about whether the United States military has become less careful, or less selective, in its targeting. President Trump repeatedly said during his campaign that he would loosen restrictions intended to protect civilians during attacks against the Islamic State and other extremist groups.

The attack came as American forces took a new step in their campaign against the Islamic State, also known by the acronyms ISIS or ISIL. On Wednesday, United States Special Forces troops and members of the Syrian Democratic Forces, the name used by the Kurdish and Arab forces working with the United States military in northeastern Syria, were dropped into territory held by the Islamic State near the Tabqa Dam on the Euphrates River, as more Kurdish forces crossed the river to reinforce them. The school in Mansoura was not far from that area.

Airstrikes during the Obama administration also led to high civilian death tolls, most notably in an operation last year in Manbij, a town in northern Syria near the Turkish border that was being held by Islamic State militants.

Khaled al-Homsi, an activist from Palmyra who opposes both the Syrian government and the Islamic State, said that among the displaced people at the school were families from Palmyra, which has changed hands several times in recent years, switching between pro-government and Islamic State forces.

Residents of Palmyra, an ancient city known for its Roman stone amphitheater, say they have endured bombing by government warplanes, harsh treatment and summary killings by the Islamic State, and reprisals and looting by pro-government forces retaking the area.

Follow Anne Barnard on Twitter @ABarnardNYT .

Document NYTF000020170323ed3n0006k



Foreign Desk; SECTA
From Tillerson, Echoes of Obama's  ISIS  Strategy

By GARDINER HARRIS 
1,024 words
23 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- On the campaign trail, Donald J. Trump falsely accused President Barack Obama of founding the Islamic State. He said Mr. Obama ''did not get it,'' in terms of fighting the extremist group that is based in Iraq and Syria, and vowed to obliterate them on the battlefield.

But in the Trump administration's first major announcement of its still-nascent plans to defeat the militants, Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson on Wednesday closely parroted Mr. Obama's strategy. His comments came as talk of fighting the Islamic State was overshadowed by an attack in London that killed four and injured 40. It was not immediately clear who was responsible for the attack, or if the Islamic State was linked to it.

''The great commonality among we who have gathered today is a commitment to bringing down a global force of evil,'' Mr. Tillerson said at the start of a conclave of the 68-nation coalition to defeat the Islamic State that was held at State Department headquarters.

In his 20-minute speech, Mr. Tillerson noted that over the past year, the flow of foreign fighters into Iraq and Syria had dropped more than 90 percent, and that 75 percent of the Islamic State's online propaganda had been eliminated. Both gains occurred largely on Mr. Obama's watch.

''Reflecting on the past year or so, we should be encouraged by the significant progress we as a coalition are making,'' Mr. Tillerson said.

Mr. Trump has long insisted that citing ''radical Islamic terrorism'' is key to defeating the Islamic State. ''You can't solve a problem if you refuse to talk about what the problem is,'' he said in November 2015. Yet Mr. Tillerson used those three words together only once -- when he requested that Saudi Arabia and Egypt do more to combat extremism.

Instead, in front of a room full of diplomats, including many from Muslim countries where Mr. Trump's favored phrase is viewed as offensive, Mr. Tillerson emphasized a sympathetic view of Islam. He rejected characterizations by Michael T. Flynn, the retired Army general and former national security adviser to Mr. Trump, that the religion is a ''malignant cancer.''

''We also must look this enemy's ideology in the eyes for what it is: a warped interpretation of Islam that threatens all of our people,'' Mr. Tillerson said in yet another passage that could have come from the playbook. He cited King Abdullah II of Jordan, who recently said of the extremists, ''Everything they are, everything they do, is a blatant violation of my faith.''

Jon Finer, chief of staff under former Secretary of State John Kerry, said Mr. Tillerson's speech felt very familiar.

''It was good to hear both that progress continues to be made in this critical fight, and that, after months of baseless criticism, the new administration seems to have decided to stick with a strategy that is working,'' Mr. Finer said.

Among those in attendance at the conclave were the British foreign secretary, Boris Johnson; the Saudi foreign minister, Adel Ahmed Al Jubeir; and Qatar's foreign minister, Mohammed Abdulrahman Al-Thani.

At the White House, Sean Spicer, the press secretary, said that the Trump administration ''will use all of the tools of national power, in coordination with our international partners, to cut off ISIS's funding, expand intelligence sharing and deny ISIS geographic and online safe havens,'' succinctly summarizing the Obama administration's strategy as well. ISIS is another name for the Islamic State.

If there were differences with the past administration, they were mostly in Mr. Tillerson's emphasis on fighting the Islamic State's online recruitment and propaganda, and in stabilizing Iraq and Syria once the militants are defeated. Over the last month, the Iraqi Army has pushed into western Mosul, the northern Iraqi city that has been a hard-fought battleground. And just this week, Syrian fighters aided by American military advisers have moved to isolate Raqqa, the Islamic State's self-proclaimed capital in northern Syria.

''We will continue to facilitate the return of people to their homes and work with local political leadership,'' Mr. Tillerson said, adding, ''As a coalition, we are not in the business of nation-building or reconstruction.''

Mr. Tillerson urged the diplomats gathered at Foggy Bottom to do more. He said the United States had so far provided 75 percent of the military resources and 25 percent of the humanitarian support used against the Islamic State.

''The United States will do its part, but the circumstances on the ground require more from all of you,'' he said.

The only clear difference between the Obama strategy and that of the Trump administration has been a loosening of restrictions on airstrikes. The potential downside of that change came the day before the conference opened, when at least 30 Syrian civilians were killed in an airstrike.

Richard Atwood, New York director of the International Crisis Group, said in an interview that he was worried that growing civilian casualties, as well as the Trump administration's decision to become more bellicose with Iran, could backfire and weaken the fight against the Islamic State.

In his remarks, Mr. Tillerson was complimentary of the Iraqi government; Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq sat on stage while Mr. Tillerson spoke. It was a notable inclusion, given that Mr. Abadi was infuriated by Mr. Trump's first executive order, which banned travel from Iraq and six other Muslim-dominated countries. In an amended order, Mr. Trump dropped the travel restrictions against Iraq. Both orders have been suspended in court proceedings.

Mr. Abadi, in his own speech, seemed to promise that money spent on reconstructing Iraq would not be wasted, since he was also fighting corruption.

''Corruption and terrorism are a common plague,'' he said.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Gardiner Harris on Twitter @GardinerHarris .

Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson at a conclave on Wednesday focused on the Islamic State. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CLIFF OWEN/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170323ed3n0004p



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Warnings of a 'Powder Keg' in Libya as  ISIS  Regroups After Setbacks

By ERIC SCHMITT 
1,093 words
22 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDNDJAMENA, Chad -- After B-2 bombers struck an Islamic State training camp in Libya in January, killing more than 80 militants, American officials privately gloated. On the heels of losing its coastal stronghold in Surt the month before, the Islamic State seemed to be reeling.

But Western and African counterterrorism officials now say that while the twin blows dealt a setback to the terrorist group in Libya -- once feared as the Islamic State's most lethal branch outside Iraq and Syria -- its leaders are already regrouping, exploiting the chaos and political vacuum gripping the country.

Gen. Thomas D. Waldhauser, head of the Pentagon's Africa Command, told a Senate panel this month that after their expulsion from Surt, many militants from the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, were moving to southern Libya.

''The instability in Libya and North Africa may be the most significant near-term threat to U.S. and allies' interests on the continent,'' General Waldhauser said. ''Even with the success of Surt, ISIS-Libya remains a regional threat with intent to target U.S. persons and interests.''

Libya remains a violent and divided nation rife with independent militias, flooded with arms and lacking legitimate governance and political unity. Tripoli, the capital, is controlled by a patchwork of armed groups that have built local fiefs and vied for power since Libya's 2011 uprising. Running gun battles have seized Tripoli in recent days.

''Libya is descending into chaos,'' said Brig. Gen. Zakaria Ngobongue), a senior Chadian officer who directed a major counterterrorism exercise here in the Chadian capital last week involving 2,000 African and Western troops and trainers. ''It's a powder keg.''

Libya's neighbors have rushed to ward off the threat of Islamic fighters seeking safe haven within their borders or trying to recruit their young people to fill its depleted ranks.

Tunisia, which has suffered several devastating terrorist attacks in recent years, has already built a 125-mile earthen wall, which stretches about half the length of its border with Libya, in an attempt to prevent militants from infiltrating.

Since last summer, the United States has been flying unarmed surveillance drone missions over Libya from bases in Tunisia, a significant expansion of that country's counterterrorism cooperation with the Pentagon.

Algeria announced this month that it had opened a new air base in the country's far south to help secure its borders with Mali, Niger and Libya.

And Chad closed its borders with Libya in January, fearing potential terrorist infiltration. The country reopened one main border crossing this month under pressure from border towns suffering a dearth of commercial traffic and to allow Chadian citizens to return home from Libya.

''As long as the Libyan chaos lasts, security in the Sahel and the Sahara will always be strained,'' President Idriss Déy of Chad told a regional security conference in Bamako, Mali, this month. The Sahel is a vast area on the southern flank of the Sahara that stretches from Senegal east to Chad.

American intelligence agencies offered wide-ranging estimates last year on the peak number of Islamic State fighters in Libya -- mainly in Surt, but also in Benghazi and Tripoli -- with some assessments topping 5,000 militants.

Perhaps several hundred of those fighters have survived and fled in various directions within the country, or even to Europe, military officials and intelligence analysts say.

''The multiple militias and fractured relationship between factions in east and west Libya exacerbate the security situation, spilling into Tunisia and Egypt and the broader Maghreb, allowing the movement of foreign fighters, enabling the flow of migrants out of Libya to Europe and elsewhere,'' General Waldhauser said.

Even before President Trump took office, vowing to intensify the global fight against ISIS, the Pentagon was accelerating its counterrorism efforts here in Central Africa.

The United States is building a $50 million drone base in Agadez, Niger. When completed next year, it will allow Reaper surveillance drones to fly from hundreds of miles closer to southern Libya, to monitor Islamic State insurgents flowing south and other extremists flowing north from the Sahel region.

American Special Operations forces and the C.I.A. have been working for more than a year to identify militia fighters in Libya who the United States can trust and support as a ground force to combat ISIS fighters, as the Pentagon did last year with militias from Misrata.

''We must carefully choose where and with whom we work with to counter ISIS-Libya in order not to shift the balance between factions and risk sparking greater conflict in Libya,'' General Waldhauser said.

In the meantime, American spy agencies, as well as Western and African intelligence operatives, are monitoring the movements of ISIS fighters, who officials say have been wary of gathering in large groups since the January strike by B-2s and armed Reaper drones flying from Sicily. American commanders say they could conduct more strikes if insurgents mass in large enough groups.

''We will be able to keep pressure on that ISIS network enough to keep it decentralized so that it cannot mass and to buy time for the G.N.A. to develop governance,'' said Brig. Gen. Donald C. Bolduc, who oversees American Special Operations forces in Africa, using an acronym for the new Libyan unity government.

General Bolduc acknowledged in an interview, however, ''None of this is going to happen fast.'' He noted that the Islamic State in Libya is ''looking to work gaps and seams, and doing it all over again to gain a foothold, influencing the populace.''

It is an assessment shared by independent Libya specialists.

''ISIS in Libya is down but not out, and in the meantime, all of Libya's other problems remain, which ensures that ISIS or something a lot like it will have little problem reasserting itself when the time is right,'' said Michael R. Shurkin, a senior political scientist at RAND and a former C.I.A. analyst. ''Be wary of any U.S. policy that amounts to calling it a victory and walking away.''

Correction: March 23, 2017, Thursday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Wednesday about efforts by the Islamic State to regroup in Libya described incorrectly the aircraft used against an Islamic State training camp there in January. The strikes were carried out by B-2 bombers, not B-52 bombers.

Follow Eric Schmitt on Twitter @EricSchmittNYT .

Document NYTF000020170323ed3m00017



World; Europe
Brussels Commemorates Attack Anniversary With Both Silence and Noise

By DAN BILEFSKY 
698 words
22 March 2017
17:10
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Belgians of all political stripes and backgrounds united in their small, divided country on Wednesday to commiserate and remember the coordinated suicide bombings that struck Brussels one year ago, killing 32 people and injuring more than 320. The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attacks.

The first two blasts ripped through the Brussels airport on the morning of March 22, 2016, turning a busy travel hub in the heart of Europe into a scene of carnage. Then, while bloody-faced passengers were being evacuated from the airport, a bomb went off miles away in the Maelbeek subway station at the peak of rush hour, disfiguring some commuters so badly that coroners struggled to identify them.

Befitting a cosmopolitan capital where the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization are based, the victims in the attacks came not just from Belgium but from a number of other countries as well, including China, India, Morocco and the United States. Among them were a Belgian filmmaker, a Swedish illustrator, a Congolese business school graduate and father of two young girls, a Chinese entrepreneur,  a Belgian Muslim teacher and mother of three, and a couple from the United States who had come to Europe in search of adventure.

A large crowd gathered at the airport on Wednesday to observe a minute of silence at 7:58 a.m., the time when the first explosion convulsed the departure terminal. Among them were King Philippe and Queen Mathilde, Prime Minister Charles Michel and relatives of victims. Baggage carousels froze, takeoffs and landings were held off and all other activity at the airport ceased for the tribute. The names of the dead were read to the plaintive accompaniment of a single cello.

The anniversary dominated Belgian newspapers on Wednesday. Le Soir, a leading daily, referred to “hat day in March where we lost our innocence.”

In Belgium, which is divided into Dutch-speaking Flanders in the north and French-speaking Wallonia in the south, the commemoration was a rare moment of the country coming together.

Speaking on the eve of the anniversary, Mr. Michel called for European countries to do a better job coordinating their counterterrorism surveillance, and he commended surviving victims for not giving in to hate.

“ome politicians were probably too lax about the rise of an extremist, fundamentalist, radical ideology,”e told Reuters. “hat was a lesson for European democracy.”

In a powerful and defiant gesture, the Brussels transit authority called for commuters at the Maelbeek station to applaud and make noise at 9:11 a.m., the time when the bomb ripped through the station a year earlier. The noise was meant as an affirmation of life, to show “hat we have not forgotten, but remain standing against hate and terror,”he authority said.

President Trump once publicly called Brussels “a hellhole,”ut the city has shown resilience over the last year, even as the scars from the attacks exposed endemic weaknesses in Belgian law enforcement and a lack of social cohesion. But soldiers continue to patrol the streets, and the specter of radicalization still hangs over Molenbeek, a gritty immigrant neighborhood of Brussels that has been trying to shed its reputation as an incubator for European extremism.

Near the heart of the European quarter of the city, a large sculpture by the Belgian sculptor Jean-Henri Compèe was unveiled on Wednesday. Titled “ounded but Still Standing in the Face of the Unthinkable,”he 66-foot-long sculpture consists of two stainless steel slabs, crushed and pocked with holes, bending upward toward the sky in a gesture of hope.

Follow Dan Bilefsky on Twitter @DanBilefsky.

* Strikes Claimed by \b ISIS\b0  Shut Brussels and Shake European Security

* Brussels Attacks Underscore Vulnerability of an Open European Society

* Standing With Brussels Against Terrorism and Fear

A ceremony on Wednesday in the Brussels neighborhood of Molenbeek commemorated the first anniversary of attacks in the Belgian capital region. | Yves Herman/Reuters | Commuters observed a minute of silence on Wednesday. | Yves Herman/Reuters | The scene at the Brussels airport shortly after twin bombings last year. | Ketevan Kardava/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170322ed3m005mt



World; Middle East
U.S. Airstrike in Syria Is Said to Kill Dozens of Civilians

By ANNE BARNARD 
589 words
22 March 2017
13:20
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon —t least 30 Syrian civilians were killed in an airstrike by the United States-led coalition fighting Islamic State militants in a rural area of Raqqa Province early Tuesday, according to residents, activists and state television.

The United States-led coalition said it had no indications an airstrike had hit civilians, but in its daily report on coalition strikes, the United States military acknowledged that strikes were carried out in the area. It said that on Tuesday, coalition warplanes carried out 19 airstrikes —n unusually high number for a single day —n a range of Islamic State facilities near the city of Raqqa.

The attack, which hit a school in the town of Mansoura, where civilians had taken shelter Tuesday night, was the second time in a week that Syrians had accused the United States of involvement in a strike that killed dozens of noncombatants.

Forty-nine people died last week when American warplanes fired on a target in Al Jinah, a village in western Aleppo Province. United States officials said the attack had hit a building where Qaeda operatives were meeting, but residents said the warplanes had struck a mosque where hundreds of people had gathered for a weekly religious meeting.

The United States military said it was investigating whether civilians had been killed in that airstrike.

In Raqqa,  the Islamic State’ self-declared  capital, hundreds of people who fled their homes in other parts of Syria were sheltering in the school, according to residents and to the group Raqqa Is Being Slaughtered Silently, a team of activists originally from Raqqa who monitor the conflict.

The two airstrikes have raised concerns about whether the United States military has become less careful, or less selective, in its targeting. President Trump repeatedly said during his campaign that he would loosen restrictions intended to protect civilians during attacks against the Islamic State and other extremist groups.

The attack came as American forces took a new step in their campaign against the Islamic State, also known by the acronyms \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL. On Wednesday, United States Special Forces troops and members of the Syrian Democratic Forces, the name used by the Kurdish and Arab forces working with the United States military in northeastern Syria, were dropped into territory held by the Islamic State near the Tabqa Dam on the Euphrates River, as more Kurdish forces crossed the river to reinforce them. The school in the town of Mansoura was not far from that area.

Airstrikes during the Obama administration also led to high civilian tolls, most notably during an operation last year in Manbij, when the city was held by Islamic State militants.

Khaled al-Homsi, an activist from Palmyra who opposes both the Syrian government and the Islamic State, said that among the displaced people at the school were families from Palmyra, which has changed hands several times in recent years, switching between pro-government and Islamic State forces.

Residents of Palmyra, an ancient city known for its Roman stone amphitheater, say they have endured bombing by government warplanes, harsh treatment and summary killings by Islamic State, and reprisals and looting by pro-government forces retaking the area.

* Trump Administration Is Said to Be Working to Loosen Counterterrorism Rules

* U.S. Military Investigating Reports of Civilian Deaths in Syria Airstrike

* U.S. Military Denies Reports It Bombed Mosque in Syria

* \b ISIS\b0  Leaders Are Fleeing Raqqa, U.S. Military Says

Document NYTFEED020170322ed3m00439



National Desk; SECTA
Devices Banned on Some Planes Over  ISIS  Fears

By RON NIXON, ADAM GOLDMAN and ERIC SCHMITT; Reporting was contributed by Katrin Bennhold and Amie Tsang in London, Adam Goldman in Washington and Nour Youssef in Cairo. 
1,280 words
22 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Intelligence showing that the Islamic State is developing a bomb hidden in portable electronics spurred the United States and Britain on Tuesday to bar passengers from airports in a total of 10 Muslim-majority countries from carrying laptop computers, iPads and other devices larger than a cellphone aboard direct inbound flights, two senior American counterterrorism officials said.

Two additional American officials said the explosives were designed to be hidden in laptop batteries. All four spoke on condition of anonymity as they were not authorized to publicly discuss the sensitive information.

The Trump administration maintained that the new restrictions did not signal a credible, specific threat of an imminent attack. Officials said the alert reflects concerns that the Islamic State is ready -- or soon will be -- to launch new capabilities against the West. Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, declined to address the intelligence during a news media briefing on Tuesday.

Officials said passengers still could carry cellphones and other small devices into the airplane's cabin, while larger items like laptops would have to be stowed with checked luggage.

In all, airports in 10 countries, stretching from North Africa to the Mideast and into Turkey, are affected by the new restrictions. Both the United States and Britain have imposed the ban on flights from some airports in Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Turkey.

Washington also has restricted some flights from Kuwait, Morocco, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. London, meanwhile, has additionally restricted flights from some airports in Lebanon and Tunisia.

The targeting of a jetliner using explosives shows how the Islamic State, which has long worked to inspire terrorist attacks, is trying to compete with groups like Al Qaeda's affiliate in Yemen. The Qaeda affiliate has spent years inventing explosives that are difficult to detect, including trying to disguise bombs in devices like cellphones. Now, American intelligence officials believe the Islamic State has also developed explosives that can be hidden in electronic devices, one of the senior counterterror officials said.

Representative Peter King, Republican of New York, who sits on the House Intelligence and Homeland Security Committees, said that government officials had called him on Saturday to alert him to the impending ban.

''It was based on intelligence reports that are fairly recent,'' Mr. King said in a telephone interview. ''Intelligence of something possibly planned.''

The Department of Homeland Security said the restricted items on flights to the United States included laptop computers, tablets, cameras, travel printers and games bigger than a phone. The restrictions would not apply to aircraft crews, officials said in a briefing to reporters to outline the terms of the ban.

The American ban on electronics applies only to flights on foreign carriers. It does not affect American-operated airlines, since they do not fly directly to the United States from 10 designated airports in eight countries -- Amman, Jordan; Cairo; Istanbul; Jidda and Riyadh in Saudi Arabia; Kuwait City; Casablanca, Morocco; Doha, Qatar; and Dubai and Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates. Officials did not say how long the ban would remain in place or if other airports would be added.

In all, an estimated 50 flights each day into the United States would be affected. One of the world's busiest airports, in Abu Dhabi, already requires American-bound passengers to undergo strict screening by United States customs officials before boarding flights. Abu Dhabi is one of 15 airports in the world to employ the Homeland Security preclearance techniques.

Several hours after the American action, the British government announced its own ban on electronic devices on flights.

The British ban affects domestic and foreign airlines, including British Airways, the country's largest. Foreign airlines affected by the order include Turkish Airlines, EgyptAir and Royal Jordanian, among others, and it affects direct flights to the United Kingdom from Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt, Tunisia and Saudi Arabia.

A British official said the U.K. ban resulted from the combination of an evolving threat picture and a proliferation of electronic devices that airline passengers carry on board.

Examples of attacks by extremist groups against transportation hubs over the past two years include the October 2015 bombing of an airliner in Egypt, the attempted airliner downing in Somalia last year and armed attacks against airports in Brussels and Istanbul in 2016.

The new bans on electronic devices have prompted a round of protests from passengers who now face the prospect of flying long hours without the use of laptops or tablets.

Banu Akdenizli, an associate professor of communication at Northwestern University's campus in Doha, complained that the ban would affect her ability to work during a long flight to Greensboro, N.C., for a conference in April.

''This is a 20-hour flight,'' she said. ''I think as an academic or any business traveler, the function of a work flight is to be able to work on it, especially if you're going to a conference.''

Osama Sharshar, a prominent Egyptian lawmaker and journalist who frequently travels to the United States, was critical of the changes and suggested President Trump issued the order simply to ''please the right-wing extremists in America.''

''It will terribly affect me as a journalist, a lawmaker and a regular Egyptian,'' he said. ''I work on planes all the time. And the flight to the States is very long.''

The Homeland Security Department's new ban appeared to take officials from some of the affected countries by surprise.

Ahmet Arslan, Turkey's transport, maritime and communication minister, said the ban would be harmful to the United States' airline industry -- and to Turkey's.

''Our problem is not how the practice would take place,'' Mr. Arslan said. ''The issue is, it can decrease the comfort of the passengers and reduce the numbers of passengers. We are emphasizing that this is not in the benefit of passengers, and we think that they should step back from this or ease it.''

Counterterrorism experts seemed equally divided over the need for the device ban.

Michael Chertoff, the former Homeland Security secretary, said the new policy made sense given the threats to aircraft from explosive devices and concerns about screening at the targeted airports.

''The challenge is to balance security without making it impossible to fly,'' Mr. Chertoff said.

But Erroll Southers, director of the Homegrown Violent Extremism Studies Program at the University of Southern California, said the new guidance would do little to enhance security.

''This does little to minimize the threat of a remote-controlled I.E.D.,'' he said, referring to improvised explosive devices hidden in checked baggage.

American intelligence officials did not cite threats against domestic airports, but one said the Transportation Security Administration has been on heightened alert at several airports. It was not clear if that alert was related to the new restrictions on electronic devices.

The restrictions follow other recent changes the T.S.A. has made in aviation security. Two weeks ago, the agency adopted enhanced pat-down searches for passengers at United States airports, a response to what it said were weaknesses in airport screening measures. Under the new rules, passengers will no longer be allowed to choose what type of searches they undergo in security lines.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

A ban affecting airports in 10 countries includes Abu Dhabi airport in the United Arab Emirates. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KAMRAN JEBREILI/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A17) 

Document NYTF000020170322ed3m0006c



Foreign Desk; SECTA
A Test for Tillerson, and for U.S. Strategy on  ISIS 

By GARDINER HARRIS 
935 words
22 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- If President Trump has a secret plan to defeat the Islamic State, as he promised during the presidential campaign, then his international allies in that fight are hoping to get a glimpse of it on Wednesday.

And if Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson hopes to reverse a growing impression of his own inefficacy in government, he will have no better opportunity than this week.

Diplomats from around the world are set to gather at the State Department on Wednesday for the Trump administration's first meeting of the global coalition to defeat the Islamic State. Although such meetings have occurred regularly for years, this is the first since December 2014 in which representatives from all 68 countries of the coalition are expected to attend.

''Nobody wants to miss this meeting,'' said Julianne Smith, a former Defense Department official and deputy national security adviser to former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. ''They're all thinking this would be the opportunity for the administration to let them in on any shift in U.S. policy or strategy.''

The conclave is the first major diplomatic event hosted by Mr. Tillerson. And like a debutante at a coming-out party, Mr. Tillerson will face intense scrutiny about his status from a crowd that is expert in gauging power.

At this point in his tenure at the State Department's helm, Mr. Tillerson has yet to persuade anyone that he has much influence over Mr. Trump or the direction of American policy. His inability or unwillingness to choose his own deputy, protect his department from proposed deep budget cuts, attend meetings with foreign leaders at the White House or effectively manage the narrative of his foreign trips all suggest that he may be a marginal player in an administration dominated by the top White House advisers Stephen K. Bannon and Jared Kushner.

Wednesday will be Mr. Tillerson's first good opportunity to change that impression, which is essential if he wants to be included in the world's most exclusive councils of power.

But managing a meeting of 67 counterparts, many of whom he has yet to meet personally, would test even the most seasoned diplomat, and it involves the kind of complex multiparty haggling that few chief executives know how to handle. Mr. Tillerson was chief executive of Exxon Mobil, where quiet one-on-one deal making was the rule.

His only genuine multilateral meeting as secretary so far was a February gathering in Germany, attended by foreign ministers from countries in the Group of 20, but he largely kept his mouth shut. This time, he must give a welcoming speech, and there will be disappointment if he fails to make any substantive pronouncements.

The problem is, Mr. Tillerson may not have much to say. During the campaign, Mr. Trump's chief foreign policy pledges were to be tougher on China and the Islamic State than President Barack Obama had been. But so far, there are few indications that Mr. Trump intends to do so as president.

Mr. Tillerson's trip last week to China was surprisingly conciliatory, and the Trump administration's effort against the Islamic State has so far been almost identical to Mr. Obama's, with a heavy reliance on supporting indigenous armies to fight their own wars instead of deploying large numbers of American forces to far-flung hot spots.

Indeed, Mr. Tillerson has already explained that one reason his department should see its budget slashed is that he expects the United States to be engaged in fewer foreign conflicts, not more.

After an Oval Office meeting on Monday with Mr. Trump, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq told an audience at the United States Institute of Peace that he had been ''given assurances that the support will not only continue but will accelerate'' in Baghdad's battle against the Islamic State.

The word ''accelerate'' is likely to be bandied about quite a bit in the next few days at Foggy Bottom, and it is one that Mark Toner, the State Department's veteran spokesman, used repeatedly on Monday to describe the Trump administration's plans.

Promising that ''there's going to be some new ideas put on the table,'' Mr. Toner said Wednesday's meeting was intended ''to accelerate and focus more on how we can accelerate our efforts.''

Some counterterrorism experts said they hoped that a promised acceleration was genuine.

''I was not a particular fan of what the last administration did, which I would describe as relying on passivity, proxies and special forces,'' said Michael E. Leiter, who stepped down in 2011 as head of the National Counterterrorism Center. ''What I hope we see in this administration is selective, deeper engagements that give greater confidence to our allies so our partnerships are more meaningful.''

The Trump administration faces some difficult decisions in the coming months. These include how to safeguard the civilian population in the northern Iraqi city of Mosul, now under attack, from further devastation; whether to include Kurdish forces in Syria in the coming attack on Raqqa, despite bitter opposition from Turkey's government; and how to bolster Libya's fragile government to resist a growing threat from the Islamic State.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Gardiner Harris on Twitter @GardinerHarris .

A meeting of coalition allies on Wednesday is the first major diplomatic event hosted by Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KEVIN LAMARQUE/REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020170322ed3m0004f



First Words
Magazine
How ‘n-American’ecame the Political Insult of the Moment

By BEVERLY GAGE 
1,632 words
21 March 2017
10:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Conservatives have long complained that “ don’ recognize my country anymore.”n Trump’ America, though, it’ liberals who see something insufficiently, well, American. Issues once assumed to be settled —he desirability of racial tolerance, a general preference for democratic processes —ow appear, suddenly and ominously, to be up for debate. For many, this has created a sense of rupture, a disconnect between what they had assumed would be happening at this moment in history and what is actually taking place —s if the 2016 election shifted the nation into some dystopian reality that was never meant to be.

This, at least, is the feeling reflected in the growing popularity of a word once used to browbeat liberals and leftists. Today’ White House, according to Trump’ critics, is not only wrongheaded or meanspirited but “n-American.”

“merica is a nation of immigrants,”ruce Springsteen declared  from a stage in Australia in the wake of Trump’ first travel ban. “nd we find this antidemocratic and fundamentally un-American.”hen the White House introduced a revised version of the order earlier this month, the newly chosen Democratic National Committee chairman, Tom Perez, warned that “his ban on Muslims is just as dangerous and un-American as the last one.”thers have invoked the word to assail the president’ name-calling, attacks on judges and contempt for the media. “his White House does not seem to value an independent press,”CNN ’ Jake Tapper declared  last month. “here is a word for that line of thinking. The word is un-American.”

This line of attack remains just as popular on the right, and Trump staff members have been quick to use it. On the day after Trump’ speech to Congress, Sebastian Gorka, a deputy assistant to the president, called for unwavering support of the president’ initiatives on behalf of “mmigration crime”ictims: “f you object to that, you are in favor of pain, in favor of tragedy and in favor of chaos,”e told one interviewer, “nd that is un-American.”he president himself has joined in, too. “he real scandal here is that classified information is illegally given out by ‘ntelligence’ike candy,”e tweeted in mid-February, responding to accusations about his campaign’ ties to Russia. “ery un-American!”

The charge can come across as an empty one, ready to be attached to any given outrage. But its re-emergence reflects something far more serious about the state of national discourse. On the surface, “n-American”mplies consensus: It carries a punch only when everybody agrees what “merican”s. But the word has historically gained traction at moments when national consensus seems the most wobbly and uncertain. It signals an urgent desire to find something —nything —hat Americans can still agree on.

For Trump’ critics, it is aspirational, pointing toward an American dream of liberty and equality that has never quite been realized on the ground. For the administration, the word is a way of designating insiders and outsiders, the righteous and the nonrighteous, those who deserve the privileges of citizenship and those who do not. Coming from the White House, it also carries an implied threat: Those who are “n-American”—eakers, critics, reporters —ay need to be dealt with as “nemies of the people,”nother worrisome Trump phrase.

To label something “n-American”s to imagine America as it should have been or as it might yet be but not as it ever was. Far from bringing back a meaningless insult, the revival of the charge suggests that something very big is now at stake: not only the direction of federal policy or the partisan balance of power but America’ identity as a nation.

In his farewell speech, Barack Obama paid homage to “he beating heart of our American idea,”escribing how the promise of “reedom to chase our individual dreams”as long inspired the nation’ citizens. This notion —hat America is not simply another nation-state but an “dea”—s itself the big American idea, the “eating heart”f what’ known as American exceptionalism. It’ what allows Americans to label certain things un-American even when those things have existed for centuries within the territorial boundaries of the United States. “merica is capable of being un-American,”amented Richard Cahan, one of the authors of a recent book on Japanese internment — seemingly absurd claim but, within the exceptionalist tradition, an entirely plausible one.

Americans have been denouncing each other in this manner almost since the dawn of the republic. By the early 20th century, the accusation encompassed a vast and incoherent range of political convictions. “mericans are very fond of classing as un-American anything they don’ like,”he St. Louis Post-Dispatch complained in 1909, ticking off tariffs and trusts, prohibition and social drinking, boycotts and “he intimidation of workingmen”s just a few of the positions declared “n-American”y their opponents.

The First World War only raised the stakes of this rhetorical clash. In an attempt to mobilize a divided country, President Woodrow Wilson called for “00 percent Americanism,”ffectively marginalizing anyone not 100 percent on board with the war effort —ncluding thousands of German immigrants (whose noncitizenship made them candidates for internment) and antiwar dissenters like the Socialist leader Eugene Debs (who was sentenced to 10 years in prison under Wilson’ new Espionage Act). After the war, the impulse to enforce “mericanism”elped to justify deportation raids and the rapid growth of the Ku Klux Klan. By 1924, the same impulse had yielded the nation’ first comprehensive immigration law, which largely banned immigrants from Asia, Africa and the Middle East and restricted entry from the heavily Catholic and Jewish countries of southern and eastern Europe.

Throughout these years, the burgeoning civil liberties movement clung to “n-American”s a useful critique, insisting that restrictive speech and immigration laws violated essential American principles. By the 1930s, though, “n-American”ad begun to harden as a language of repression, not resistance. In 1938, the House of Representatives created its infamous Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC). After brief forays into investigating domestic fascism, the committee focused almost exclusively on American communists, deemed dangerous both for their suspected ties to the Soviet Union and for their “n-American”deas about labor rights and racial equality.

The committee did target a few suspected spies, but HUAC’ tribunals served primarily to decimate the American left, creating an atmosphere in which communists and noncommunists alike feared expressing their political opinions. Even at the height of this conflict, though, a few dissenters held on to an alternate view. By 1948, one F.B.I. memo noted, some Americans were starting to see “he House Committee on Un-American Activities as being un-American, itself.”

For today’ Democratic leadership, this viewpoint appears to hold considerable appeal. In her now-notorious 2013 speech at Goldman Sachs , Hillary Clinton warned against demagogues who “lay on people’ fears”o promote their “ackward-looking”genda. “hey have to be rejected,”he declared, “ecause they are fundamentally un-American.”wo years later, Obama made a speech championing the children of undocumented immigrants: “hen I hear folks talking as if somehow these kids are different than my kids or less worthy in the eyes of God, that somehow they are less worthy of our respect and consideration and care, I think that’ un-American,”e said. “ think we should do better, because that’ how America was made.”

The problem, of course, is that this is not how America was made. As a point of strategy, it may behoove Democrats to embrace patriotic or nationalistic language —o insist that there is more than one way to make America great. As a matter of history, however, this tends to obscure the bitter and enduring conflicts of the past. During election season, many Democrats apparently believed their own story, assuming that Americans were too dedicated to the expansion of liberty to elect Donald Trump . His victory is a reminder that, despite the country’ fondness for aspirational rhetoric, our illiberal traditions have serious staying power, too.

Today’ Republicans seem to recognize this perfectly well. In the past three years, Attorney General Jeff Sessions has praised the 1924 immigration act as a matter of national self-preservation. Newt Gingrich has called for a revival  of HUAC to contend with ISIS sympathizers. And the Ku Klux Klan and American fascist movements have experienced levels of attention and influence not seen since before World War II. Trump complains that he is being subjected to “itch hunts”nd “cCarthyism”ut has advocated policies —ike a “egistry”or Muslims —hat hark back to the list-making and name-naming of the HUAC era.

For the president’ opponents, it may be comforting to believe that such policies are un-American. But as the editors of The St. Louis Post-Dispatch noted more than a century ago, “he things we hurry to denounce as un-American”re often “eculiarly and distinctly American.”

“ better and broader view,”hey concluded, “eems to be that these problems are of our own creation, and are to be solved only by ourselves.”

Sign up for our newsletter  to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Beverly Gage is a professor of American political history at Yale. She is the author of “he Day Wall Street Exploded: A Story of America in Its First Age of Terror”nd is currently writing a biography of the former F.B.I. director J. Edgar Hoover.

Illustration by Derek Brahney 

Document NYTFEED020170321ed3l002jr



Lens
Multimedia
The Times Sweeps Overseas Press Club Photo Awards

By JAMES ESTRIN 
779 words
21 March 2017
14:56
NYT Blogs
NYTB
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved 

Recognizing “xceptional courage and enterprise,”he Overseas Press Club awarded its Robert Capa gold medal to Bryan Denton and Sergey Ponomarev of The New York Times for their coverage of the fight against ISIS and its aftermath.

The Times swept all three of the O.P.C.’ photography awards this year. Daniel Berehulak won the Oliver Rebbot Award for his coverage of murders of drug users in the Philippines who were targeted by President Rodrigo Duterte. The award for feature photography went to Meridith Kohut for her photo essay “nside Venezuela’ Crumbling Mental Hospitals.”n addition, Times photographer Tomá Munita received a special citation in the feature category for his poetic photographs of Cuba on the edge of change.

“e’e thrilled and honored for the recognition which validates the commitment that we have to in-depth photojournalism,”aid David Furst, the Times’ international photo editor. “’ particularly proud of the range of Times photography that was awarded and recognized this year —rave war photography from Sergey and Bryan; unflinching photography from Daniel Berehulak on the streets of the Philippines; sensitive, intimate photos of the change in Cuba from Tomá Munita; and Meridith Kohut’ definitive work on the downward spiral in Venezuela.”

During the final two weeks of the Fallujah offensive against ISIS, Mr. Denton said he covered “ellish”ighting in temperatures that soared to over 110 degrees.

“t was in Fallujah where I first got a little insight to the brutality not just of ISIS but of some of the popular mobilization units fighting ISIS and of the war in general,”aid Mr. Denton, who started photographing for The Times in 2006. “ understand the necessity to put an end to the human rights violations, war crimes and genocidal reign of ISIS. But at the same time, I do worry about how you demilitarize the population and stop this cycle of revenge that has maimed Iraq over the last decade and a half.”

Mr. Ponomarev also photographed the battle for Mosul, as well as several Christian villages that were liberated from ISIS’ rule. Covering the war against ISIS, he said, was different from other conflicts he has photographed because he could only work from one side, since ISIS has executed many journalists.

The photographers ad already been recognized by other organizations this year, including the World Press Photo Contest, Pictures of the Year International and the George Polk awards. Mr. Berehulak, who won a Pulitzer Prize in 2015 for his coverage f Ebola, said that awards could help re-focus the world’ attention on important stories, such as the state-sanctioned drug killings in the Philippines. His story, which he also wrote, was published by The Times in Filipino, Mandarin, Spanish and English.

Meridith Kohut has been based in Venezuela for eight years and has chronicled its economic and political collapse. She spent much of 2016 working with Times correspondent Nick Casey on a series of in-depth stories examining how the crisis affected people’ daily life. Mr. Casey and Ms. Kohut recently won a Polk award for those stories.

“e found doctors working in public hospitals that were similar to war zones with no antibiotics, no pain medicine and shortages of gauze and syringes,”s. Kohut said.

Ms. Kohut’ reporting led her to photograph psychiatric hospitals, including one on the outskirts of the town of Barquisimeto. She walked into a building overgrown with vegetation where the voices of “patients screaming in desperation”ould be heard. Because of an extreme shortage of psychiatric medicines, there was little treatment available for patients who were harming themselves or others.

“he only thing the doctors and nurses can do to protect them and the other patients is keep them in an isolation cell which looks like a very small jail cell with a barred window,”s. Kohut said.

The Times also received a citation for the Hal Boyle Award for “est newspaper, news service or digital reporting from abroad”or the series “ecrets of the Kingdom”y Ben Hubbard, Mark Mazzetti, Carlotta Gall, Scott Shane and Nicholas Kulish, and a citation for the Ed Cunningham Award for best magazine reporting on an international story for “ractured Lands,”y Scott Anderson.

When asked what the secret was to such consistently outstanding work, Michele McNally, the Times’ director of photography, was concise.

“ou take an incredibly talented group of photographers, put them on the most important stories, and let it run as long as it needs to!”

Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.“

Document NYTB000020170321ed3l00001



technology
What Travelers Should Know About New Restrictions on Devices

By BRIAN X. CHEN 
706 words
21 March 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

SAN FRANCISCO —he United States Department of Homeland Security on Tuesday enacted a new flight restriction. Under the rule, passengers traveling on foreign airlines from eight majority-Muslim countries to the United States are barred from bringing devices larger than cellphones onto the plane. Instead, they have to stow devices like computers and tablets in checked luggage.

Who is affected, why are larger devices banned, and what should you do? Here is what we know so far.

Who is affected?

The new policy affects people flying to the United States from airports in Amman, Jordan; Cairo; Istanbul; Jidda and Riyadh in Saudi Arabia; Kuwait City; Casablanca, Morocco; Doha, Qatar; and Dubai and Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates.

The United Kingdom also announced a similar ban on devices larger than smartphones on certain airlines. The policy applies to flights coming into the U.K. from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Tunisia, Lebanon, Turkey and Jordan.

For business travelers on those airlines, the ban may disrupt productivity.

“his is going to hurt all the serious businesspeople and academics,”aid Osama Sharshar, an Egyptian lawmaker and journalist who frequently travels to the United States. “hey are not going there to play and don’ have time to waste.”

Do these devices pose a greater threat than cellphones?

Only physically, not technologically.

A computer or a tablet is larger than a smartphone, which would theoretically provide more room for terrorists to cram in components like bomb parts or weapons, said Bill Marczak, a senior fellow at the Citizen Lab, a research group that follows technology and policy. Multiple terrorists could then each take a computer on a plane containing an explosive component and, hypothetically, put it together in the cabin, he said.

Yet a smartphone may also pose threats. As Samsung demonstrated last year with its Galaxy Note 7, smartphones —nd anything with a lithium-ion battery —re capable of exploding and causing safety hazards.

Technologically, a smartphone is a miniature computer that is just as powerful as a laptop. There is also a risk that a terrorist could use a smartphone to remotely detonate a bomb that is hidden inside a computer checked in as cargo, said Nick Feamster, a computer science professor at Princeton University.

So why ban computers and tablets?

Other than preventing terrorists from smuggling components onto planes, the device ban may create additional surveillance opportunities. It is common for airport security officials to search checked luggage. In theory, if a computer is checked, airport officials can do more thorough searches, including a data frisk.

“ho, if anyone, takes control of your device while it’ not in your sight or possession?”rofessor Feamster said. “ search of your device is not outside the realm of possibility.”

What should I do?

If you are flying on an affected airline and concerned about your privacy, consider the recommendations outlined in our guide to protecting your data while crossing the border.

For one, you could encrypt your files with an app like BitLocker or FileVault. That way, if someone did try to gain access to your data, a passphrase would be needed to decrypt the files, Mr. Marczak of the Citizen Lab said.

In addition, travelers could seal laptops in a tamper-evident bag, Mr. Marczak said. Once you reach your destination, you can see if anyone tampered with the laptop by inserting a physical surveillance device into it, for example.

You could also consider traveling with an inexpensive computer that lacks any of your sensitive data, Professor Feamster added. And you could back up your data to the cloud and purge it from the inexpensive computer before checking it in with your luggage.

If he were traveling to those countries now, Mr. Feamster said, “ wouldn’ even bother taking my main laptop. I’ take my clean laptop that doesn’ have any data on it.”

Follow Brian X. Chen on Twitter@bxchen.

Nour Youssef contributed reporting from Cairo.

* Crossing the Border? Here’ How to Safeguard Your Data From Searches

* Devices Banned on Flights From 10 Countries Over \b ISIS\b0  Fears

* As More Devices Board Planes, Travelers Are Playing With Fire

Document INHT000020170322ed3l00011



Books
Tell Us 5 Things About Your Book: Judith Matloff on Why Mountains Attract War

By JOHN WILLIAMS 
844 words
21 March 2017
21:15
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

No one would describe mountains as easy places. But the dangers documented in Judith Matloff’ new book, “o Friends but the Mountains,”o beyond the expected rough terrain. Matloff, a veteran war correspondent, was curious why so many of the world’ conflicts take place in mountainous regions. To get a better understanding, she traveled to Albania, Mexico and other places. In the first installment of a new interview series, Matloff tells us about the inspiration for the book, what she learned while writing it and more.

When did you first get the idea to write this book?

JUDITH MATLOFF Over three decades as a foreign correspondent, whether I was writing about rebellion or drug cartels or massacres, I invariably found myself in mountains. These assignments required hiking boots and tablets for altitude sickness. Yet I only made the connection between terrain and conflict during the most prosaic moment, at home in flatland Manhattan. I was playing a round of the board game Risk with my 11-year-old son and husband, and that afternoon, as we battled over Afghanistan —ho hasn’ over the centuries? —ur son, Anton, asked me where people were currently fighting. I marked about two dozen places off the top of my head, and threw in a few more spots that had seen strife over the past century. On a globe that showed elevations, Anton traced the surface with his finger and made notes on a pad, so absorbed that he failed to notice his father rampaging through the Himalayas to take China. “osovo, Chechnya, Kashmir, Chiapas,”nton recited, among others, checking the altitude key for each. “ost occur in mountains. Why?”

I decided to find out.

What’ the most surprising thing you learned while writing it?

MATLOFF: That people from mountains spanning the Atlas to the Andes feel an intense affinity with each other. They have even formed a global organization, the World Mountain People Association. No such network exists for desert dwellers or islanders. The WMPA gathers highlanders from 70 countries, who meet on a different slope each year to discuss a shared “ountain identity”nd grievances over flatland chauvinism. The group convinced me that topography plays a role in shaping lifestyle and outlook. A sherpa and a shepherd from the Pyrenees will both describe a deep spiritual connection to the land and similar personality traits: insularity, self-reliance, a gift for improvisation, a suspicion of outsiders.

In what way is the book you wrote different from the book you set out to write?

MATLOFF: I initially envisaged a prescriptive policy book that would examine why mountains were prone to persistent violence. I delved deep into literature and history to understand these islands in the sky. The book took on a more anecdotal complexion when I began field research. I couldn’ resist describing the drama of the landscape and the lives of people. The isolated mountains entrapped both inhabitants and invaders. Colombian fighters stuck on a ridge squeezed water from moss as supplies ran out. A bold geriatric inspired Nepal’ Rai indigenous people to fight construction of a dam. American soldiers collapsed from oxygen starvation in Afghanistan. Blood feuds prevented Albanian teens from leaving their houses to attend school. I wanted to evoke the crack of avalanches, the vertigo, the smell of wood smoke and fear.

Who is a creative person (not a writer) who has influenced you and your work

MATLOFF: My father. He inspired me to write both light and dark. Dad deployed as a teen to fight Hitler, and he spent his adult years obsessing over war. As a child I watched films about concentration camps and General George Patton, which no doubt influenced my choice of topics later on. But my father also was a jokester who drew hilarious cartoons and urged me not to take myself too seriously. My work embodies these contradictory aspects. This book —ike my first, about the Angolan civil war —xamines why people fight, a topic that my late father would have loved to debate, no doubt. Yet I also seize upon absurd moments, as that’ as much a part of the human condition as misery.

Persuade someone to read it in less than 50 words.

MATLOFF: Danger, like water, cascades down from mountains. They house 10 percent of the world’ population but account for a disproportionate number of its conflicts. Highlands provide sanctuary to ISIS, cocaine barons, Al Qaeda and countless insurgents. You better pay attention because those hills threaten world peace.

This interview, conducted by email, has been condensed and edited.

Correction: March 22, 2017, Wednesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of the introduction to this interview erroneously included one country in a list of places to which Judith Matloff traveled to gather material for her book. The book’ account of Afghanistan was based on secondary sources.

Judith Matloff | Glenn Jussen 

Document NYTFEED020170321ed3l007n1



U.S.; Politics
Devices Banned on Planes From 10 Countries Over  ISIS  Fears

By RON NIXON, ADAM GOLDMAN and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,557 words
21 March 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

WASHINGTON —ntelligence showing that the Islamic State is developing a bomb hidden in portable electronics spurred the United States and Britain on Tuesday to bar passengers from airports in a total of 10 Muslim-majority countries from carrying laptop computers, iPads and other devices larger than a cellphone aboard direct inbound flights, two senior American counterterrorism officials said.

Two additional American officials said the explosives were designed to be hidden in laptop batteries. All four spoke on condition of anonymity as they were not authorized to publicly discuss the sensitive information.

Officials said passengers still could carry cellphones and other small devices into the cabin, while larger items like laptops would have to be stowed with checked luggage.

The Trump administration maintained that the new restrictions did not signal a credible, specific threat of an imminent attack. Officials said the alert reflects concerns that the Islamic State is ready —r soon will be —o launch new capabilities against the West. Sean Spicer, the White House spokesman, declined to address the intelligence during a press briefing on Tuesday.

In all, airports in 10 countries, stretching from North Africa to across the Mideast and into Turkey, are affected by the new restrictions. Both the United States and Britain have imposed the devices ban on flights from some airports in Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Turkey.

Washington also has restricted some flights from Kuwait, Morocco, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. London, meanwhile has additionally restricted flights form some airports in Lebanon and Tunisia.

The targeting of a jetliner using explosives shows how the Islamic State, which has long worked to inspire terrorist attacks, is trying to compete with groups like Al Qaeda’ affiliate in Yemen. The Qaeda affiliate has spent years inventing explosives that are difficult to detect, including trying to disguise bombs in devices like cellphones. Now, American intelligence officials believe the Islamic State has also developed explosives that can be hidden in electronic devices, one of the senior counterterror officials said.

Representative Peter King, Republican of New York, who sits on the House Intelligence and Homeland Security Committees, said that government officials called him on Saturday to alert him to the impending ban.

“t was based on intelligence reports that are fairly recent,”r. King said in a telephone interview. “ntelligence of something possibly planned.”

The Department of Homeland Security said the restricted items on flights to the United States included laptop computers, tablets, cameras, travel printers and games bigger than a phone. The restrictions would not apply to aircraft crews, officials said in a briefing to reporters to outlined the terms of the ban.

The new policy took effect at 3 a.m. Eastern time on Tuesday, and must be followed within 96 hours by airlines flying to the United States from airports in Amman, Jordan; Cairo; Istanbul; Jidda and Riyadh in Saudi Arabia; Kuwait City; Casablanca, Morocco; Doha, Qatar; and Dubai and Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates.

The American ban on electronics applies only to flights on foreign carriers, and not American-operated airlines, which do not fly directly to the United States from the designated airports. Officials did not say how long the ban would remain in place or if other airports would be added.

In all, an estimated 50 flights each day into the United States would be affected. One of the world’ busiest airports, in Abu Dhabi, already requires American-bound passengers to undergo strict screening by United States customs officials before boarding flights. Abu Dhabi is one of 15 airports in the world to employ the Homeland Security preclearance techniques.

Several hours after the American action, the British government announced its own ban on electronic devices on flights.

The British ban affects domestic and foreign airlines, including British Airways, the country’ largest. Foreign airlines affected by the order include Turkish Airlines, EgyptAir and Royal Jordanian, among others, and it affects direct flights to the United Kingdom from Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt, Tunisia and Saudi Arabia.

A British official said the U.K. ban resulted from the combination of an evolving threat picture and a proliferation of electronic devices that airline passengers carry on board.

Examples of attacks by extremist groups against transportation hubs over the past two years include the October 2015 bombing of an airliner in Egypt, the attempted airliner downing in Somalia last year and armed attacks against airports in Brussels and Istanbul in 2016.

The new bans on electronic devices have prompted a round of protests from passengers who now face the prospect of flying long hours without the use of laptops or tablets.

Banu Akdenizli, an associate professor of communication at Northwestern University’ campus in Doha, complained that the ban would affect her ability to work during a long flight to Greensboro, N.C., for a conference in April.

“his is a 20-hour flight,”he said. “ think as an academic or any business traveler, the function of a work flight is to be able to work on it, especially if you’e going to a conference.”

Osama Sharshar, a prominent Egyptian lawmaker and journalist who frequently travels to the United States, was critical of the changes and suggested President Trump issued the order simply to “lease the right-wing extremists in America.”

“t will terribly affect me as a journalist, a lawmaker and a regular Egyptian,”e said. “ work on planes all the time. And the flight to the States is very long. What are people supposed to do for 14 or so hours?”

The Homeland Security Department’ new ban appeared to take officials from some of the affected countries by surprise.

Ahmet Arslan, Turkey’ transport, maritime and communication minister, said the ban would be harmful to the United States’irline industry —nd to Turkey’.

“ur problem is not how the practice would take place,”r. Arslan said. “he issue is, it can decrease the comfort of the passengers and reduce the numbers of passengers. We are emphasizing that this is not in the benefit of passengers, and we think that they should step back from this or ease it.”

Counterterrorism experts seemed equally divided over the need for the device ban.

Michael Chertoff, the former Homeland Security secretary, said the new policy made sense given the threats to aircraft from explosive devices and concerns about screening at the targeted airports.

“he challenge is to balance security without making it impossible to fly,”r. Chertoff said.

But Erroll Southers, director of the Homegrown Violent Extremism Studies Program at the University of Southern California, said the new guidance would do little to enhance security.

“his does little to minimize the threat of a remote-controlled I.E.D.,”e said, referring to improvised explosive devices hidden in checked baggage.

American intelligence officials did not cite threats against domestic airports, but one said the Transportation Security Administration has been on heightened alert at several airports. It was not clear if that alert was related to the new restrictions on electronic devices.

The restrictions follow other recent changes the T.S.A. has made in aviation security. Two weeks ago, the agency adopted enhanced pat-down searches for passengers at United States airports, a response to what it said were weaknesses in airport screening measures. Under the new rules, passengers will no longer be allowed to choose what type of searches they undergo in security lines.

The agency said the measures, which will be more invasive than current procedures, were needed to improve the ability of screeners to detect explosives or other banned items. In a series of 70 undercover tests of airport security screening procedures, conducted in 2015 by the Homeland Security inspector general’ office, auditors were able to get fake weapons and explosives past security screeners 95 percent of the time, according to the still-classified report.

The enhanced pat-down searches will be used on passengers who refuse to go through the full-body screening machine. Passengers who trigger alarms while going through screening will also undergo the enhanced searches. T.S.A. officers can also randomly choose passengers for the more invasive pat-downs.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Reporting was contributed by Katrin Bennhold and Amie Tsang in London, Adam Goldman in Washington and Nour Youssef in Cairo.

Correction: March 21, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misidentified an airport subject to the new policy that is one of 15 in the world that employs the Homeland Security preclearance techniques. It is Abu Dhabi International Airport, not Dubai International Airport. The error was repeated in a picture caption.

* What Travelers Should Know About New Restrictions on Devices

* Trying to Get Past Airport Security Faster? Get in Line

* Airport Security Delays Won’ End Soon, T.S.A. Chief Says

An Emirates plane at the Dubai airport in the United Arab Emirates. | Ullstein Bild, via Getty Images | The Transportation Security Administration trains an average of 230 dogs a year to detect explosives at its center at Lackland Air Force Base in Texas. | By RON NIXON and MICHAEL LESTER 

Document NYTFEED020170321ed3l0030e



U.S.; Politics
A Test for Tillerson, and for U.S. Strategy on  ISIS 

By GARDINER HARRIS 
922 words
22 March 2017
00:23
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —f President Trump has a secret plan to defeat the Islamic State, as he promised during the presidential campaign, then his international allies in that fight are hoping to get a glimpse of it on Wednesday.

And if Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson hopes to reverse a growing impression of his own inefficacy in government, he will have no better opportunity than this week.

Diplomats from around the world are set to gather at the State Department on Wednesday for the Trump administration’ first meeting of the global coalition to defeat the Islamic State. Although such meetings have occurred regularly for years, this is the first since December 2014 in which representatives from all 68 countries of the coalition are expected to attend.

“obody wants to miss this meeting,”aid Julianne Smith, a former Defense Department official and deputy national security adviser to former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. “hey’e all thinking this would be the opportunity for the administration to let them in on any shift in U.S. policy or strategy.”

The conclave is the first major diplomatic event hosted by Mr. Tillerson. And like a debutante at a coming-out party, Mr. Tillerson will face intense scrutiny about his status from a crowd that is expert in gauging power.

At this point in his tenure at the State Department’ helm, Mr. Tillerson has yet to persuade anyone that he has much influence over Mr. Trump or the direction of American policy. His inability or unwillingness to choose his own deputy, protect his department from proposed deep budget cuts, attend meetings with foreign leaders at the White House or effectively manage the narrative of his foreign trips all suggest that he may be a marginal player in an administration dominated by the top White House advisers Stephen K. Bannon and Jared Kushner.

Wednesday will be Mr. Tillerson’ first good opportunity to change that impression, which is essential if he wants to be included in the world’ most exclusive councils of power.

But managing a meeting of 67 counterparts, many of whom he has yet to meet personally, would test even the most seasoned diplomat, and it involves the kind of complex multiparty haggling that few chief executives know how to handle. Mr. Tillerson was chief executive of Exxon Mobil, where quiet one-on-one deal making was the rule.

His only genuine multilateral meeting as secretary so far was a February gathering in Germany, attended by foreign ministers from countries in the Group of 20, but he largely kept his mouth shut. This time, he must give a welcoming speech, and there will be disappointment if he fails to make any substantive pronouncements.

The problem is, Mr. Tillerson may not have much to say. During the campaign, Mr. Trump’ chief foreign policy pledges were to be tougher on China and the Islamic State than President Barack Obama had been. But so far, there are few indications that Mr. Trump intends to do so as president.

Mr. Tillerson’ trip last week to China was surprisingly conciliatory, and the Trump administration’ effort against the Islamic State has so far been almost identical to Mr. Obama’, with a heavy reliance on supporting indigenous armies to fight their own wars instead of deploying large numbers of American forces to far-flung hot spots.

Indeed, Mr. Tillerson has already explained that one reason his department should see its budget slashed is that he expects the United States to be engaged in fewer foreign conflicts, not more.

After an Oval Office meeting on Monday with Mr. Trump, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq told an audience at the United States Institute of Peace that he had been “iven assurances that the support will not only continue but will accelerate”n Baghdad’ battle against the Islamic State.

The word “ccelerate”s likely to be bandied about quite a bit in the next few days at Foggy Bottom, and it is one that Mark Toner, the State Department’ veteran spokesman, used repeatedly on Monday to describe the Trump administration’ plans.

Promising that “here’ going to be some new ideas put on the table,”r. Toner said Wednesday’ meeting was intended “o accelerate and focus more on how we can accelerate our efforts.”

Some counterterrorism experts said they hoped that a promised acceleration was genuine.

“ was not a particular fan of what the last administration did, which I would describe as relying on passivity, proxies and special forces,”aid Michael E. Leiter, who stepped down in 2011 as head of the National Counterterrorism Center. “hat I hope we see in this administration is selective, deeper engagements that give greater confidence to our allies so our partnerships are more meaningful.”

The Trump administration faces some difficult decisions in the coming months. These include how to safeguard the civilian population in the northern Iraqi city of Mosul, now under attack, from further devastation; whether to include Kurdish forces in Syria in the coming attack on Raqqa, despite bitter opposition from Turkey’ government; and how to bolster Libya’ fragile government to resist a growing threat from the Islamic State.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

President Xi Jinping of China meeting with Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson in Beijing this week. | Thomas Peter/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170321ed3l0093t



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Iraqi Leader, in Washington, Gets Trump's Assurance of U.S. Support

By MARK LANDLER and MICHAEL R. GORDON 
1,024 words
21 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Trump, who touted his opposition to the Iraq war during the 2016 campaign, welcomed Iraq's leader to the White House on Monday, and promised to continue support for the fight against the Islamic State.

Mr. Trump praised Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi at the start of their meeting for doing a ''good job'' and said that the United States recognized that the Iraqi soldiers who are pushing to retake the northern city of Mosul were ''fighting hard.''

Mr. Abadi later said that he was happy with the meeting and asserted that the new administration had assured him that American support would be expanded.

''We have been given assurances that the support will not only continue but will accelerate,'' he said during an appearance at the United States Institute of Peace in Washington.

''I think this administration wants to be more engaged in fighting terrorism,'' Mr. Abadi added. ''I sense a difference in terms of being head-to-head with terrorism.''

Neither American nor Iraqi officials, however, explained what economic support might be provided by the United States and the international community to help rebuild Iraqi cities that have been damaged during the conflict.

Nor did they explain what the American role might be after Iraqi forces retake Mosul, Iraq's second largest city, and evict Islamic State militants from other towns.

There is broad recognition among Iraqi and American security experts that there will be a continued need to train Iraqi forces, and perhaps even conduct commando operations, if the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, loses its so-called caliphate because any surviving militants are expected to maintain their yearslong drumbeat of terrorist bombings.

Mr. Trump hinted at the need for future American presence in Iraq by criticizing his predecessor, former President Barack Obama, for failing to negotiate an agreement that would have enabled American forces to stay. American ground troops withdrew from Iraq in 2011, as required under a security agreement brokered in 2008 by President George W. Bush.

''Certainly, we shouldn't have left. We should never ever have left,'' Mr. Trump said. ''A vacuum was created, and we discussed what happened.''

Mr. Abadi volunteered little on the matter, which remains a delicate issue in Iraq and, especially, with its neighbor Iran. Asked if he had been briefed on the strategy the Trump administration is working on to defeat the Islamic State, the prime minister said that ''I haven't seen a full plan.''

James Jeffrey, a former American ambassador to Baghdad, said the coming destruction of the Islamic State, as a caliphate and fighting force, would make the administration confront difficult questions about how deeply to get involved in Iraq's reconstruction and stabilization, and what additional political reforms might be needed to ensure that the country's politics do not become a breeding ground for the rise of another militant group.

''The main reason we're engaging with Iraq is combating ISIS, in the short run,'' Mr. Jeffrey said in an interview. ''But underneath that is the question, 'How are we going to relate to Iraq?'''

That was also addressed in a letter to Mr. Trump from more than a dozen senators, including Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee, who leads the Foreign Relations Committee.

''Iraq's challenges will not be solved when ISIS is defeated on the battlefield,'' wrote the senators, who argued that bringing stability to Iraq would require more power-sharing with the Sunnis and progress in resolving tensions with the Kurds. ''If Prime Minister al-Abadi commits to lead Iraq along these lines, he should have our full support in this endeavor.''

Some senior members of Mr. Trump's administration, including Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and H. R. McMaster, the national security adviser, served in Iraq.

They joined the White House meeting along with other ranking officials, including Vice President Mike Pence, Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson and Jared Kushner, the president's senior adviser.

Mr. Abadi brought his foreign, defense and oil ministers. Fuad Hussein, a senior official from the Kurdish autonomous region in northern Iraq, was also present, in a gesture of comity to the Kurds.

The session was held virtually 14 years to the day after Mr. Bush announced the start of the United States-led invasion of Iraq, which Mr. Trump initially supported but later opposed. Mr. Abadi spoke in classical Arabic at the start of his White House meeting. After reciting a section from the Quran, he stressed the desire for more cooperation with the United States.

But the Iraqi prime minister, who lived in exile in Britain during Saddam Hussein's years in power, switched to fluent English in his appearance at the Institute of Peace, where he sought to assure his audience that Iraq would not be unduly influenced by Iran.

''Iraq is not under the influence of any other country,'' he said. ''We are looking after our own interests.''

An unintended moment of levity came when the Iraqi leader was asked about proposals that Nineveh Province be turned into a semiautonomous region after Mosul is retaken. The idea has been promoted by province's former governor, but the notion of giving that degree of autonomy to a largely Sunni but ethnically diverse region has drawn opposition from Shiite-led Baghdad.

''We have to build bridges with others and work with others to be more secure,'' he said. ''Otherwise, what do you do? You build walls.''

The room erupted into laughter, and Mr. Abadi grinned, as well.

Iraq's future will be on the agenda again this week when Mr. Tillerson convenes a 68-nation gathering of the coalition that is fighting the Islamic State. Mr. Abadi is staying in Washington to attend that session.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

President Trump and Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi on Monday in Washington. Mr. Abadi said he was happy with their meeting. (PHOTOGRAPH BY T.J. KIRKPATRICK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170321ed3l00060



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
All the President's Lies

By DAVID LEONHARDT 
880 words
21 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
29
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The ninth week of Donald Trump's presidency began with the F.B.I. director calling him a liar.

The director, the very complicated James Comey, didn't use the L-word in his congressional testimony Monday. Comey serves at the pleasure of the president, after all. But his meaning was clear as could be. Trump has repeatedly accused Barack Obama of wiretapping his phones, and Comey explained there is ''no information that supports'' the claim.

I've previously argued that not every untruth deserves to be branded with the L-word, because it implies intent and somebody can state an untruth without doing so knowingly. George W. Bush didn't lie when he said Iraq had weapons of mass destruction, and Obama didn't lie when he said people who liked their current health insurance could keep it. They made careless statements that proved false (and they deserved much of the criticism they got).

But the current president of the United States lies. He lies in ways that no American politician ever has before. He has lied about -- among many other things -- Obama's birthplace, John F. Kennedy's assassination, Sept. 11, the Iraq War, ISIS, NATO, military veterans, Mexican immigrants, Muslim immigrants, anti-Semitic attacks, the unemployment rate, the murder rate, the Electoral College, voter fraud and his groping of women.

He tells so many untruths that it's time to leave behind the textual parsing over which are unwitting and which are deliberate -- as well as the condescending notion that most of Trump's supporters enjoy his lies.

Trump sets out to deceive people. As he has put it, ''I play to people's fantasies.''

Caveat emptor: When Donald Trump says something happened, it should not change anyone's estimation of whether the event actually happened. Maybe it did, maybe it didn't. His claim doesn't change the odds.

Which brings us to Russia.

Russia's interference in the 2016 presidential campaign was an attack on the United States. It's the kind of national-security matter that a president and members of Congress swear to treat with utmost seriousness when they take the oath of office. Yet now it has become the subject of an escalating series of lies by the president and the people who work for him.

As Comey was acknowledging on Monday that the F.B.I. was investigating possible collusion between Russia and the Trump campaign, Trump was lying about it. From both his personal Twitter account and the White House account, he told untruths.

A few hours later, his press secretary, Sean Spicer, went before the cameras and lied about the closeness between Trump and various aides who have documented Russian ties. Do you remember Paul Manafort, the chairman of Trump's campaign, who ran the crucial delegate-counting operation? Spicer said Manafort had a ''very limited role'' in said campaign.

The big question now is not what Trump and the White House are saying about the Russia story. They will evidently say anything. The questions are what really happened and who can uncover the truth.

The House of Representatives, unfortunately, will not be doing so. I was most saddened during Comey's testimony not by the White House's response, which I've come to expect, but by the Republican House members questioning him. They are members of a branch of government that the Constitution holds as equal to the presidency, but they acted like Trump staff members, decrying leaks about Russia's attack rather than the attack itself. The Watergate equivalent is claiming that Deep Throat was worse than Haldeman, Ehrlichman and Nixon.

It fell to Adam Schiff, a Democratic representative from Southern California, to lay out the suspicious ties between Trump and Russia (while also hinting he couldn't describe some classified details). Schiff did so in a calm, nine-minute monologue that's worth watching. He walked through pro-Putin payments to Michael Flynn and through another Trump's aide's advance notice of John Podesta's hacked email and through the mysterious struggle over the Republican Party platform on Ukraine.

''Is it possible that all of these events and reports are completely unrelated, and nothing more than an entirely unhappy coincidence? Yes, it is possible,'' Schiff said. ''But it is also possible, maybe more than possible, that they are not coincidental, not disconnected and not unrelated, and that the Russians used the same techniques to corrupt U.S. persons that they have employed in Europe and elsewhere. We simply don't know, not yet, and we owe it to the country to find out.''

Comey, as much as liberals may loathe him for his 2016 bungling, seems to be one of the few public officials with the ability and willingness to pursue the truth. I dearly hope that Republican members of the Senate are patriotic enough to do so as well.

Our president is a liar, and we need to find out how serious his latest lies are.

You can join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook. I am also writing a daily email newsletter and invite you to subscribe.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).

Document NYTF000020170321ed3l0005l



FIXES
OpEd; SECT
Bonds That Combat the Isolation of Military Life

By DAVID BORNSTEIN 
1,899 words
21 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

When Amanda Yeram was 17, she left her home in Southern Maine, and, following in her father's footsteps, joined the Marines. ''I was chasing my boyfriend, who had previously enlisted,'' Yeram said. ''I thought what a great adventure and opportunity to be with the one I love.''

The couple soon married, in 2002. During the next three years, Yeram's husband, James, was deployed twice in Iraq, while she stayed in the Marines, stationed at Camp Lejeune in Jacksonville, N. C. In 2006, after giving birth to a son, Yeram decided to leave the military. Shortly thereafter, James was reassigned from New River, N.C., to China Lake, Calif. In her new home, she suddenly found that ''I had no connections, no sense of community,'' she said. ''I had a hard time relating to nonmilitary families around me.''

It took her 10 months to find a job. Then, shortly after her daughter was born, her husband received another posting, to Camp Pendleton, Calif. ''The struggle started again,'' Yeram said. ''I was stuck both emotionally and financially. I got really depressed because I was used to providing for my family and couldn't any more.''

Three years ago, on Facebook, Yeram learned about a bicycle-building event being hosted for children of military families by a group called Blue Star Families. ''It was an amazing experience,'' she said. ''So I signed up to become a volunteer chapter director -- and it changed my life.''

She began as a volunteer and now is on staff, serving as as the organization's business operations manager. She has learned how to effectively assist others -- including military spouses and disabled veterans -- and how to organize events and build a community around herself and others.

Blue Star Families is a modest nonprofit organization founded in 2009 by military spouses. It receives no government funding, but punches well above its weight. Its 35 chapters around the world have engaged thousands of volunteers, who lead a wide range of programs to support military families.

''When you're in the military, you move so often and you're remote from family and friends, and what you're thinking about is so different from your nonmilitary neighbors,'' said Kathy Roth-Douquet, Blue Star Families' co-founder and chief executive, who is married to a retired Marine, and whose family moved nine times in 15 years. ''Because of these things, you don't have the kinds of bonds with a diverse set of people that are natural to how we solve our problems.''

''That isolation is very fixable,'' she added.

Blue Star Families' annual Military Family Lifestyle Survey has gained considerable influence among leaders in the armed forces and federal government. ''They have been a game changer when it comes to understanding the warrior class in America and being able to give us the data on the issues that are prevalent among them,'' said Patrick J. Murphy, a former under secretary of the Army.

Many Americans don't appreciate the strain that has been placed on military families since the 9/11 terrorist attacks or how actively troops are still being deployed. The war in Afghanistan is now the longest in American history. And around the globe, more than 150,000 troops are deployed in 150 countries protecting borders, sea lanes and underwater cables; fighting terrorism; guarding against a nuclear-capable North Korea; and much more. With the Trump administration seeking to augment American military capacity, it's essential to understand and find better ways to mitigate the stresses on military families.

The Blue Star Families survey is known for the level of detail it goes into and the candor it draws from military personnel. ''The research is granular enough that it allows you to think of how we can strategically improve the well-being of military families without just throwing money at it at a time of constrained budgets,'' said Michael O'Hanlon, who co-directs the Center on 21st Century Security and Intelligence at Brookings.

The survey has intensified attention to issues that military analysts and the Pentagon say lacked a sense of urgency until recently. Here are some important findings of the 2016 survey, which was released in December:

·2 percent of military families feel the current ''optempo'' -- the rate of military deployments, training and base duties -- ''exerts an unacceptable level of stress for a healthy work and family life.''

·2 percent of military families experienced more than six months of family separation in the previous 18 months.

·8 percent of military families feel the general public ''does not understand sacrifices made by service members and their families.''

·2 percent of military spouses are not employed.

·7 percent of military families would not recommend military service to their children.

·6 percent of military families cannot obtain reliable child care.

The data on the underemployment of military spouses was something of a revelation. It was widely understood that military pay and benefits are a top concern among military families. But the recognition that fewer than half of military spouses are employed -- and that those who are often take jobs well below their qualifications and earnings potential -- provides a clearer picture of the financial sacrifice military service entails. With median military pay in the mid-$40,000's, most military families cannot achieve the American dream on a single income.

The data on family stress has also caught many by surprise. ''Even though we've cut back the troop presence in Afghanistan by 90 percent relative to peak, and in Iraq by 95 percent relative to peak,'' O'Hanlon said, ''there's still enough little deployments -- in Europe, Korea, Okinawa, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, Syria, Turkey, naval deployments -- that families are still feeling stressed and fatigued by the pace'' of deployments.

Part of the problem is that the current personnel system was ''developed at a time when most of the people in the service were single,'' said former Senator Jim Talent, a Missouri Republican who serves as a co-chairman, alongside Roth-Douquet, of a task force created by the Bipartisan Policy Center to focus on defense personnel.

Today's military families think differently than those in the past. Roth-Douquet noted: ''This year's survey was the first time that family issues'' like spousal employment, family stability and quality of life, and the impact of deployments on children ''were top-five concerns for service members. It's an important thing to understand about millennials.''

And it revealed a vulnerability. Since the military has been an all-volunteer force, recruitment has drawn heavily on families with histories of service. In the Army, 83 percent of recruits have a close family member who served. What happens if military families are reluctant to recommend service to their children?

We may soon find out. The Blue Star Families survey reports that 19 percent of service members plan to leave the military within two years and another 25 percent plan to leave within three to five years. Last year, 57 percent of active-duty military families said they would not recommend military service to their children, almost triple the figure of a generation ago. ''Eighty percent of military spouses say that being a military spouse has hurt their careers,'' said Roth-Douquet. ''And for those who feel military service has hurt them, only a third are willing to recommend it.''

Blue Star Families seeks to help in two important ways: first, by getting more Americans to understand, through its survey, what military life is really like for families; and second, by fostering stronger communities around military families to mitigate their isolation and other challenges.

In recent years, the group's data has helped inform policies and practices. For example, the Army's Soldier for Life program not only helps veterans find employment and education after leaving the service, through partnerships with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation, the Schultz Family Foundation and the Teamsters, its employment transition programs also assist spouses, as well.

Bill French, a retired Navy vice admiral who leads the Armed Services Y.M.C.A., says the survey has helped his organization perform its work of helping enlisted service members from the lowest five pay grades. ''Their ages range from 17 years old to 26 or 27,'' said French. ''They make about $26,000 a year. Half of the folks in these pay grades are married, many with children.'' The organization serves families on 57 military bases with a range of child care, youth and parenting programs, as well as food and toy distribution, and travel stipends to bring families together at holidays.

''When our warriors are sent overseas, whether it's ISIS or to solve Ebola in Africa, we need our men and women to have their heads in the game, and they can't be worried about their spouses or kids at home,'' said Murphy, the former under secretary of the Army. ''When I was in Baghdad in Iraq in 2003 and it was 138 degrees, when these soldiers came in with divorce paperwork or their car was getting repossessed, they were not in the frame of mind they needed to be. And I had to make sure I got them straight and we took care of them. Having a team like Blue Star Families who are constantly checking where the heads and hearts of our military families are is critically important to our national security.''

Some ideas being considered to help military spouses include introducing more stability in assignments, making it easier for them to get Department of Defense jobs, streamlining professional certification across state lines, and opening contracting opportunities. ''These are not big-ticket items,'' said Talent. ''It's a question of making the system more responsive. The department needs to refocus itself on the long term quality of life of the families who serve.''

''This is one of those cases where everyone can really make a difference simply by being a good neighbor,'' Roth-Douquet said. The vast majority of military families in the United States live off base, making them harder to identify and reach out to. Blue Star Families' Neighbors program assists those who would like to meet other military families by recruiting them to be mentors, volunteers, employers or just friends. ''If we can get people to come together at large scale, it will make all the difference,'' she added.

Amanda Yeram's husband, James, is currently on a six-month deployment in Japan, but her experience is very different than in the past. ''I could pity myself,'' she said. ''But I don't hide inside anymore and build up that emotion. I go out and connect. Whether it's deployment, a caregiving issue, depression, unemployment, we need to understand that we're all going through something similar, and we need to build trust and cohesion.''

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

David Bornstein is the author of "How to Change the World," which has been published in 20 languages, and "The Price of a Dream: The Story of the Grameen Bank," and is co-author of "Social Entrepreneurship: What Everyone Needs to Know." He is a co-founder of the Solutions Journalism Network, which supports rigorous reporting about responses to social problems.

Document NYTF000020170321ed3l0003b



opinion
All the President’ Lies; Op-Ed Columnist

By DAVID LEONHARDT 
881 words
20 March 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The ninth week of Donald Trump’ presidency began with the F.B.I. director calling him a liar.

The director, the very complicated James Comey, didn’ use the L-word in his congressional testimony Monday. Comey serves at the pleasure of the president, after all. But his meaning was clear as could be. Trump has repeatedly accused Barack Obama of wiretapping his phones, and Comey explained there is “o information that supports”he claim.

I’e previously argued that not every untruth deserves to be branded with the L-word, because it implies intent and somebody can state an untruth without doing so knowingly. George W. Bush didn’ lie when he said Iraq had weapons of mass destruction, and Obama didn’ lie when he said people who liked their current health insurance could keep it. They made careless statements that proved false (and they deserved much of the criticism they got).

But the current president of the United States lies. He lies in ways that no American politician ever has before. He has lied about —mong many other things —bama’ birthplace, John F. Kennedy’ assassination, Sept. 11, the Iraq War, \b ISIS\b0 , NATO, military veterans, Mexican immigrants, Muslim immigrants, anti-Semitic attacks, the unemployment rate, the murder rate, the Electoral College, voter fraud and his groping of women.

He tells so many untruths that it’ time to leave behind the textual parsing over which are unwitting and which are deliberate —s well as the condescending notion that most of Trump’ supporters enjoy his lies.

Trump sets out to deceive people. As he has put it, “ play to people’ fantasies.”

Caveat emptor: When Donald Trump says something happened, it should not change anyone’ estimation of whether the event actually happened. Maybe it did, maybe it didn’. His claim doesn’ change the odds.

Which brings us to Russia.

Russia’ interference in the 2016 presidential campaign was an attack on the United States. It’ the kind of national-security matter that a president and members of Congress swear to treat with utmost seriousness when they take the oath of office. Yet now it has become the subject of an escalating series of lies by the president and the people who work for him.

As Comey was acknowledging on Monday that the F.B.I. was investigating possible collusion between Russia and the Trump campaign, Trump was lying about it. From both his personal Twitter account and the White House account, he told untruths.

A few hours later, his press secretary, Sean Spicer, went before the cameras and lied about the closeness between Trump and various aides who have documented Russian ties. Do you remember Paul Manafort, the chairman of Trump’ campaign, who ran the crucial delegate-counting operation? Spicer said Manafort had a “ery limited role”n said campaign.

The big question now is not what Trump and the White House are saying about the Russia story. They will evidently say anything. The questions are what really happened and who can uncover the truth.

The House of Representatives, unfortunately, will not be doing so. I was most saddened during Comey’ testimony not by the White House’ response, which I’e come to expect, but by the Republican House members questioning him. They are members of a branch of government that the Constitution holds as equal to the presidency, but they acted like Trump staff members, decrying leaks about Russia’ attack rather than the attack itself. The Watergate equivalent is claiming that Deep Throat was worse than Haldeman, Ehrlichman and Nixon.

It fell to Adam Schiff, a Democratic representative from Southern California, to lay out the suspicious ties between Trump and Russia (while also hinting he couldn’ describe some classified details). Schiff did so in a calm, nine-minute monologue that’ worth watching. He walked through pro-Putin payments to Michael Flynn and through another Trump’ aide’ advance notice of John Podesta’ hacked email and through the mysterious struggle over the Republican Party platform on Ukraine.

“s it possible that all of these events and reports are completely unrelated, and nothing more than an entirely unhappy coincidence? Yes, it is possible,”chiff said. “ut it is also possible, maybe more than possible, that they are not coincidental, not disconnected and not unrelated, and that the Russians used the same techniques to corrupt U.S. persons that they have employed in Europe and elsewhere. We simply don’ know, not yet, and we owe it to the country to find out.”

Comey, as much as liberals may loathe him for his 2016 bungling, seems to be one of the few public officials with the ability and willingness to pursue the truth. I dearly hope that Republican members of the Senate are patriotic enough to do so as well.

Our president is a liar, and we need to find out how serious his latest lies are.

You can join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook. I am also writing a daily email newsletter and invite you to subscribe.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).

Document INHT000020170321ed3k00003



Op-Ed Columnist
Opinion
All the President’ Lies

By DAVID LEONHARDT 
893 words
20 March 2017
23:12
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The ninth week of Donald Trump’ presidency began with the F.B.I. director calling him a liar.

The director, the very complicated James Comey, didn’ use the L-word in his congressional testimony Monday. Comey serves at the pleasure of the president, after all. But his meaning was clear as could be. Trump has repeatedly accused Barack Obama of wiretapping his phones, and Comey explained there is “o information that supports”he claim.

I’e previously argued that not every untruth deserves to be branded with the L-word, because it implies intent and somebody can state an untruth without doing so knowingly. George W. Bush didn’ lie when he said Iraq had weapons of mass destruction, and Obama didn’ lie when he said people who liked their current health insurance could keep it. They made careless statements that proved false (and they deserved much of the criticism they got).

But the current president of the United States lies. He lies in ways that no American politician ever has before. He has lied about —mong many other things —bama’ birthplace, John F. Kennedy’ assassination, Sept. 11, the Iraq War, \b ISIS\b0 , NATO, military veterans, Mexican immigrants, Muslim immigrants, anti-Semitic attacks, the unemployment rate, the murder rate, the Electoral College, voter fraud and his groping of women.

He tells so many untruths that it’ time to leave behind the textual parsing over which are unwitting and which are deliberate —s well as the condescending notion that most of Trump’ supporters enjoy his lies.

Trump sets out to deceive people. As he has put it, “ play to people’ fantasies.”

Caveat emptor: When Donald Trump says something happened, it should not change anyone’ estimation of whether the event actually happened. Maybe it did, maybe it didn’. His claim doesn’ change the odds.

Which brings us to Russia.

Russia’ interference in the 2016 presidential campaign was an attack on the United States. It’ the kind of national-security matter that a president and members of Congress swear to treat with utmost seriousness when they take the oath of office. Yet now it has become the subject of an escalating series of lies by the president and the people who work for him,

As Comey was acknowledging on Monday that the F.B.I. was investigating possible collusion between Russia and the Trump campaign, Trump was lying about it. From both his personal Twitter account and the White House account, he told untruths.

A few hours later, his press secretary, Sean Spicer, went before the cameras and lied about the closeness between Trump and various aides who have documented Russian ties. Do you remember Paul Manafort, the chairman of Trump’ campaign, who ran the crucial delegate-counting operation? Spicer said Manafort had a “ery limited role”n said campaign.

The big question now is not what Trump and the White House are saying about the Russia story. They will evidently say anything. The questions are what really happened and who can uncover the truth.

The House of Representatives, unfortunately, will not be doing so. I was most saddened during Comey’ testimony not by the White House’ response, which I’e come to expect, but by the Republican House members questioning him. They are members of a branch of government that the Constitution holds as equal to the presidency, but they acted like Trump staff members, decrying leaks about Russia’ attack rather than the attack itself. The Watergate equivalent is claiming that Deep Throat was worse than Haldeman, Ehrlichman and Nixon.

It fell to Adam Schiff, a Democratic representative from Southern California, to lay out the suspicious ties between Trump and Russia (while also hinting he couldn’ describe some classified details). Schiff did so in a calm, nine-minute monologue that’ worth watching. He walked through pro-Putin payments to Michael Flynn and through another Trump’ aide’ advance notice of John Podesta’ hacked email and through the mysterious struggle over the Republican Party platform on Ukraine.

“s it possible that all of these events and reports are completely unrelated, and nothing more than an entirely unhappy coincidence? Yes, it is possible,”chiff said. “ut it is also possible, maybe more than possible, that they are not coincidental, not disconnected and not unrelated, and that the Russians used the same techniques to corrupt U.S. persons that they have employed in Europe and elsewhere. We simply don’ know, not yet, and we owe it to the country to find out.”

Comey, as much as liberals may loathe him for his 2016 bungling, seems to be one of the few public officials with the ability and willingness to pursue the truth. I dearly hope that Republican members of the Senate are patriotic enough to do so as well.

Our president is a liar, and we need to find out how serious his latest lies are.

You can join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook. I am also writing a daily email newsletter and invite you to subscribe.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).

James Comey testifying on Capitol Hill on Monday. | Eric Thayer for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170320ed3k007vd

