 


National Desk; SECTA
Proposal to Collect Social Media Data From Immigrants Raises Privacy Concerns

By RON NIXON 
738 words
29 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
16
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The Department of Homeland Security will soon begin collecting social media data from all immigrants entering the United States, part of what agency officials call an effort to more effectively screen those coming to the country but privacy advocates see as an unnecessary intrusion that would do little to protect national security.

The department will begin collecting the information on Oct. 18, the same day the Trump administration's new travel ban on citizens of seven countries and restrictions on those from two others are set to take effect.

Green card holders and naturalized citizens will also have their social media information collected, with the data becoming part of their immigration file. It was unclear whether the monitoring would take place only in the application process or could continue afterward.

The department published the new requirement in the Federal Register last week, saying it would collect ''social media handles, aliases, associated identifiable information and search results,'' which would be included in an applicant's immigration file. It said the data would come from ''publicly available information obtained from the internet, public records, public institutions, interviewees, commercial data providers.''

The data collection has alarmed privacy groups and lawyers, who expressed concerns on about how the department would use the information. Advocates say they also worry that the monitoring could suck in information on American citizens who communicate over social media with immigrants.

''This would undoubtedly have a chilling effect on the free speech that's expressed every day on social media,'' Faiz Shakir, the national political director for the American Civil Liberties Union, said in a statement. ''This collect-it-all approach is ineffective to protect national security and is one more example of the Trump administration's anti-immigrant agenda.''

Efforts to collect social media information are not unique to the Trump administration. During the Obama administration, the department had begun asking visitors to voluntarily provide social media information, and had four pilot screening programs.

After the December 2015 mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., counterterrorism officials and lawmakers grew increasingly worried about the use of social media by terrorist groups like the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

Many members of Congress, mainly Republicans, began urging the Department of Homeland Security to use data gleaned from visa applicants' or asylum seekers' social media accounts as part of the immigration process.

Congressional Democrats also supported the effort to collect social media data on visa applicants.

''We believe these checks, focused on possible connections to terrorist activity, should be incorporated into D.H.S.'s vetting process for visa determinations, and that this policy should be implemented as soon as possible,'' Democratic lawmakers said in a letter at the time.

The attackers in San Bernardino, Tashfeen Malik and her husband, Syed Rizwan Farook, had exchanged private online messages discussing their commitment to jihad and martyrdom, law enforcement officials said. But they did not post any public messages about their plans on Facebook or other social media platforms.

One of the pilot projects, which began in December 2015, screened the social media accounts of applicants for so-called fiancéisas, the program under which Ms. Malik entered the United States.

United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the part of the Department of Homeland Security that approves citizenship and green cards, has previously used social media as part of the screening process for Syrian refugees, but only when the person was flagged because of a hit in an intelligence database or when questions were raised during an interview with immigration officials.

Faiza Patel, co-director of the Brennan Center's Liberty and National Security Program at New York University, said although it was true that the Obama administration collected social media information, the new monitoring put in place by the Trump administration represented an escalation.

''What is different here is that it appears that they are monitoring people who are already in the United States -- green card holders, for example,'' she said. ''And there is a lack of transparency of how they are using this data, which does heighten the concerns for this group of people.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Outside Dulles airport. Starting Oct. 18, all immigrants will have their social media data screened. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAMES LAWLER DUGGAN/REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020170929ed9t0004f



National Desk; SECTA
Few Objections by Deficit Hawks on Tax Cuts' Cost

By THOMAS KAPLAN 
1,297 words
29 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- In 2001, when surging budget surpluses fueled hopes of extinguishing the national debt, a pitched battle broke out over President George W. Bush's proposed $1.6 trillion tax cut. Never mind that the tax cut's 10-year tab was supposed to leave behind more than $3 trillion in surpluses -- Democrats and some Republicans said that the tax cut was just too large.

Fast forward to President Trump's Washington, where the budget deficit for this fiscal year is projected to near $700 billion and the federal debt has topped $20 trillion.

A new tax cut is emerging to rival those of the Bush years, and the deficit hawks have hardly peeped.

''It's a great talking point when you have an administration that's Democrat-led,'' said Representative Mark Walker, Republican of North Carolina and the chairman of the Republican Study Committee, a group of about 150 conservative House members. ''It's a little different now that Republicans have both houses and the administration.''

For years, Republican lawmakers lamented the soaring national debt, pressing for spending cuts and clinging to the mantle of fiscal responsibility. But last week, Senate Republicans hammered out a deal to allow for as much as $1.5 trillion in tax cuts, betting that supercharged growth will make up for lost revenue, a potentially dubious prospect. The tax plan outlined Wednesday by the White House and Republican leaders in the House and Senate could cost more than $2 trillion over the next decade, according to a preliminary estimate by the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a nonpartisan advocacy group.

This month, the majority of Republicans in the House and the Senate voted to raise the debt limit without doing anything to rein in spending.

Republican lawmakers are pushing to increase military spending by tens of billions of dollars, topping even Mr. Trump's request for a beefed-up military. Democrats are sharing in the fiscal intemperance, lining up behind a ''Medicare for all'' proposal despite having no definitive plan for how to pay for universal, government-provided health coverage.

And as Congress mulls large tax cuts, the tabs for Hurricanes Harvey, Irma and Maria keep rising.

When Mr. Bush took office and pushed for a big tax cut, the fiscal outlook was strong. The Congressional Budget Office in 2001 was projecting $5.6 trillion in budget surpluses over 10 years.

Now, the budget office forecasts that deficits will total $10.1 trillion over the next decade. The deficit is expected to top $1 trillion a year in 2022 and keep growing from there. Federal debt held by the public is at the highest level since shortly after World War II, at 77 percent of the gross domestic product.

''I think the greatest threat to our nation is us,'' warned Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee and a member of the Senate Budget Committee. ''The way we handle our finances, we as a nation are the greatest threat to our nation. It's not ISIS. It's not North Korea. It's not ascendant China. It's not Russia. We are the greatest threat.''

But such voices are strangely quiet these days in Washington. Even Mr. Corker seems accommodating.

Last week, he reached a deal with another Republican on the budget panel, Senator Patrick J. Toomey of Pennsylvania, to allow a tax cut of up to $1.5 trillion over a decade, helping pave the way for the overhaul of the tax code that is a top goal for Mr. Trump and congressional Republicans. He did say he would not vote for a final tax plan if it would add to the deficit.

The mantra now is economic growth.

''Every Republican I know of is concerned about the deficit,'' said Senator John Kennedy, Republican of Louisiana. ''Every Republican I know of is concerned about tepid growth, too.''

While Republicans denounced the ballooning debt when President Barack Obama was in office, they have much less of a political incentive to dwell on the issue now that their party controls the government.

''There's been less talk about it this year with a Republican-led administration than there has been the last seven or eight years,'' said Mr. Walker, who bristled at the Senate's plan for tax cuts that would add to the deficit. He said it was imperative that lawmakers pay attention to the debt.

Maya MacGuineas, the president of the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, said it seems like ''fiscal responsibility is more about playing defense than it really is caring about the issue.''

''The party that is the minority, you hear them talk about fiscal responsibility so much more to try to stop the other party from implementing their agenda,'' she said. ''But then when that party gets in power, and you're seeing that now, they're more likely to throw those fiscal concerns to the wayside in order to implement their agenda without having to face any of the hard choices about how to pay for things.''

Representative Mo Brooks, Republican of Alabama, said his party deserves blame. He warned that the United States could wind up facing an economic collapse akin to that in Venezuela, adding that Republicans in the House and Senate had not demonstrated that they possess ''the intellectual understanding of the dangers posed by these deficits and accumulated debt.''

Mr. Trump, who has called himself ''the king of debt,'' may be setting the tone.

During his presidential campaign, he insisted that he could eliminate the national debt in eight years, even as he promised to protect Social Security and Medicare, programs that are projected to consume an ever larger share of federal spending as the country's population ages.

After Mr. Trump struck a deal with Democrats on a short-term debt limit extension, Representative David Schweikert, Republican of Arizona, asked, ''In this entire discussion, how many members have you heard, how many from the White House said, 'We're in the middle of a demographic crisis that's going to crush us in just a few years; let's get to work on it'?''

He left unsaid the answer to his question: Not many.

The change in tone on fiscal matters has been swift. This spring, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, asserted that the tax overhaul needed to be revenue neutral, citing the nation's debt and invoking Mr. Trump's Democratic predecessor.

''We added an enormous amount of debt during the Obama years,'' Mr. McConnell said.

Now, Republican lawmakers are betting that economic growth will fix the nation's fiscal woes with no pain and a lot of gain.

''The only way we're going to solve our long-term debt and deficit issue to allow the federal government to have the revenue it's going to need to fund all these promises made is with strong -- and I mean strong -- economic growth,'' said Senator Ron Johnson, Republican of Wisconsin and a member of the Senate Budget Committee. ''You're not going to achieve that with an awful tax system.''

Mr. Kennedy, another member of the budget panel, said Americans have to have faith.

''If we do it right, then the economy will be stimulated appropriately and tax revenues will go up and the deficit won't increase,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''Now, I can't prove to you that that will happen. But neither can anybody else.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

The Republican Study Committee at a news conference on Tuesday. Its chairman says lawmakers must pay attention to the debt. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GABRIELLA DEMCZUK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A15) 

Document NYTF000020170929ed9t0004e



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Signals Its Leader Is Still Alive

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI; Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington, Nour Youssef from Cairo and an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria, and Mosul, Iraq. 
861 words
29 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The Islamic State issued on Thursday what appears to be the first recording in nearly a year of its reclusive leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, a move that seems intended to silence rumors of his death and to galvanize his pummeled troops.

The 46-minute audio recording would be the first time since last November that supporters of the jihadist group have heard the voice of their self-proclaimed caliph.

Since then, the group has lost significant territory, including Mosul, Iraq, which had been the largest city under its control, and much of the group's capital, Raqqa, Syria.

In the recording, Mr. Baghdadi praised his foot soldiers for waging a tenacious battle in Mosul.

''They fulfilled their promise and their responsibility, and they did not give up except over their skulls and body parts,'' he said. ''Thus they were excused, after nearly a year of fighting and confrontation.''

He also accused the American-backed troops they faced of using scorched-earth tactics. ''They burned the people, trees, and everything on the ground,'' he said, according to a translation provided by the SITE Intelligence Group.

But instead of pondering those losses, Mr. Baghdadi, 46, emphasized the threat the West still faces from the Islamic State, making indirect references to recent attacks on the Underground in London, in the heart of Barcelona and in Russia.

''Now the Americans, the Russians and the Europeans are living in terror in their countries, fearing the strikes of the mujahedeen,'' he said.

The recording, which was widely disseminated to Islamic State supporters in their chat rooms on the messaging app Telegram, begins with the voice of a narrator who introduces Mr. Baghdadi and adds, ''May Allah protect him.''

That phrase is used to refer to people who are still living and is intended to signal that Mr. Baghdadi is not dead, contrary to reports over the summer. The recording also cites current events, including the growing nuclear threat from North Korea, suggesting that it was recorded in recent weeks.

In June, the Russian military said it might have killed Mr. Baghdadi in a strike on Islamic State leaders in May near Raqqa. In July, a British-based monitoring organization, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, said senior Islamic State commanders had confirmed that Mr. Baghdadi had been killed in Deir al-Zour Province.

Neither report could be independently confirmed, and United States officials immediately cast doubt on their credibility.

Despite the doubts cast on those reports, rumors of Baghdadi's death continued to swirl. More important than the content of the audio is the fact that it served as a ''proof-of-life message,'' said Seamus Hughes, the deputy director of George Washington University's Program on Extremism.

The Islamic State has been steadily losing territory since 2015.

This year, it lost the city of Mosul, where it controlled a population of approximately one million people; the nearby town of Tal Afar, Iraq; and part of Raqqa.

Despite these setbacks, the group continues to be a fierce and nimble foe. The battle for Mosul, which President Barack Obama's administration had hoped to conclude before he left office in January, grew into a bloody nine-month slog, with entire neighborhoods obliterated in an effort to kill the remaining fighters. It came at a steep price to Iraq's military, which lost more than 700 troops in the battle.

Even as the group has lost territory in one part of its caliphate, it has retaken areas that were declared liberated and pushed into new parts of the world.

In recent weeks, new Islamic State checkpoints have emerged in Libya, and the group continues to hold parts of the city of Marawi, in the Philippines, despite a four-month-long siege by the country's military.

The Islamic State staged a counterassault this week on Ramadi, Iraq, a town liberated by the Iraqis in 2015. In neighboring Syria on Thursday, the group's fighters assaulted a position south of the city of Deir al-Zour, putting a dent in recent gains by the government.

The group has also continued to remotely guide and inspire its sympathizers to carry out both small-scale and devastating attacks in Europe, with cells of people who had never traveled to Syria behind some of the worst violence, including in Britain and Spain.

Sounding a defiant tone, Mr. Baghdadi ridiculed the coalition forces who are battling the group with American help, saying they ''wouldn't stand one hour of fighting without Crusader air support.''

Mr. Baghdadi ended his speech by vowing to continue fighting, including calling for attacks on ''disbeliever media centers.''

Although the recording's authenticity could not be immediately confirmed, the voice on the tape sounds the same as that of other recordings of Mr. Baghdadi. The Islamic State has not misrepresented a recording of its leader in the past, and the Pentagon said it had ''no reason to believe tape is not authentic.''

Document NYTF000020170929ed9t0003l



Today’ Paper
Quotation of the Day: Hardly a Chirp by Deficit Hawks on Tax Cuts’ost

88 words
29 September 2017
02:52
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

“ think the greatest threat to our nation is us. The way we handle our finances, we as a nation are the greatest threat to our nation. It’ not ISIS. It’ not North Korea. It’ not ascendant China. It’ not Russia. We are the greatest threat.”

SENATOR BOB CORKER, Republican of Tennessee and a member of the Senate Budget Committee, questioning the effects of proposed tax cuts.

Document NYTFEED020170929ed9t0008d



Op-Ed Contributor
Opinion
My Time Undercover With the Alt-Right

By PATRIK HERMANSSON 
1,484 words
27 September 2017
16:55
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Patrik Hermansson spent nearly a year infiltrating the extreme right for the British anti-racist watchdog group Hope Not Hate. His findings were shared in an Op-Ed article by Jesse Singal, “Undercover with the Alt-Right,”s well as a report by the group.

Here, Mr. Hermansson answers readers’uestions, which have been edited for clarity and length.

Jim Cricket: Have you ever tried to debate the alt-right? If so, with any success? How do you present facts/counterfacts to these types of people?

Patrik Hermansson: While inside, I couldn’ debate them; otherwise my cover would have been blown. This was one of the hardest things about the whole project. People would say the most hateful things and I couldn’ challenge them, I just had to nod and agree. This was extremely frustrating and at times upsetting. At those times I had to think of the purpose of the whole project rather than what would feel good right then and there.

Part of the problem with challenging these people’ views is that often they are not arrived at logically, so it is hard to reason them out of them. Their worldview is deeply conspiratorial, so straight facts often won’ work. Some of them reach their views because of fear or anger, so we need to find a way to speak to them on an emotional level, not merely a rational and factual level. However, by the time people get that far into these movements, it is extremely hard to change their minds. It is better to try to discourage people before they get involved.

Tara Rashan : Did it seem to you that ISIS and these neo-Nazis have more in common than either realizes?

PH: I’ not an expert on the Islamic State so I can’ comment on it specifically. In one sense, of course, it is a fundamentally different type of threat driven by its own set of complex causes and we don’ want to oversimplify either phenomenon.

However, there are some obvious parallels especially in regard to young men being driven by anger or fear to join extreme movements. They are looking for simple binary answers to very complex questions about the state of the world and their own circumstances.

mancuroc: Are these people independently wealthy or is someone putting lots of money behind them?

PH: The funding of the alt-right is a fascinating question. Some are clearly independently wealthy, like Richard Spencer, and I’ sure there are rich people providing help in different ways.

However, much of the movement is crowdfunded. They have crowdfunding sites like Hatreon where they get money for projects or individual events. Recently, for example, a group of European “dentitarians”inked to the alt-right raised more than $200,000 to charter a ship to hamper the efforts of organizations working with migrants trying to cross the Mediterranean to Europe. This money was raised around the world via crowdfunding. In one way, this shows the scale of the alt-right.

Robert Bruce: Fundamentally, all the alt-right stands for is the idea that ethnic Europeans have the same moral entitlement as every other people on earth: namely, a land of their own. They ask why it is that ethnic Europeans, uniquely, face a moral obligation to turn themselves into ethnic minorities and hope it all works out for their descendants. And, so far, no one has been able to answer that question.

PH: I’ afraid I fundamentally reject the premise of this question on several fronts. First, it’ based on the premise that ethnic groups have an “ntitlement”o certain pieces of land. Ethnic groups have moved around the globe for millenniums so when exactly did this become static and certain ethnic groups became “ntitled”o certain bits of the planet? Second, you state that Europeans “ace a moral obligation to turn themselves into ethnic minorities.”here is this the case? This is the sort of spurious demographic nonsense the alt-right uses all the time.

Victronix : Many of the members of the alt-light, in fact, have renounced explicit racism and anti-Semitism, though they will creep up to the line of explicitly racist speech, especially when Islam and immigration are concerned.

PH: If people have fears and concerns it is important we listen to them, as simply ignoring them will compound the problem. However, we must also be extremely firm toward those who seek to manipulate and use those concerns and fears to advance prejudiced political agendas. This is what much of the alt-right does.

 98_6 : I’ not trying to detract from the horrors of their racism, but understanding how integral sexism is to this poisonous ideology is important, too.

PH: This is such an important point and it is often hugely overlooked. The Hope Not Hate report looks at the importance of anti-feminism, gender and masculinity to the alt-right. It is central to the worldview of the alt-right.

The international alt-right has, at its core, the explicit rejection of equality and the pursuit of identity and status for white men who feel aggrieved. As you suggest, one part is racism and the belief that white people overall are threatened by multiculturalism. But more specifically white men are those they consider repressed. The alt-right believes the world should be ordered into strict hierarchies. That includes the belief that strict traditional gender roles are natural. Therefore, they fight against what they think is the emasculating effect of feminism.

The alternative right is, to a large part, an online movement and much of it is organized on online forums —lready male-dominated spaces. There, misogyny can function as a pep talk that helps empower men who feel disempowered. See Jack Donovan, who advocates the retreat of men into ethnic tribal “rotherhoods.”nline or offline, the sense of camaraderie fostered in male spaces allows men to validate one another as men; it’ an incredibly powerful feeling for those who would otherwise be isolated.

Norman: Why was it necessary to go undercover? Elle Reeve from Vice identified herself as a reporter to cover the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, and produced a dramatic documentary in which the alt-right participants were just as candid as they were with you.

PH: This is an important question and one that many have asked. The reason that Hope Not Hate uses undercover research and asks people like me to spend long periods inside far-right movements is not to just catch racist people saying racist things. Of course, in some cases far-right people and organizations cloak their true extremism and portray a more moderate image to the world to try to avoid criticism and gain new supporters. Going undercover allows us to expose this.

However, more important is understanding how a far-right movement operates, organizes and functions. This is invaluable for finding the most effective strategies for opposing and undermining them. I spent hundreds of hours with these people and came away with a real understanding of what drives their activism, the tactics they seek to use, and what they were planning to do. This allows Hope Not Hate to always be one step ahead, and to plan responses and opposition earlier than anyone else.

Sam: “ar-right” “lt-right” “lt-light” Why not “azis,”“ascists,”nd “hite supremacists”

PH: Terminology is a constant discussion when you’e looking at the far right. It’ really important not to just call everyone a Nazi. You can’ defeat what you don’ understand, and just writing off everyone you disagree with as a Nazi shows a lack of analysis. Of course, if someone is a Nazi, then call him a Nazi.

I fully understand why people want to avoid the term alt-right, and there is no doubt that some have adopted it with a view to sanitizing their image. This is why it is important not to be inaccurate and allow the far right to self-label.

However, while “lt-right”s a very broad and imperfect term, and there are large areas of crossover with the traditional far right and neo-Nazis, there are also differences, especially around the culture of the movement and its means of operating. It remains a useful and necessary term.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Patrik Hermansson (@patrik_h) is a researcher for Hope Not Hate.

* Undercover With the Alt-Right

Patrik Hermansson prepares to go undercover. | Hope Not Hate | A Swedish graduate student goes undercover in the alt-right movement for nearly a year. This video, and those below, are excerpts from the resulting documentary by the organization Hope Not Hate. 

Document NYTFEED020170927ed9r000b7



EDITORIAL
OpEd; SECT
Kurdistan's Dangerous Vote

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
430 words
27 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The International New York Times
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The referendum on independence that Iraqi Kurds held on Monday was unwise, dangerous and very understandable.

Unwise, because it raised high and probably unachievable hopes among Kurds not only in Iraq, but also in Iran, Turkey and Syria, the countries where they live.

Dangerous because those yearnings trigger multiple alarms in one of the least stable regions on earth.

And understandable because few people have dreamed of independence for so long, at such cost and with so little success.

Even before full results were in, there was little doubt the Kurds had voted overwhelmingly for a separate state. It is hard not to sympathize with that longing, especially given the brutal suppression of Iraqi Kurds under Saddam Hussein. Since the 1991 gulf war, the five million Iraqi Kurds have created a semiautonomous Kurdistan region whose rich oil and gas resources have supported a relatively peaceful existence. Kurdish military forces, the pesh merga, have played a major role in the fight against the Islamic State.

Massoud Barzani, the president of Kurdistan, as the Kurdish region in Iraq is known, has said the vote will not lead to an immediate, unilateral declaration of independence, but to the opening of negotiations with Baghdad and consultations with neighboring states and other powers.

Yet Iraq, Iran, Syria, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, the Arab League and the United States, as well as the European Union and the United Nations, all tried to pre-empt the vote. Iraq has no intention of losing rich oil fields. The White House declared the referendum ''provocative and destabilizing,'' and Defense Secretary Jim Mattis traveled to Kurdistan last month to argue that the referendum would be a distraction from the fight against ISIS. Turkey, Iran and Syria fear that their restive Kurdish minorities will join in secessionist demands. Only Israel, with a history of close ties to Kurds and hopes for an ally against Iran, has declared support for a Kurdish state.

In any case, the vote was held. There is a new and volatile reality that cannot be denied. All sides -- the Kurds, their neighbors, Washington and all the others involved -- must avoid any action that could prompt violence. Then, urgent efforts must begin to channel newly fired passions into what room remains for diplomatic maneuvers. The United States, whose forces have long protected Iraqi Kurds and fought alongside the pesh merga, should be at the forefront of that search.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170927ed9r0004l



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Egyptian Concertgoers Wave a Flag, and Land in Jail for Promoting Homosexuality

By DECLAN WALSH; Nour Youssef contributed reporting. 
872 words
27 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CAIRO -- Seven Egyptians were arrested on charges of promoting homosexuality after concertgoers waved rainbow-colored flags at a rock concert in Cairo last week, Egyptian officials said.

The arrests were the latest assault on social freedoms in Egypt under President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, whose government has imposed harsh restrictions on free speech and led an aggressive campaign against gays.

Photos and video clips of audience members waving rainbow flags during a performance on Friday by Mashrou' Leila, a popular Lebanese band whose lead singer is openly gay, were shared widely on social media over the weekend. On its Facebook page the band called the concert ''one of the best shows we've ever played!''

But the images provoked a backlash from conservative Egyptian politicians and television hosts, as well as a heated debate on social media that featured virulently homophobic comments.

On Monday Egypt's top prosecutor, Nabil Sadek, ordered an investigation and by evening the police had arrested seven people, most of whom were said to have waved rainbow flags.

An official at Mr. Sadek's office said the seven had been charged with ''promoting sexual deviancy'' and could be detained for 15 days. The state paper Al Ahram said one of the men had been detained for posting approvingly on Facebook about the concert.

''Legal actions against him are underway,'' the paper reported.

On Monday, one man who had been photographed with a rainbow flag at the concert wrote on Facebook, ''Had I raised the ISIS flag I wouldn't be facing half of what I am facing now.'' The man, who said he was not gay, did not respond to requests for comment. It was unclear if he was among those arrested.

A second prosecution official said the seven arrested men would undergo a forensic medical examination to determine if they have had anal sex. Such tests are standard practice in Egypt, but they have been condemned by human rights groups as a form of torture.

In an apparently separate case, a student who attended the Mashrou' Leila concert was arrested hours later after being ''caught in the act,'' the police said. The student was charged with ''debauchery'' and sentenced to six years imprisonment on Tuesday.

The police lured the man to a location near the pyramids using a fake profile on a dating app, and arrested him.

Homosexuality is not illegal in Egypt, but the authorities frequently prosecute gay men for homosexuality and women for prostitution under loosely-worded laws that prohibit immorality and ''habitual debauchery.''

Musical concerts are one of the few public gatherings still permitted to young Egyptians, who otherwise chafe under harsh restrictions introduced by Mr. Sisi that have outlawed public protest, led to prosecutions of writers and the censorship of films and music deemed critical of the government.

Mashrou' Leila is a wildly popular band across the Middle East, with its exuberant brand of Arab indie rock. The band's lead singer, Hamed Sinno, is one of the few openly gay celebrities in a Muslim country, and has spoken publicly about his orientation.

The band's following grew after the Arab Spring, as it rode a wave of youthful openness, but it has since fallen foul of conservatives in different countries. It was twice banned in Jordan after facing accusations of blasphemy and not respecting the country's traditions.

Egypt's pro-government musicians union denounced last Friday's concert, and said it was considering a ban on future performances by Mashrou' Leila. In 2016 the syndicate drew sharp criticism for its effort to stop a heavy metal concert in Cairo that it claimed had been organized by ''devil worshipers.''

Ahmed Mahran, a law lecturer who filed the criminal complaint against the flag-wavers, conceded in a phone interview that some were minors. ''But it doesn't matter,'' Mr. Mahran said. ''We need to set an example.''

He added, ''These people must be treated with force and cruelty.''

The crackdown on gays in Egypt gained global notoriety in 2001 with the high-profile raid on Cairo's Queen Boat nightclub, which led to dozens of arrests. The Arab Spring ushered in a brief period of respite, but that door snapped shut again in 2013 after the military takeover that brought Mr. Sisi to power.

Since then, the security forces have sought to entrap gay and transgender people on dating sites by impersonating other gay people. Last year the advocacy group Solidarity with Egypt LGBTQ+, which monitors news reports of criminal investigations, said at least 274 people had been charged.

Mr. Sisi's government has also used the language of public morals to suppress critics. On Monday a court convicted Khaled Ali, a lawyer and opposition figure, for making an obscene finger gesture outside a Cairo courthouse last year after he and other lawyers won a case against the government.

Mr. Ali, who was a candidate in the 2012 presidential election, has expressed interest in running again in 2018. If an appeal court confirms Monday's conviction, he would be ineligible for the race.

Follow Declan Walsh on Twitter @declanwalsh

Document NYTF000020170927ed9r0004n



magazine
How Fake News Turned a Small Town Upside Down; Feature

By CAITLIN DICKERSON 
5,842 words
26 September 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

On a Tuesday morning in June 2016, Nathan Brown, a reporter for The Times-News, the local paper in Twin Falls, Idaho, strolled into the office and cleared off a spot for his coffee cup amid the documents and notebooks piled on his desk. Brown, 32, started his career at a paper in upstate New York, where he grew up, and looks the part of a local reporter, clad in a fresh oxford and khakis that tend to become disheveled over the course of his long days. His first order of business was an article about a City Council meeting from the night before, which he hadn’ attended. Brown pulled up a recording of the proceedings and began punching out notes for his weekly article. Because most governing in Twin Falls is done by a city manager, these meetings tend to deal with trivial subjects like lawn-watering and potholes, but Brown could tell immediately that this one was different.

“e have been made aware of a situation,”aid the first speaker, an older man with a scraggly white beard who had hobbled up to the lectern. “n alleged assault of a minor child and we can’ get any information on it. Apparently, it’ been indicated that the perpetrators were foreign Muslim youth that conducted this — guess it was a rape.”rown recognized the man as Terry Edwards. About a year earlier, after The Times-News reported that Syrian refugees would very likely be resettled in Twin Falls, Edwards joined a movement to shut the resettlement program down. The group circulated a petition to put the proposal before voters. They failed to get enough signatures to force a referendum, but Brown was struck by how much support around town the movement attracted. In bars after work, he began to overhear conversations about the dangers of Islam. One night, he heard a man joke about dousing the entrance to the local mosque with pig’ blood.

After he finished watching the video, Brown called the police chief, Craig Kingsbury, to get more information about the case. Kingsbury said that he couldn’ discuss it and that the police reports were sealed because minors were involved. Brown made a couple phone calls: to the mayor and to his colleague at the paper who covers crime. He pieced together that 12 days earlier, three children had been discovered partly clothed inside a shared laundry room at the apartment complex where they lived. There were two boys, a 7-year-old and a 10-year-old, and a 5-year-old girl. The 7-year-old boy was accused of attempting some kind of sex act with the 5-year-old, and the 10-year-old had used a cellphone borrowed from his older brother to record it. The girl was American and, like most people in Twin Falls, white. The boys were refugees; Brown wasn’ sure from where. In his article about the meeting, Brown seems to anticipate that the police chief’ inability to elaborate was not going to sit well with the people whose testimony he had just watched.

That weekend, Brown was on his way to see a movie when he received a Facebook message from Jim Dalos Jr., a 52-year-old known to Twin Falls journalists and police as Scanner Man. Dalos is disabled; he works six hours a week as a dishwasher at a pizzeria but spends most of his time in his apartment, sitting in a reclining chair and drinking Diet Pepsi out of a 52-ounce plastic mug, voraciously consuming news. He reads the local paper, old issues of which litter his living-room floor, and keeps the television blaring —sually Fox News. He got his nickname because he constantly monitors an old police scanner, a gift he received as a teenager from his father, and often calls in tips to the media based on what he hears. He also happens to live at the apartment complex, Fawnbrook, where the laundry-room incident occurred.

Dalos told Brown that he had seen the police around Fawnbrook and that the victim’ mother told him that the boys had been arrested. He also pointed Brown to a couple of Facebook groups that were created in response to the crime. Brown scrolled through them on his cellphone and saw links flying back and forth with articles that said that the little girl had been gang raped at knife point, that the perpetrators were Syrian refugees and that their fathers had celebrated with them afterward by giving them high fives. The stories also claimed that the City Council and the police department were conspiring to bury the crime.

Over the weekend, Brown plowed through his daily packs of cigarettes as he watched hundreds, then thousands, of people joining the groups. Their panic appeared to be piqued by a mass shooting, the deadliest in American history, that had just occurred at Pulse nightclub in Orlando. The perpetrator had declared allegiance to ISIS. The commenters also posted stories that claimed refugees were responsible for a rash of rapes in Europe and that a similar phenomenon in the United States was imminent. “y girl is blond and blue-eyed,”ne woman wrote. “ am extremely worried about her safety.”

The details of the Fawnbrook case, as it became known, were still unclear to Brown, but he was skeptical of what he was reading. For one thing, he knew from his own previous reporting that no Syrians had been resettled in Twin Falls after all. He woke up early on Monday to get a head start on clarifying things as much as possible in order to write a follow-up article. Before he got into the office, a friend texted him, telling him to check the Drudge Report. At the top, a headline screamed: “EPORT: Syrian ‘efugees’ape Little Girl at Knifepoint in Idaho.”

As the only city of any size for 100 miles in any direction, Twin Falls serves as a modest hub within southern Idaho’ vast agricultural sprawl. Its population of about 45,000 nearly doubles each day as people travel there to work, primarily in the thriving agribusinesses. But its bucolic rhythms still allow for children to play outside unattended and make driving a meditative experience. Surrounding the city and sprinkled among its tidy tract neighborhoods, potatoes, alfalfa, sugar beets and corn grow in fields. Half a million dairy cows in the area produce three-quarters of the state’ milk supply. Because of its location, Twin Falls is home to major food processors like Chobani Yogurt, Clif Bar and Glanbia Nutritionals, a dairy company. All have large facilities in town and have helped to push down the unemployment rate to just under 3 percent, below the national average. The wealth of easy-to-find low-skilled jobs made Twin Falls attractive as a place for resettling refugees, and they began arriving in the 1980s, at that time mostly from Cambodia and the former Yugoslavia. Nearly 2,500 refugees have moved to the town over the years.

Most Twin Falls residents are churchgoing, and about half of those are Mormons. Locally owned stores and restaurants are generally closed on Sundays, and the city has not voted for a Democratic presidential candidate since Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1936. Liberals often register as Republicans just to have an opportunity to participate in the electoral process, by voting in the primaries. If a Republican is going to win regardless, the thinking goes, they would at least like to play a role in deciding which one prevails.

The same qualities that bind the townspeople together can, in turn, be alienating to newcomers. The refugee community has begun to experience this effect as its demographic makeup has changed. Over the past decade and a half, as conflict spread across North Africa and the Middle East, Twin Falls started to resettle larger numbers of refugees with darker skin who follow an unfamiliar religion —wo things that make it difficult to blend into a town that is 80 percent white.

On a national scale, an ascendant network of anti-Muslim activists and provocateurs has exploited the fears brought on by these changes, finding a platform and a receptive audience online. The narrative they espouse —n blogs with names like Jihad Watch —s that America, currently 1 percent Muslim, is in the midst of an Islamic invasion. Central to the worldview of these bloggers, some of whom have celebrity-size social-media followings, is that Muslims have a propensity toward sexual violence. They seize on any news item that bolsters this notion. Perhaps their biggest touchstone is an incident that took place in Cologne, Germany, on New Year’ Eve in 2015. Mobs of men, many of them asylum seekers from the Middle East, pick-pocketed and groped more than a thousand women in and around a train station. The German police acknowledged the incident had taken place only under pressure, as the women’ stories began to leak out through the media. This established, for these activists, the contours of a narrative that they believe has been repeating itself. The Fawnbrook incident quickly drew their interest.

What happened in Twin Falls was sadly somewhat commonplace but not in the way the activists believed. The local Police Department investigates sex crimes on a weekly basis, and in about half a dozen of those that proceed to court each year, the victims and the accused are both minors. “f it’ younger kids, it’ them being curious,”.R. Paredez, the lead investigator on the case, explained to me. Some children who act out sexually have been victimized themselves, he said, while others have been exposed to explicit material at home or at school or, as is more common recently, on their cellphones. “s they start to get older, there’ more of the actual sexual component to it.”

Two weeks after the incident, the boys were charged with lewd and lascivious behavior against a minor. (The 14-year-old who lent his cellphone to the boys was initially charged with the same crime. He was not present in the laundry room, and his charge was eventually reduced to make him an accessory.) In Idaho, this statute applies to physical contact “one with the intent of arousing, appealing to, or gratifying the lust or passions or sexual desires of such person, such minor child, or third party.”aredez said that the cellphone video made clear what specifically had happened between the children, but that he couldn’ show it to the reporters who asked him about it, because doing so would have constituted criminal distribution of child pornography. He called most of the details that he read about the case on the internet “00 percent false, like not even close to being accurate.”The family of the accused declined to comment.)

As more time passed without a solid account of what happened inside the laundry room, lurid rumors continued to surface online and came to dominate conversations in grocery stores and at school events. And while the City Council members did not have control over the case, the bloggers who wrote about it placed much of the blame on them.

On the Monday when Twin Falls was the top story on Drudge, the City Council held another weekly meeting. Normally only a handful of people attend, and Brown is one of the few reporters among them. But that night, the auditorium filled until there was standing room only, and television news crews appeared from Boise and other nearby cities. When it came time for public comments, one man got up and praised the city’ handling of the case, followed by more than a dozen others who laid into the council members. Terry Edwards handed each of them a small copy of the Constitution and told them to do their jobs. A woman named Vicky Davis, her hair in a satiny white bob, stood up and proclaimed that Islam had declared jihad on America.

“hey are not compatible with our culture,”he said. “hey hate us. They don’ want to be Americans. They don’ want to assimilate. What do you need to see? What more proof do you need?”

This was a highly unusual meeting, but Brown wasn’ exactly surprised. Several months earlier, when the anti-refugee activists began to organize, he started reading up to try to better understand their views. He picked up a book by Ann Coulter and began to follow the anti-refugee blogs. At the meeting, he felt as if he were hearing all that he had read being repeated aloud by his neighbors.

Kingsbury, the police chief, read from a statement while fumbling with a thicket of microphones piled onto the lectern by visiting reporters. In between exasperated breaths, he explained why he could not disclose the details of the incident but said that he could address some of the misinformation that was spreading online. There was no evidence of a knife, he said, or of any celebration afterward or of a cover-up, and no Syrians were involved: The boys were from Sudan and Iraq. “’ a kid who grew up in Idaho,”e said. “aw enforcement takes these types of allegations very seriously. However, we can’ act on them within an hour. It’ not like a crime show.”e told the audience that the boys had been arrested, to applause.

But online, Kingsbury’ words only inflamed the activists more. Just after midnight, someone posted his work email address on Jihad Watch, along with those of the council members and the mayor. A commenter on another website called The Muslim Issue posted the phone numbers and email addresses for the town’ government officials, the head of the refugee-resettlement center and some administrators at the college, which runs the refugee resettlement program. From there, the information spread to more blogs and to the comments sections of far-right news outlets with massive audiences.

By 9 the next morning, messages were pouring into the inbox of the mayor of Twin Falls, Shawn Barigar, nearly every minute. Barigar grew up in a neighboring town and went to work in Boise as a television news anchor before moving back to start a family. His even keel and the air of sophistication he picked up while living in a comparatively big city have made him popular politically. He is left of the town on many social issues, which has made some of his constituents suspicious of him. But most of the people who contacted him that summer were from other states and even other countries. Some people demanded that the city pay for a new car and apartment for the victim and her family. Others said that local officials’ttempts to correct inaccurate details about the incident were veiled efforts to suggest that no crime had occurred at all, in order to protect the refugees. Others accused him of being a “lobalist,” word that has taken on many definitions but in this case meant he was part of a vast, arcane conspiracy. They believed that establishment politicians wanted to turn red states like Idaho blue by starting wars and then importing refugees from those war zones as cheap labor who would not only displace American workers but also reliably vote Democratic.

Many of the people who wrote to the mayor had a much simpler goal: to unleash their hatred of Islam. One message, with the subject line “uslims,”aid that refugees were committing rapes and hit-and-runs and urinating on women and that the mayor was guilty of treason. “t’ out of the bag, [expletive],”t read. “e will and are holding you responsible for any and all crimes committed by these quote refugees. No courts. No police. Just us. You will answer to us in the darkness of night.”

The next day, Camille Barigar, the mayor’ wife, arrived in her office at the college, where she ran the performing-arts center, and started listening to her voice mail. In a calm, measured voice, a man who sounded as if he was reading from a script went on for nearly four minutes. “ wonder, Miss Barigar, if your residence was posted online and your whereabouts identified, how you would feel if half a dozen Muslim men raped and sodomized you, Miss Barigar, and when you tried to scream, broke every tooth in your mouth,”e said. “nd then I wonder how you’ feel if, when you went to the Twin Falls Police Department, they told you to run along, that this is simply cultural diversity.”

The caller said that life was “ecoming difficult”n the United States, just as it had in England. He referenced Jo Cox, a British member of Parliament who spoke out in support of refugees and later “et with opposition in the form of a bullet to the head.”

“he’ dead now,”e said. “hey’e buried her.”

The Twin Fallsstory aligned perfectly with the ideology that Stephen Bannon, then the head of Breitbart News, had been developing for years, about the havoc brought on by unchecked immigration and Islamism, all of it backed by big-business interests and establishment politicians. Bannon latched onto the Fawnbrook case and used his influence to expand its reach. During the weeks leading up to his appointment in August 2016 to lead Donald J. Trump’ campaign for president, Twin Falls was a daily topic of discussion on Bannon’ national radio show, where he called it “he beating heart”f all that the coming presidential election was about. He sent his lead investigative reporter, Lee Stranahan, to the town to investigate the case, boasting to his audience that Stranahan was a “it bull”f a reporter. “e’e going to let him off the chain,”e said.

Then 50, Stranahan was relatively new to journalism. He had spent a few decades as a television producer and a graphic illustrator in Los Angeles, and on the side he shot erotic photography, which is how he met his wife. Stranahan’ transition into journalism began during the television writers’trike of 2007 and 2008. To keep himself entertained, he created parody political advertisements and posted them on YouTube. One of the first was a satirical Rudy Giuliani ad, asking Republican primary voters to support him because he had taken good care of his mistress, offering her private security courtesy of the N.Y.P.D., whereas Mitt Romney “idn’ even bother”o take on a paramour. Stranahan says that within weeks, the videos led to invitations to appear on CNN and to meet with a vice president at NBC and to a job offer, which he accepted, writing political comedy for The Huffington Post.

In college, Stranahan was a libertarian and even attended Ayn Rand’ funeral. But when he moved to California, he became a liberal, vehemently opposing the Iraq war and the presidency of George W. Bush. He voted for Barack Obama in 2008. Two years later, Stranahan interviewed Andrew Breitbart, a fellow Huffington Post alumnus, for an article he was writing about Jon Stewart’ Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear. They spoke for more than three hours, bonding over their shared love of Depeche Mode. Eventually, Breitbart became Stranahan’ mentor, converted him to conservatism and offered him a job. In 2011, Breitbart took Stranahan to the Conservative Political Action Conference and introduced him to Michele Bachmann, who, in Stranahan’ recollection, convinced him that she had uncovered disturbing details about Islam that no one in the establishment was willing to talk about. Stranahan says this conversation was the genesis of his concerns about the religion.

Stranahan arrived in Idaho in August, after covering the national party conventions. The sealed nature of the case prevented any journalist from an exhaustive examination, and the accused and the victim’ families refused to speak to the mainstream media. But Stranahan thrived in the void of facts. He was granted one of the few interviews with the victim’ family, but his account of the crime offered little more information than others’ad —nd far more inaccuracies, according to the police and the county prosecutor. He described what took place as a “orrific gang rape”nd wrote graphic details about the incident, which the Twin Falls Police say are untrue. On Breitbart radio, Stranahan openly wondered whether Barigar, the mayor, was “ big, you know, Shariah supporter.”nd he suggested repeatedly that mass rapes by refugees had occurred in Europe and were inevitably coming to the United States. “f you want to wait until your country turns into France or Cologne, Germany. If you want to wait, you can wait,”e warned the audience. “ut if you want to watch it and stop it now, you’e got a chance to do it in November.”

Stranahan says his Breitbart editors sent him to Twin Falls to report on the “uslim takeover”f the town. (Breitbart denies this and says it’ “bsurd.” But he soon became enamored of a grander theory about what was happening in southern Idaho: globalism. He wrote that local businesses received government kickbacks for employing foreigners instead of Americans. (Stranahan did not cite any evidence of this, and it is untrue, according to the state Department of Labor.) And he often referred to a Syrian refugee crisis, though no Syrians were ever resettled there. Then, to bring the story full circle, he claimed these Muslim refugees were being used to replace American workers and that the government, big business and law enforcement were either conspiring to conceal the sexual-assault case or intentionally looking the other way, in order to keep the machine turning.

“ottom line, this is bad for business,”e told me in an interview last winter, explaining his interpretation of the city officials’ationale: “ ‘’ not really going to look into this too deeply because if I find out the truth, if I discover what actually happened, if I figure out the truth, it’ not really good for business.’ ”tranahan believed that Chobani, a Greek-yogurt company, was at the center of the scheme. Breitbart had been covering the company for months, ever since the owner, Hamdi Ulukaya, a Turkish-born businessman, made a speech at the World Economic Forum at Davos encouraging other chief executives to pledge financial and political support to refugees.

While he was in town, Stranahan embedded with critics of the refugee program. They drove him to some of his interviews and to the yogurt factory to shoot drone footage. Stranahan doesn’ get around well on his own in part because he has been mostly blind in one eye since grade school, when a neighborhood kid threw a rock at him, shattering his right optic nerve. Rather than a round pupil, his is jagged-edged, and so large that it nearly covers his iris. He shuffles when he walks because of neuropathic foot pain from diabetes, which he regulates by eating a ketogenic diet, usually one meal a day, consisting entirely of protein and fat. In Twin Falls, he subsisted most days on blackened chicken from Popeyes.

During the three months he was in Twin Falls, City Council members refused his interview requests, leaving him stuck inside an echo chamber with the activists, which he amplified online. When I was in Twin Falls, I found myself empathizing: These same activists refused to speak with me. One of the most outspoken among them is a woman named Julie DeWolfe, who lives atop a grassy hill 20 minutes outside town and who spent significant time with Stranahan. When I went there to ask for an interview, she came outside with several barking dogs and told me to leave. “he company you work for is not trustworthy,”he said.

As the summer came to a close, The Times-News was bombarded with threatening phone calls and email from all over. After it received a threat that was deemed credible enough to engage the F.B.I., the editor of the paper told Brown and the other reporters to conduct their interviews outside the office and ordered the entire staff to walk in pairs when going out to their cars. For months, the reporters covered protests around town, which were widely hyped on social media but, for the most part, sparsely attended. At least once the Police Department deployed plainclothes officers into the crowds, with instructions to look after the journalists. Later, it turned out that fake Facebook accounts linked to the Russian government helped to spread stories about Twin Falls and even organized one of the rallies there. The event was also poorly attended but is the first known Russian attempt to spark a demonstration on American soil.

The phone and email attacks continued through the fall and spiked each time a new conspiracy theory was posted online. One council member told me that she gained 15 pounds from the stress. At night, Shawn Barigar would lie down with his iPad and spend hours reading stories that called him a crook, a liar or an ISIS sympathizer. He had to shut down his Twitter account after someone accused him of having been convicted of sexual assault. Before he could debunk the myth, the post had spread, leaving untold numbers of constituents under the impression that he was a rapist. He stopped sleeping and struggled to focus at work or to be present with his family. He and his wife say they bickered all summer.

“t was like being in a hole,”e told me, his eyes welling up with tears. “t was all-consuming.”

Stranahan now works out of a trendy shared workspace in Washington, across the street from the White House. He quit his job at Breitbart, which he said was being mismanaged in Bannon’ absence, to host a drive-time FM radio show with Sputnik, a state-run Russian news outlet. He told me that he jumped at the chance to transition to a Kremlin-funded outfit and, knowing that it would be controversial, spoke to every media outlet that inquired about it, in order to draw even more people to his work.

He expressed no contrition about the reporting he did in Twin Falls, though many of the conclusions that he drew on the radio and online have been debunked. Still, many of the outlets that covered Twin Falls made only minor tweaks to their stories or did nothing at all. Many of the falsehoods that were written about the Fawnbrook case still appear at the top of a Google search of the city.

The most transparent course-correction resulted from a lawsuit against Alex Jones, the publisher of InfoWars, for its misleading stories about Chobani. After initially vowing to fight the yogurt company in court, Jones retracted several stories and issued an apology in order to make a lawsuit go away. Stranahan said that his editors forced him off the Twin Falls story during the fall and suggested that they had done so under threat from Chobani. (Breitbart denies this.)

Stranahan and I spoke a handful of times over the course of the last year, each time for several hours. Talking with him feels like being inside one of his conspiracy theories. When you ask him a question, he begins to answer and then immediately swerves in a different direction, bouncing like a pinball between topics that barely connect to one another —rom the Fawnbrook case to clitorectomies and stoning, then Syrian refugees, then a prominent Wahhabi cleric —nd seems to increase in velocity as he ricochets off them. It’ an exhausting exercise, but also a fascinating one. He seems perpetually on the precipice of pulling the argument together, sparking just enough curiosity that you let him keep going. Stranahan uses this talent most effectively in his work, painting himself as a champion of people who are understandably uninformed about other cultures and religions based on their own experiences. “t’ just easy to brand these people as a bunch of Islamophobic, racist yokels,”e told me, with a hint of disgust in his voice. “ just don’ like it.”

Stranahan struck me as passionate about his stories; not about their veracity but about the freedom he and the critics of refugee resettlement should have to speculate as they wanted without being belittled by the fact-mongering mainstream. When I reached him by phone this June, he told me he was planning to travel back to Idaho for more reporting on Fawnbrook, now that he was no longer constrained by his editors at Breitbart. He told me that he believed that he had uncovered another dimension of his globalist theory related to Chobani’ participation in the federal school-lunch program. He felt compelled to follow up on the earlier coverage, because he was frustrated that Alex Jones and others were forced to retract their stories and apologize under pressure. “ don’ like people getting shut up like that,”e said. “ven if their stories have problems, I don’ like journalists getting shut down.”

I started to ask why anyone should be allowed to publish false information for the express purpose of angering their audience and pushing them further away from those with whom they disagree, but Stranahan cut me off. “ey, I’ walking into the White House right now,”e said. He had just arrived for a press briefing with the president’ spokesman. “et me call you back.”

This April, theboys accused in the Fawnbrook case admitted guilt —he juvenile court equivalent to pleading guilty —nd were sentenced in June. The judge prohibited city officials from commenting on the outcome of the trial, but juvenile-justice experts told me that the boys would most likely be placed on probation and required to attend mandatory therapy to correct their behavior. Even in Idaho, a state with tough sentencing requirements, the law bars anyone under 10 from being jailed and only allows it in extreme cases for anyone under 12.

Late one Monday night in June I received a phone call from Dalos, the Scanner Man. He asked if I had heard about the “ireworks flying around Twin Falls.”he news of the boys’ate had somehow reached the public. “he suspects didn’ go to jail or nothing,”e said, adding that people in town were “rate.”Facebook posts about the story were again flooding his feed. “hey’e blaming it on Muslim law,”e said. One of the articles circulating, from a site called Bare Naked Islam, included a photograph of the judge in the case with a large red arrow pointing toward his head, next to the caption “orrupt Judge.”nother article published the judge’ home address and phone number, inciting another flood of harassment, a year after the initial onslaught.

Shawn and Camille Barigar’ bickering has subsided, but they have discovered that they disagree over whether Islamic teachings conflict with American social norms. “ can’ take the leap,”hawn told me, “hat because you are Muslim therefore you are reading the Quran verbatim, and you’e going to go out and do genital mutilation.”amille said she supported the local resettlement program but thought that her husband’ unwillingness to even consider cultural differences or acknowledge any nuance was naïe. “ think we’e got to be careful,”he said. “nd I don’ want to be afraid to talk about it entirely or, like, sound racist.”t is precisely this discomfort that provides an opening for people like Stranahan to dominate the conversation.

Part of the reason a fear of Islam has persisted in Twin Falls is because the local leadership refused to defuse it, according to Matt Christensen, 36, the editor of The Times-News. While Brown wrote articles that sorted out the truth about the Fawnbrook case, Christensen was publishing commentary that castigated the people who were spreading falsehoods. He told me that he had closed-door meetings with city officials, in which he asked them to write guest editorials doing the same, but none of them did. Christensen suspected that they were afraid of one of the most reliable political dangers in the region, the same force that leads would-be Democrats there to register as Republicans: being outflanked on the right is the quickest way to lose your job.

“ehind closed doors, they would all tell you they were pro-refugee, and we wanted them to step forward and make that declaration in a public arena, and it just never really happened,”e told me. “hat was frustrating to us especially at the beginning because it really felt like the newspaper was out there all alone.”e continued: “here were days where we felt like, Godammit, what are we doing here? We write a story and it’ going to reach 50,000 people. Breitbart writes a story and it’ going to reach 2, 3, 4, 5, 10 million people. What kind of a voice do we have in this debate?”

The refugee resettlement center received a dramatic increase in donations from local residents during the last year. But those in the town who support the program have often been drowned out by the relatively smaller, but louder, group of activists who oppose it. Brown said he expected to see an anti-Shariah bill introduced in the State Legislature when the next session starts in 2018. Bills like this, which try to bar Islamic law from being used in American courts, have been introduced in the past two years in Boise but never passed. He speculated that the momentum of the past year could force a different outcome. “here are a lot of people who feel like society is changing too quickly, like the community is changing too quickly,”e told me. “nd who view other people not like them or who don’ speak their language as a threat or a sign that their culture is going to be weakened. And they want to do what they can to stop that.”

Sign up forour newsletterto get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Caitlin Dickerson is a national reporter for The Times. She has covered changes in immigration policy and often profiles the lives of immigrants, including those without legal status.

PHOTOS: PHOTO (MM46-MM47); NATHAN BROWN, WHO COVERS POLITICS FOR THE LOCAL NEWSPAPER, THE TIMES-NEWS.; JIM DALOS JR. , THE ‘‘CANNER MAN’’HO CALLS IN TIPS TO LOCAL MEDIA. (MM49); SHAWN BARIGAR, THE MAYOR OF TWIN FALLS.; CAMILLE BARIGAR, THE MAYOR’ WIFE, WHO WORKS AT THE LOCAL COLLEGE.; LEE STRANAHAN, A FORMER INVESTIGATIVE REPORTER FOR BREITBART NEWS. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY HARRIS MIZRAHI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM51)

Document INHT000020171005ed9q0000a



National Desk; SECTA
Justices Cancel Hearing on Travel Ban as Questions Linger on New Policy

By MICHAEL D. SHEAR, RON NIXON and ADAM LIPTAK 
1,569 words
26 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
12
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The Supreme Court on Monday abruptly canceled oral arguments on President Trump's travel ban, signaling the beginning of the end for a politically charged legal case that could have produced a blockbuster ruling on the clash between presidential power and claims of religious discrimination.

A new, broader ban on travel prompted the unusual move by the justices, leaving Mr. Trump to face scrutiny on a policy that in some ways goes even further -- indefinitely banning most travel to the United States from seven countries and imposing restrictions on two others.

But the president's third attempt at controlling the border may finally stand up to the expected wave of new legal challenges. The new ban includes two countries that are not majority Muslim, which may insulate him from charges that his actions are based on religious discrimination.

And the new ban was developed after a vigorous security review that administration officials said provided a legally unassailable rationale for the travel restrictions. The court was set to hear the challenge to Mr. Trump's travel ban in two weeks. But after the president's announcement over the weekend, the justices now appear likely to declare the case moot.

That would allow Mr. Trump to avoid a definitive ruling on whether he had violated the Constitution's protection of religious freedom and exceeded his statutory authority to control the country's borders, as civil rights lawyers argued. With lower courts having ruled against him, Mr. Trump was pinning his hopes for political vindication on an ideologically divided Supreme Court.

Critics say Travel Ban 3.0 is still little more than a dressed-up Muslim ban. And despite a less chaotic rollout, questions remain about how the travel ban will be put in place, who will be affected, how the countries were picked and whether it will work to prevent terrorist attacks.

Here are answers to some of those questions:

Why did Trump ban travel from these countries?

The Department of Homeland Security said the countries covered under the presidential proclamation were chosen because they could not properly establish the identity of people seeking to travel from those countries to the United States. Officials said the countries on the list did not share information about whether potential travelers have a criminal history or connections to terrorism. And some of the countries are known to be potential terrorist safe havens.

Administration officials said countries on the banned-travel list failed to meet what they called ''objective criteria.'' They will be subject to the travel ban until they can demonstrate their ability to deliver the information requested by the United States, officials said.

Will this prevent a terrorist attack?

While counterterrorism experts say improvements to the government's vetting capabilities are necessary, they say the new restrictions may be far too broad because they focus on countries and not individuals.

An internal report written by intelligence analysts at the Department of Homeland Security in February found that ''country of citizenship is unlikely to be a reliable indicator of potential terrorist activity.''

Moreover, the Cato Institute found that since 1975, no Americans have been killed on American soil by foreign-born terrorists who come from any of the countries on the new executive order: Iran, Libya, Syria, Yemen, Somalia, Chad, North Korea, Iraq and Venezuela. The New America Foundation found that since the Sept. 11 attacks, 95 Americans had been killed by terrorists inside the United States. Each of the terrorists was a citizen or legal resident of the United States who would not be affected by the new travel restrictions.

Since the Sept. 11 attacks, the United States has made a number of changes to its vetting system for foreign visitors, immigrants and refugees.

The government has created a number of terrorist watch lists, required visitors to provide biometric information including fingerprints and facial scans, hired new consular officers and Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents to conduct visa security background checks and improved both interagency and country-to-country intelligence sharing.

Some counterterrorism experts say the new travel restrictions could make the United States less safe.

''My concern over the travel restrictions on countries like Yemen, Chad and Somalia is that it may discourage those countries from cooperating on vital counterterrorism efforts in their countries, and that will hurt our efforts to go after Al Shabab, Al Qaeda and ISIS,'' said John D. Cohen, a professor at Rutgers University and a senior Homeland Security Department official during the Obama administration.

Isn't this just a Muslim ban?

Like his first travel bans, the president's latest restriction mostly targets predominantly Muslim countries. But officials note that two non-Muslim countries -- North Korea and Venezuela -- are on the list this time. They say that should be proof that the latest ban was not designed to target one religion.

Critics are not convinced. They continue to point to Mr. Trump's history of calling for a ban on Muslim entry into the United States. And they insist that the addition of two non-Muslim countries does little to alter the original intent of the restrictions: to keep Muslims from certain countries out of the United States.

''President Trump's original sin of targeting Muslims cannot be cured by throwing other countries onto his enemies list,'' Anthony D. Romero, the executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, said.

How involved was the White House in drafting the new travel ban?

When it comes to immigration issues, very little happens in the Trump administration without the direct input of Stephen Miller, the president's senior policy adviser, and Jeff Sessions, the attorney general. But administration officials said the process of selecting countries for travel restrictions involved scores of career bureaucrats at the Department of Homeland Security, the State Department and the intelligence agencies.

Officials said information collected by the agencies helped generate a recommendation from the secretary of homeland security to the president. On Friday, Mr. Trump met at his Bedminster, N.J., golf club with officials from the agencies, legal advisers and Mr. Sessions to make a final decision.

So what will happen now in the courts?

The Supreme Court asked lawyers in the case involving the previous ban to submit briefs by Oct. 5 addressing ''whether, or to what extent, the proclamation'' may render the case moot. The court also asked for briefings on a question not addressed in the proclamation, concerning the earlier ban's suspension of the nation's refugee program. That suspension is scheduled to expire next month. On that question, too, the court asked the parties to explain whether the issue would soon be moot.

By canceling the arguments for now, the court indicated that it may never decide the case. ''The cases are removed from the oral argument calendar, pending further order of the court,'' the court said.

If the court does eventually dismiss the case as moot, a further legal question will remain. The Trump administration will ask the court to vacate the appeals court decisions striking down the earlier ban, while the challengers will ask that the decisions remain on the books.

Several critics have said they intend to challenge the new ban in court as well. But that would most likely require a new lawsuit at the federal district court level, followed by hearings in front of appellate courts. It could take a long time for new litigation to reach the Supreme Court again.

But legal experts say that critics of the president's policies may have less success waging a legal battle against the latest travel ban.

In the first case, administration officials struggled to explain to judges the basis for the selection of the majority-Muslim countries on the list. That led judges to rely on Mr. Trump's campaign statements and Twitter posts, many of which suggested religion as a motivation.

The current travel ban was put in place after a worldwide security review, and officials can point to a rigorous process conducted by bureaucrats from several agencies. That is the kind of executive branch action to regulate immigration and the country's borders that is usually given plenty of deference by judges.

When will this take effect? And does it affect students?

The new travel ban takes effect Oct. 18, though citizens of countries included in the earlier orders will remain banned from entry until the new one takes over. Unlike the chaotic rollout of the president's first executive order, the latest travel restrictions have clear exceptions for people who already have permission to enter the United States, so there should be few instances of people being detained at airports or consulates.

As for students, it depends. Citizens of some of the affected countries are completely banned from coming to the United States. Those include Syria and North Korea. Students from the other countries may still travel to the United States to study, assuming they can meet the normal requirements for a student visa and pass security screenings.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

The Supreme Court abruptly canceled a hearing set for Oct. 10 and asked lawyers in the travel ban case to submit briefs by Oct. 5. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ED JONES/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170926ed9q0004p



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Airstrikes in Libya Hit  ISIS  Training Camp

By ERIC SCHMITT; Declan Walsh contributed reporting from New York, and Nour Youssef from Cairo. 
925 words
25 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The United States military said on Sunday that it had conducted drone strikes on an Islamic State training camp in Libya, killing 17 militants in the first American airstrikes in the strife-torn North African nation since January.

A half-dozen ''precision strikes'' on Friday hit a training camp about 150 miles southeast of Surt, from which militants were moving fighters in and out of the country, stockpiling weapons and equipment, and plotting and conducting attacks, the Pentagon's Africa Command said in a statement. Three vehicles were also destroyed.

Between August and December last year, the military carried out 495 airstrikes to drive the Islamic State out of Surt, a coastal city that until then was an Islamic State stronghold. On Jan. 18, just before President Barack Obama left office, armed Reaper drones and two Air Force B-2 bombers attacked Islamic State training camps south of Surt, killing more than 80 militants, including some the military said were involved in plotting terrorist attacks in Europe.

The most recent strikes underscore the major threat that the Islamic State still poses in the region, despite the heavy losses it has suffered. The militant group is believed to have several hundred fighters in Libya who have taken sanctuary in its vast ungoverned spaces to plot attacks inside and outside the country, and send fighters into neighboring countries like Tunisia.

''We're seeing some signs of their regrouping in Libya,'' Amanda J. Dory, the Pentagon's top policy official for Africa until this summer, said at a Council on Foreign Relations panel discussion here this month.

President Trump authorized the airstrikes based on the recommendation of Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, an administration official said on Sunday.

The Africa Command statement noted that the strikes, which military officials said separately were carried out by armed Reaper drones flying from a base in Sicily, were conducted in coordination with the government of Prime Minister Fayez Serraj of Libya.

Reda Eissa, a spokesman for the coalition of militias backed by Mr. Serraj's Government of National Accord, said he had no information about Friday's airstrikes. He referred queries to the government's defense ministry, which did not respond to requests for comment.

Libya analysts said the area where the strikes took place is controlled by another major power broker in Libya's fractious political landscape, Gen. Khalifa Haftar, a former Libyan Army officer who was a major figure in the 2011 rebellion against the former Libyan dictator, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.

The American airstrikes come at a particularly chaotic moment for Libya. In the east, General Haftar has strengthened his position, receiving a stream of Western ministers, including the British foreign secretary, Boris Johnson.

Elsewhere, the Italian government has struck deals with smuggling militias to cut human trafficking to Europe. The capital, Tripoli, has seen sporadic violence as rival groups, including the United Nations-backed unity government, jostle for supremacy.

The American strikes took place in a desert region south of the oil crescent, where key ports changed hands between rival groups several times last spring.

''The strikes are the logical consequence to the change of the tactics of I.S.,'' said Col. Wolfgang Pusztai, a former Austrian defense attachéo Libya who follows the country closely, referring to the Islamic State. ''This is to keep the pressure on them, as none of the Libyans considers the fight against I.S. as a priority.''

On Wednesday, in the latest attempt to revive Libya's stuttering peace efforts, the United Nations envoy Ghassan Salaméaid he would seek to renegotiate a national political agreement signed in Morocco in December 2015. That announcement, at the United Nations in New York, acknowledged the chronic weakness of the unity government, which has dismally failed to assert its authority beyond Tripoli, yet retains the backing of the international community.

Mr. Salaméaid the United Nations was ready to facilitate a ''security dialogue'' with Libya's many armed factions with a view to drawing them into the political process.

American military officials said on Sunday that Friday's strikes were conducted under Obama-era rules designed to protect civilians outside active war zones, like Iraq and Afghanistan. Those rules -- called the Presidential Policy Guidance, or P.P.G. -- are in the process of being replaced by the Trump administration to streamline the process for approving drone strikes and commando raids in areas outside traditional war zones, including Yemen, Somalia and Libya.

Issued by Mr. Obama in 2013, those rules require ''near certainty'' that a bombing will kill no civilians, and the target must pose a threat to Americans -- not just to American interests. The new procedures awaiting Mr. Trump's approval would lay the groundwork for expanding possible counterterrorism missions in countries where Islamic militants are active but the United States has not previously tried to kill or capture them.

For the more than 500 other airstrikes in Libya this year and last year, the Obama White House authorized an exemption to its rules and effectively made Libya a fourth combat zone, along with Iraq, Syria and Afghanistan. It was not immediately clear why the Trump administration did not temporarily turn back on the exemption from the Obama-era rules.

President Trump authorized drone strikes on an Islamic State training camp in Libya, which reportedly killed 17 fighters. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AL DRAGO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170925ed9p00045



Asia and Australia Edition
Briefing
North Korea, Angela Merkel, N.F.L.: Your Monday Briefing

By CHARLES McDERMID 
1,370 words
24 September 2017
22:01
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

• week of threatening exchanges between the U.S. and North Korea left China and South Korea on the sidelines and the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, effectively in his preferred position: dealing directly with the U.S. Above, Mr. Kim’ image on TV in Seoul on Friday.

Over the weekend, American warplanes flew close to North Korea’ coast, and Pyongyang held a large anti-U.S. demonstration.

We assessed the likelihood that North Korea could, or would, follow through on its threat to detonate a hydrogen bomb over the Pacific.

Starting next month, most citizens of North Korea, and six other countries, will be indefinitely banned from entering the U.S., the White House announced.

_____

•n Germany’ elections, Angela Merkel won a diminished mandate for a fourth term as chancellor. Alternative for Germany, or AfD, became the first far-right party to enter parliament in more than 60 years.

The results suggest that populism —nd anxieties over security and national identity —re far from dead in Europe. The shape and policies of a new governing coalition will involve weeks of painstaking negotiations.

But Ms. Merkel, and the country she leads, now have a major role around the world.

_____

•resident Trump engaged in a war of words with the country’ largest sports leagues, making the N.F.L.’ game day one of the country’ most political events of the year.

Teams and owners presented a united front against Mr. Trump’ criticism over the role athletes play in the country’ race and social justice issues. Check here for the latest as Sunday games play out. Above, players knelt for the national anthem, the exact protest action Mr. Trump demanded players be fired for.

Among his barbs, Mr. Trump revoked a White House invitation to Stephen Curry and his Golden State Warriors to the White House. “t’ kind of beneath the leader of a country to go that route,”he star player responded.

_____

•ur videographer goes inside the chilling reality of a refugee camp for Rohingya Muslims who fled what rights officials have called “extbook”thnic cleansing in Myanmar.

His video captures a sprawling makeshift city in southern Bangladesh that now houses more than 400,000 Rohingya. For the families who made it this far, the first challenge is food and water.

_____

•he telling problems of an oil middleman: We took a close look at Unaoil, a go-to agent for multinationals operating in the biggest oil patches on earth. Above, its chief operating officer, Saman Ahsani.

It’ under investigation by Australia, Britain and the U.S. for possibly paying bribes in resource-rich countries, like Iraq and Libya, on behalf of a long list of companies.

_____

•he Pentagon introduced a $700 million program to destroy the Islamic State’ increasingly lethal fleet of drones. Above, one of the drones recovered in Iraq in January.

It also used drones against an Islamic State training camp in Libya, killing 17 militants in the first U.S. airstrikes there since January.

And, in what appears to be a first, a Singaporean \b ISIS\b0  fighter appeared in a recruitment video. He challenged Britain’ Prince Harry to fight.

_____

Business

•ber has successfully barreled into the cutthroat business of food delivery. UberEats sometimes eclipses Uber’ main ride-hailing business in markets like Tokyo, Taipei and Seoul. Above, the service’ San Francisco headquarters.

•Facebook’ response to Russian meddling in the U.S. election follows a pattern, our columnist writes: Mark Zuckerberg often fixes things after they’e broken, rather than preventing problems.

• backlash is building in Silicon Valley against the push for gender equality in tech.

•ustralia’ four biggest banks are dropping cash withdrawal charges at A.T.M.s to lift their reputations after a series of scandals.

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•raqi Kurds appear to be holding to their plan to vote on independence today, despite enormous pressure from Iraq, regional neighbors, and the U.S. over fears of violence that could tear the country apart. [The New York Times]

• “remendous increase”n seismic activity has forced more than 35,000 people to flee Mount Agung, a Bali volcano that last erupted in 1963, killing 1,100 people. [Associated Press]

•hree U.N. soldiers were killed and five others seriously injured by an explosion in Mali. As of Aug. 31, the four-year peacekeeping mission had recorded 133 fatalities. [The New York Times]

•wo Vietnamese fishermen were killed and five arrested in what was described as an exchange of gunfire with the Philippine Navy in the South China Sea. [The Rappler]

•“rexit”alks resume today, but divisions within Britain’ Conservative and Labour parties could endanger Prime Minister Theresa May’ starting position. [Bloomberg]

•audi Arabia’ 87th anniversary celebrations included an event that allowed women to enter the King Fahd International Stadium in Riyadh for the first time. [Reuters]

• housands of Tibetan mastiffs are roaming wild on the Tibetan plateau after a craze for owning them faded out. [Quartz]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ecipe of the day: Avoid the deep fryer. Bake your chicken tenders.

•se your smartphone to explore a new city like a local.

•ction —ot fretting —s an excellent career and business strategy.

Noteworthy

•re you a “repper?”oomsday isn’ just for camouflage-clad American cave dwellers hoarding canned goods. Our style team offers a checklist for the neo-survivalist.

•“ wasn’ really sure what to expect.” Swedish photojournalist explored the Afghan capital and found Kabul’ stylish side in beauty parlors, teens and weekend cricket players.

•inally, birds beware. Praying mantises prey on small birds more often than realized —specially large species like the Chinese mantis.

Back Story

If you’e looking to point fingers for one of the more giddily narcissistic trends of our time, look to the world’ smallest continent.

When the Oxford Dictionaries crowned “elfie”ts Word of the Year (edging out “werk”) a few years ago, its editors noted that the first known use of the term could be traced back to a post on an Australian Broadcasting Corporation forum that came 15 years ago this month.

There, a tipsy university-aged man posted a photo of his mouth, asking for medical advice for his lip, which he’ split open at a party.

“ had a hole about 1 cm long right through my bottom lip,”rote “opey.”“nd sorry about the focus, it was a selfie.”

It was a very Australian turn of phrase.

A “arbecue”s a “arbie.”our work colleague, Mr. Fitzgerald, is more often than not “itzy”t the pub.

Anna Wierzbicka, a linguistics professor at the Australian National University, has described the country’ love affair with such foreshortenings as reflective of cherished ideals, like “ateship,”umor, informality, and a dislike for “ong words.”

Although, given that Hopey turned out to be a man named Nathan Hope, maybe a casual tone is more important than brevity.

Adam Baidawi contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. Browse past briefings here.

We have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian, European and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.

Ahn Young-Joon/Associated Press | Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters | Michael Reaves/Getty Images | Rebecca Marshall for The New York Times | Muhammad Hamed/Reuters | Christie Hemm Klok for The New York Times | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | Craig Lee for The New York Times | Leo Acadia | Greg Baker/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Rohingya Muslims are the most recent victims of ethnic cleansing. Hundreds of thousands have fled their homes in Myanmar. Ben C. Solomon, a New York Times correspondent, shows us the chilling reality they face as refugees. | By BEN C. SOLOMON 

Document NYTFEED020170924ed9o003h2



world
Pentagon Tests Lasers and Nets to Combat a Vexing Foe:  ISIS  Drones

By ERIC SCHMITT 
1,412 words
23 September 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —t the vast, windswept White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico earlier this year, nearly a dozen military contractors armed with laser guns, high-tech nets and other experimental systems met to tackle one of the Pentagon’ most vexing counterterrorism conundrums: how to destroy the Islamic State’ increasingly lethal fleet of drones.

The militant group has used surveillance drones on the battlefield for more than two years. But an increase in deadly attacks since last fall —ostly targeting Iraqi troops and Syrian militia members with small bombs or grenades, but also threatening American advisers —as highlighted the terrorists’uccess in adapting off-the-shelf, low-cost technology into an effective new weapon.

The Pentagon is so alarmed by this growing threat —ven as it routs the Islamic State from its strongholds in Mosul, Iraq, and Raqqa, Syria —hat it has launched a $700 million crash program overseen by two senior Army generals to draw on the collective know-how and resources of all branches of the armed services, Silicon Valley and defense industry giants like Boeing and Raytheon to devise tactics and technology to thwart the menace.

One important piece of that effort was the contest in New Mexico. It amounted to a Pentagon counter-drone bake-off, called the Hard Kill Challenge, to see which new classified technologies and tactics proved most promising. The results were decidedly mixed, and underscore the long-term problem confronting the Pentagon and its allies as it combats the Islamic State and Al Qaeda in a growing number of hot spots around the world beyond Iraq and Syria, including Yemen and Libya.

“hreat targets were very resilient against damage,”he Pentagon agency assigned to help crack the problem, the Joint Improvised-Threat Defeat Organization, said in response to questions from The New York Times about how the contractors fared against mock enemy drones. “ottom line: Most technologies still immature.”he agency said some of the technology might work well with “djustments and further development.”

In the meantime, the Pentagon has rushed dozens of technical specialists to Iraq, Syria and Afghanistan to help protect American troops and to train and, in some cases, equip local allies against the drone threat, which has killed more than a dozen Iraqi soldiers and wounded more than 50. The aircraft, some as small as model airplanes, conduct reconnaissance missions to help Islamic State fighters attack American-backed ground forces. Other drones drop bombs or are rigged with explosives to detonate on the ground.

“hese things are really small and hard to detect, and if they swarm in groups, they can overload our ability to knock them all down,”aid J. D. Johnson, a retired three-star Army general who previously commanded the threat-defeat agency, and now heads Army programs for Raytheon. “he threat is very resilient and well-resourced, and we have to be looking one or two moves ahead to defeat it.”

American troops are using an array of jammers, cannons and other devices to disrupt, disable or destroy the enemy drones, often quadcopters rigged with explosives. And the military has increased airstrikes against Islamic State drones on the ground, their launch sites and their operators.

“his isn’ just an Iraq and Syria problem; it’ a regional and global problem,”t. Gen. Michael Shields, director of the threat-defeat organization and one of the two generals overseeing the effort, said in a telephone interview. “hese are airborne I.E.D.s,”eaning improvised explosive devices.

Indeed, the drone threat is going global. Iranian drones have buzzed United States Navy ships more than a dozen times in the Persian Gulf this year. In Europe, American and allied soldiers accustomed to operating from large, secure bases in Iraq and Afghanistan now practice using camouflage netting to disguise their positions and dispersing into smaller groups to avoid sophisticated Russian surveillance drones that could potentially direct rocket or missile attacks against personnel or command posts.

In the United States, the authorities voice increasing concerns about possible Islamic State-inspired drone attacks against dams, nuclear power plants and other critical infrastructure. Over the summer, the Pentagon issued classified guidance to base commanders around the country to warn local communities to keep commercial drone hobbyists away from installations.

Earlier this month, an Arabic publication offered guidance from the Islamic State, also called ISIS or Daesh, to its followers on how to evade American drones. This past week, the Islamic State released through its Amaq news agency a video of an operation in which its fighters tracked what it identified as a Syrian news media vehicle and then dropped a munition on it.

“here’ a D.I.Y. aspect to this,”aid Don Rassler, a researcher at the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, which has studied Islamic State drones.

The peak of the threat came this spring during the fight to wrest Mosul from Islamic State control in northern Iraq, military officials said. Since then, the military has repeatedly attacked Islamic State drones in the air and on the ground. Earlier this month, the Pentagon said it had killed Junaid ur Rehman, a senior Islamic State drone pilot trainer and engineer, in an airstrike near Mayadin, Syria, south of Raqqa.

“e are destroying their launch points, we’e killing their engineers, we’e dismantling their manufacturing facilities and their users,”aid Col. Ryan Dillon, a spokesman for the American military in Iraq.

Here in Washington, however, Pentagon officials worry about the rapid spread of armed drones to other conflict zones, where the United States and its local partners may be less prepared to confront the threat. In February, the Defense Department created a special task force headed by Lt. Gen. Anthony R. Ierardi, a top officer on the military’ Joint Staff, to coordinate a Pentagon-wide counter-drone campaign along with General Shields.

“hese are learning experiences, and the adversary will adapt,”aid General Ierardi, who added that the Pentagon’ $700 million effort was likely to grow in the next few years.

Some of that money will go to help organize events like the Hard Kill Challenge in New Mexico, where major defense contractors including Boeing and BAE Systems, as well as much smaller specialty technology companies, participated in a five-day competition that extended longer for some firms.

Organizers said they were searching for technologies that could defeat enemy drones with “ fly-swatter approach.”ontestants had to destroy or disable 30 drones flying more than 250 yards away. A total of 10 systems competed, including four high-energy laser weapons and an attack drone that carried a big net to capture hostile drones, military officials said.

Military officials and contractors balked at talking about details of the technology involved, much of which is both classified and proprietary.

General Shields declined to provide specific details about the result of the shootout, other than to say, “hat we learned is there are limitations with various technology.”he Islamic State, he noted, “s an adaptive enemy. They have access to talent, resources and a global supply chain.”

Counterterrorism officials said that drone technology and expertise were rapidly evolving. Speaking at a defense industry conference in Bethesda, Md., in August, Michael Cardash, a former commander of the Israeli National Police bomb squad, said that terrorists were now using larger, commercial drones that could carry up to four bombs. Smaller drones can only carry one.

“e do expect the technology to expand, and the larger the payloads, the bigger the problem,”aid Mr. Cardash, who displayed photographs of a drone that he said had been knocked down in the mountains between Lebanon and Syria.

Damien Spleeters, head of operations in Iraq and Syria for Conflict Armament Research, a London-based private arms consultancy that has been investigating weapons recovered from the Islamic State since 2014, also warned of the troubling trend.

“nless something is done about the sourcing of the material,”r. Spleeters said, “ountries will indeed be stuck in this continuous cycle of targeting more and more of ISIS’ inventions, locations and operators.”

PHOTO: American Special Operations forces inspected an Islamic State drone used to drop explosives on Iraqi forces, in Mosul in January. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MUHAMMAD HAMED/REUTERS) (A12)

* Pentagon Confronts a New Threat From \b ISIS\b0 : Exploding Drones

* Papers Offer a Peek at \b ISIS\b0 ’rones, Lethal and Largely Off-the-Shelf

Document INHT000020170925ed9n00009



World; Europe
Syrian Activist and Her Daughter Are Fatally Stabbed in Turkey

By CARLOTTA GALL 
975 words
22 September 2017
23:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

ISTANBUL — Syrian activist and her daughter, a journalist, have been found murdered in their apartment in Istanbul, family and friends reported on social media Friday.

The activist, Orouba Barakat, 60, and her daughter, Halla Barakat, 22, were discovered Thursday night in Uskudar, on the Asian side of the city. The news was first announced on social media by Shaza Barakat, the elder Ms. Barakat’ sister. The two women had been stabbed to death, the Turkish news agency Anadalou reported, quoting a police official.

The Barakats came from a large family known for its long opposition to President Bashar al-Assad of Syria and his predecessor and father, Hafez al-Assad. The two women were both active in the Syrian refugee community in Turkey.

The elder Ms. Barakat was a member of the opposition Syrian National Council, now known as the Syrian National Coalition, but she had also criticized some members of the opposition. Halla Barakat was an editor for Orient TV, which covers events in the Middle East, and had also worked for the Turkish Radio and Television Corporation.

While there was no official confirmation of the circumstances of the deaths, friends and relatives said the Assad government was to blame.

“hey assassinated them in a foreign land,”haza Barakat wrote on Facebook. “or 40 years her headlines occupied front pages. She sought out criminals and exposed them. And today, her name and Halla’ name are on the front page.”

The two women “ere vocal activists in the Syrian revolution, speaking truth to power, and raising awareness about the atrocities committed by the Assad regime,”nother relative, Suzanne Barakat, wrote on Facebook.

In a statement, the Syrian National Coalition said, “he hand of terrorism and tyranny is the prime suspect in this heinous crime of assassination.”

Social media posts on pro-government sites contained hateful comments about the Barakats.

But the Turkish newspaper Cumhuriyet published details that indicated a similarity to killings committed by the Islamic State. The women’ throats had been cut, and they had received a threat on social media 10 days earlier from someone speaking in a Tunisian dialect, the newspaper reported.

The Islamic State has claimed responsibility for four previous killings of Syrian journalists in Turkey. A fifth has survived two attacks.

The elder Ms. Barakat had received threats in the days before her killing but had disregarded them, her brother, Maen Barakat, 56, said in a telephone interview.

“ince threats by the regime have become a common thing, she didn’ pay much attention to them,”r. Barakat said.

“o items were stolen from the apartment, which suggests that the crime was committed only to kill Orouba and Halla,”e added.

His sister was a born activist, he said. “he dedicated her life to give voice to the voiceless, until the Syrian regime exiled her in the ’0s,”e said. “ut still she continued to defend her rights and the rights of others.”

She set up a media and advertising business in Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, and after the Syrian uprising moved to Istanbul.

“he came to Turkey to be closer to her country, hoping that once the war ends she would be able to return to her homeland,”r. Barakat said. “alla joined her mom in her fight against the Syrian regime, and became a loud voice in defending the rights of Syrians and documenting the crimes against them.”

Halla Barakat “as beautiful and lovely, smart and ambitious, and so kindhearted,”aid Jamal Mano, a Syrian journalist who worked for 10 months with her in Istanbul.

A Syrian refugee in Germany, Nour Sheikh Ibrahim, wept as he remembered the kindness the elder Ms. Barkat had shown him when he defected from the Syrian Army and escaped to Turkey.

“he was everything in my life, she was like my aunt,”r. Ibrahim said when reached by telephone. “he helped me a lot.”

Jobless and penniless, he had appealed to Ms. Barakat for help and when she opened a sewing factory she offered him a job. “he used to help refugees, and the camps,”e said. “he was very active. She helped lot of Syrians with money, even those who didn’ deserve it.”ater in Istanbul she gave him a place to stay.

They remained in touch, talking every few days, and he said Ms. Barakat had become depressed recently. “n the past few weeks Orouba was feeling so down,”e said. “ asked her to leave Turkey but she said she couldn’.”he lacked a valid passport, he added.

“ remember she used to receive a lot of threats on her phone,”r. Ibrahim said.

Suzanne Barakat also recalled how, in a tragic twist of fate, three members of the extended family —er brother, Deah Barakat, and his wife and her sister, who were studying in the United States —ere shot dead in Chapel Hill, N.C., in 2015 in a case that authorities investigated as a possible hate crime.

“umbness,”he said on Facebook, describing her feelings about the family’ latest deaths. “onfusion. Shock. Disbelief. I can’ think straight.”

Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon, and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul.

Correction: September 25, 2017, Monday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misidentified Suzanne Barakat’ relationship to the 2015 shooting victim Deah Barakat. He was her brother, not her cousin.

* \b ISIS\b0  Is Said to Have Killed 2 Activists in Turkey

* Syrian Journalist Who Documented \b ISIS\b0  Atrocities Is Killed in Turkey

* In Chapel Hill, Suspect’ Rage Went Beyond a Parking Dispute

Halla Barakat and her mother, Orouba, were found stabbed to death, relatives and a Turkish news agency said. | ABC News 

Document NYTFEED020170922ed9m008sp



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Fights Erupt At a Speech By Erdogan

By MAGGIE ASTOR and NICHOLAS FANDOS; Reporting was contributed by Al Baker, Malachy Browne, Niraj Chokshi, Vivian Wang and Ceylan Yeginsu. 
898 words
22 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Violence broke out at a New York hotel Thursday afternoon when protesters disrupted a speech by President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey.

In the middle of Mr. Erdogan's speech, delivered in Turkish, a man -- one of a handful of protesters -- screamed in English: ''You're a terrorist. Get out of my country!'' The ballroom at the Marriott Marquis hotel in Times Square instantly erupted, with many attendees chanting Mr. Erdogan's name to drown out the protesters.

Videos showed the protesters -- one of them wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with a picture of Michael Israel, an American who was killed in a Turkish airstrike while volunteering with the Kurdish People's Protection Units, or Y.P.G. -- being punched and slapped by several attendees as security personnel removed them from the room. Security also removed at least one person who had assaulted the protesters.

Meghan Bodette, who identified herself as one of six protesters (one of whom was filming), said their goal was ''to call attention to the Turkish state's war crimes and human rights abuses against the Kurdish people,'' both in Turkey and in Syria.

''Erdogan should not be able to speak here unchallenged, and we challenged him because the American people need to know that a state that claims to be our ally is hindering the fight against ISIS in Syria and destroying civilian lives,'' Ms. Bodette said in a Twitter message.

Halil Demir, a Turkish-American who works for a humanitarian organization, said he had been standing near the back of the room when three protesters stood up in rapid succession: a young man, a young woman and a middle-aged man. The woman held a green banner, Mr. Demir said. Ms. Bodette identified it as the flag of the Women's Protection Units, or Y.P.J., the female counterpart to the Y.P.G.

The young man was pulled out of the room, Mr. Demir said, and the woman left on her own after being told to do so. But Mr. Demir said he saw security guards push the middle-aged man, who fell to the ground. He did not know whether the guards were part of Mr. Erdogan's detail, the United States Secret Service or the hotel's security team.

''The third man screamed, and people were screaming at him,'' he said. ''It didn't take long. Seconds, really.''

Mr. Demir said he later saw the man on the floor, handcuffed, outside the ballroom where Mr. Erdogan was speaking at the invitation of the Turkish American National Steering Committee.

Cemil Akgun, 44, a Turkish textile producer who was in New York on a business trip, said Mr. Erdogan appeared unfazed. He resumed speaking less than two minutes later.

The New York Police Department said about five protesters were ''briefly detained.'' No arrests were made, and no injuries were reported.

Kathleen Duffy, a spokeswoman for Marriott International's New York City hotels, estimated that more than 2,000 people had attended the event and said that only ''a very small'' number had been escorted out.

''It appears that it started when pro and anti demonstrators kind of clashed, and it started a little bit of a physical confrontation,'' Stephen P. Davis, the Police Department's chief spokesman, said. ''But at that point, the people were separated and broken out and brought out of the venue.''

Mr. Davis cautioned that the understanding of what happened was still preliminary.

A police official, who spoke about the investigation on the condition of anonymity, said it appeared the fight had been instigated by competing protesters, not by Mr. Erdogan's security forces, who have a history of violent run-ins in the United States.

In 2011, the security forces took part in a fight at the United Nations headquarters in New York that sent at least one officer to the hospital. Last year, they, along with police officers, clashed with demonstrators outside the Brookings Institution in Washington.

In May, during Mr. Erdogan's last official visit to the United States, members of his security team attacked a group of peaceful protesters outside the Turkish ambassador's residence in Washington. Nine people were hospitalized, and video showed the episode in vivid detail. Another video emerged showing Mr. Erdogan himself watching the attack from a Mercedes-Benz sedan parked a few yards away.

A grand jury in Washington indicted 15 Turkish security officials, as well as four civilians, on assault charges in August.

That attack and the subsequent charges strained the relationship between Washington and Ankara, already tested by Mr. Erdogan's authoritarian actions in Turkey. The State Department condemned the violence and said actions intended to limit free speech would not be tolerated on American soil. Mr. Erdogan, for his part, accused American officers on the scene of bungling the situation.

After Thursday's episode, however, Mr. Erdogan -- who was in New York for United Nations General Assembly meetings -- seemed unbothered. Immediately after his speech, he met with President Trump and American diplomats, and he and Mr. Trump had little but praise for each other, at least as they smiled for photographs.

''We are as close as we've ever been,'' Mr. Trump said.

Document NYTF000020170922ed9m0006t



WORLD REVIEW
National Desk; SECT
What makes propaganda more dangerous today?

By SAMANTHA POWER 
1,274 words
21 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The International New York Times
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

When George Washington gave his Farewell Address in 1796, he urged the American people ''to be constantly awake'' to the risk of foreign influence. In the wake of Russia's meddling in the 2016 United States election, the president's warning has a fresh, chilling resonance.

The debate in the United States about foreign interference concentrates on who did what to influence last year's election and the need for democracies to strengthen their cybersecurity for emails, critical infrastructure and voting platforms. But we need to pay far more attention to another vulnerability: our adversaries' attempts to subvert our democratic processes by aiming falsehoods at ripe subsets of our population -- and not only during elections.

In the Cold War era, Soviet attempts to meddle in American democracy were largely unsuccessful. In 1982 Yuri Andropov, then the K.G.B. chairman, told Soviet foreign intelligence officers to incorporate disinformation operations -- the so-called active measures meant to discredit adversaries and influence public opinion -- into their standard work. They had an ambitious aim: preventing Ronald Reagan's re-election.

Soviet agents were instructed to infiltrate party and campaign staffs in the United States in search of embarrassing information to leak to the press, while Soviet propagandists pushed a set of anti-Reagan story lines to the Western media. Ultimately, they failed to influence the election. President Reagan defeated Walter F. Mondale, winning 49 states. Margaret Thatcher, who was similarly targeted, also won re-election in a landslide.

What exactly has changed since then to make foreign propaganda far more dangerous today?

During the Cold War, most Americans received their news and information via mediated platforms. Reporters and editors serving in the role of professional gatekeepers had almost full control over what appeared in the media. A foreign adversary seeking to reach American audiences did not have great options for bypassing these umpires, and Russian dezinformatsia rarely penetrated.

While television remains the main source of news for most Americans, viewers today tend to select a network in line with their political preferences. Even more significantly, The Pew Research Center has found that two-thirds of Americans are getting at least some of their news through social media.

After the election, around 84 percent of Americans polled by Pew described themselves as at least somewhat confident in their ability to discern real news from fake. This confidence may be misplaced.

The sheer quantity of shares that misleading stories get on Facebook is staggering. Using a database of 156 election-related news stories that fact-checking websites deemed false, economists from New York University and Stanford University determined that these false stories had been shared by American social media users 38 million times in the three months before the 2016 presidential election.

Russia has keenly exploited our growing reliance on new media -- and the absence of real umpires. Last year the Russian government supplemented the growing reach of its state-owned, English-language media outlets -- RT and Sputnik -- by employing a network of trolls, bots and thousands of fake Twitter and Facebook accounts that amplified damaging stories on Hillary Clinton.

Russia appears to have deployed similar measures in Europe. Hackers' attempts to influence political outcomes in France and Germany have received significant attention, but interference has been widespread. In Bulgaria, cyberattacks believed to originate from Russia have hit the country's electoral commission, while in Sweden, Kremlin-funded media outlets have been accused of fabricating stories to rally public opinion against NATO membership. Russia has had time to refine these strategies in the oft-overlooked disinformation campaigns that accompanied Russia's military incursions into Georgia and Ukraine, and the now-familiar mix of trolls, bots and state-sponsored journalism was also used in attempts to deflect responsibility onto the United States for the 2014 downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17.

In the United States, the vulnerability to foreign influence is exacerbated by divisions within the political establishment. During the Cold War, the larger struggle against communism created a mainstream consensus about what America stood for and against. Today, our society appears to be defined by a particularly vicious form of ''partyism'' affecting Democrats and Republicans alike. This divisive environment can make the media more susceptible to repeating and amplifying falsehoods.

These days, the walls of our media echo chambers are so soundproof that, even after Russian President Vladimir Putin's well-documented interference in the United States election, and his many offenses in Ukraine and Syria, his favorability among Republicans rose substantially between 2015 and President Trump's inauguration, from 12 percent to 32 percent.

Most worrisome, many Americans are questioning not only whether they are obtaining objective facts -- 60 percent believe news stories today are ''often inaccurate,'' according to Gallup, a major increase from 34 percent in 1985 -- but also whether objective facts exist at all. The sense of an epistemological free-for-all provides an opening to all comers.

Another reason for concern is that in 2017 any well-financed actor -- political campaigns, companies, foreign governments -- can harvest data (location, age, gender, likes, shares) on its target audience, personalizing messages to suit the taste of those it aims to reach and employing this customized propaganda to skew the political debate. Kremlin-linked ads have likely reached millions of Americans, and some were geographically directed.

Because of the attention to last year's Russian election meddling, there is a risk that going forward we will be inclined to ''fight the last war'' -- mobilizing our defenses with a focus on Russia or on the next election cycle. But we must be on our guard toward all adversaries at all times.

At the height of its military successes, the Islamic State was releasing 38 pieces of news and propaganda on social media daily, the majority of which was used to attract potential recruits by falsely, but persuasively, depicting utopian life in ISIS-held territory.

The bipartisan Alliance for Securing Democracy, meanwhile, has begun tracking and exposing Russia's extensive disinformation efforts in the here and now.

For example, the alliance documented how on the same day in August when Mr. Trump signed a bill imposing significant sanctions on Russia, the top story promoted by Russian-associated Twitter accounts concerned Mrs. Clinton's links to foreign arms sales. More recently, the alliance showed how Russia-linked accounts promoted alt-right conspiracies about the violence in Charlottesville, Va., as well as stories that slammed those -- like Senator John McCain -- who had criticized Mr. Trump's equivocal response.

This new dashboard is evocative of a series of special reports by the United States State Department that in the 1980s sought to undermine Soviet fake news by exposing Moscow's attempts to influence the American public.

It is a testament to our times that it now seems unthinkable that the State Department -- much less the president -- would publicly call out the misinformation being spread. But now that there is a genuine risk of foreign powers who, in George Washington's words, ''practice the arts of seduction, to mislead public opinion,'' it is incumbent on the rest of us to enhance our vigilance.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

This is an article from World Review: The State of Democracy, a special section that examines global policy and affairs through the perspectives of thought leaders and commentators.

George Washington in 1796 urged the American people ''to be constantly awake'' to the risk of foreign influence -- a warning that resonates today. TIMOTHY A. CLARY/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES WALTER CHIN 

Document NYTF000020170921ed9l0003k



Europe Edition
Briefing
United Nations, Mexico, Hurricane Maria: Your Wednesday Briefing

By PATRICK BOEHLER 
1,437 words
20 September 2017
06:07
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•resident Trump made a bellicose debut speech at the United Nations, threatening to “otally destroy”orth Korea and referring to its dictator, Kim Jong-un, as “ocket Man.”

He called the Iran nuclear deal “n embarrassment,”romised to “rush the loser terrorists”n the Middle East and said the U.S. was prepared to confront Venezuela’ authoritarian government. (Here’ the video.)

Our White House correspondent noted a dissonance between Mr. Trump’ vision of renewed sovereignty of the nation state and his threats to act aggressively against some countries.

_____

•Emmanuel Macron, the French president, said that the nuclear deal with Iran was “ssential for peace”nd that his country would “ot close any door to dialogue”ith North Korea. (Here’ the video, in French.)

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel agreed with Mr. Trump’ assessment of Iran. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey called for more financial assistance for sheltering more than three million Syrian refugees.

Among today’ speakers: the presidents of the European Council, Iran and the Palestinian Authority and the prime ministers of Britain, Italy and Japan.

_____

•exico was hit with a 7.1-magnitude earthquake, just two weeks after it was struck by its most powerful tremor in a century. At least 216 people were killed. Millions poured into the streets and remained there, fearful of returning inside. Images show crushed cars and falling facades.

The quake came on the 32nd anniversary of the 1985 quake that killed as many as 10,000 people.

_____

•urricane Maria left “ind-boggling”amage on the Caribbean island nation of Dominica and in Guadeloupe, the French overseas territory.

The Category 5 storm is expected to approach the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico today. Here’ a map of its projected path.

It’ not your imagination: This year’ Atlantic hurricane season has been unusually active. At the U.N., leaders of island nations called for a reconceptualization of aid to help vulnerable countries recover from devastating storms linked to climate change.

_____

•apad-2017, the large Russian and Belarusian military exercises that target fictional countries somewhat resembling the Baltic States, ends today.

It will most likely be remembered for a mishap: At least one bystander narrowly escaped death when a military helicopter accidentally fired rockets into a parking lot.

Separately in Moscow, a towering monument to Mikhail Kalashnikov, designer of the AK-47, was unveiled to the sounds of the Soviet anthem and Orthodox prayers. There was no mention of the untold millions killed by the weapon.

_____

•cientists have found the genes that control pattern and color in a butterfly’ wing —eaning they may someday be able to design them.

The advances are thanks to the new Crispr-Cas DNA editing technique, which allows researchers to figure out what a gene does by deleting it and seeing what happens.

Business

•oxconn’ stalled plans in Brazil show the difficulties the company has faced in replicating its manufacturing model outside China. Above, its compound in Shenzhen.

•ere’ a look at how Apple’ new iOS 11 will change your iPhone. And our tech columnist reviewed some of the new iPhones, describing them as “n ultimate refinement before eternal retirement.”

•nternational tourism to the U.S. declined significantly over the first few months of 2017. European countries were down 10.1 percent.

•erman watchmakers like A. Lange & Söne and Nomos are emblematic of the industry’ renaissance that has taken place in the city of Glashüte.

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•n our latest 360 video, we follow an Iraqi family returning to Mosul and hoping to rebuild their home after Iraqi forces declared victory against the Islamic State there. [The New York Times]

•he police in London said they were considering manslaughter charges over the deaths of around 80 people in a fire at Grenfell Tower in June. [The New York Times]

•ur reporter shares how he inadvertently landed a scoop on the investigation into Russian meddling in the U.S. presidential election by overhearing a conversation at a steakhouse. [The New York Times]

•he Spanish police searched some offices of Catalonia’ regional government and detained several officials ahead of a planned independence referendum, which the central government had declared illegal. [El Paí / Catalan News]

• n Germany, auditors are busy figuring out what happened at Documenta, the contemporary art exhibition that required a government bailout. [The New York Times]

•rom the Op-Ed section: A new documentary shows how a Swedish graduate student infiltrated the alt-right movement in the U.S. and Europe. [The New York Times]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•f you plan to v isit Ireland, here are some tips on how to live lavishly without spending too much.

•hat’ the secret to an organized kitchen? Experts share their insights.

•ecipe of the day: Deep dive into our collection of delicious recipes for Rosh Hashana, which begins at sunset.

Noteworthy

•e asked the people behind “other!”how the year’ most divisive film came about. The actress Jennifer Lawrence, above center, called it an allegory for climate change. Our critic’ take: “t’ a hoot!”

• Jordanian princess, whose brother twice lost bids for the FIFA presidency, has been discreetly working with British private investigators to collect evidence of soccer corruption.

• cautionary tale: A copy of a masterpiece by Piet Mondrian passed unchecked around some important art institutions as though it were the real thing.

•n an Op-Ed, the author Miljenko Jergovic writes about how Communist Yugoslavia’ rulers considered punk rock a useful outlet for youth rebellion.

•t London Fashion Week, Italian designers showcased their latest collections from their younger, more accessible lines. Today, the focus shifts to Milan’ shows.

Back Story

For today, a slice of culinary history. The Times introduced readers to pizza 73 years ago today as “ pie made from a yeast dough and filled with any number of different centers.”

“ith the dexterity of a drum major wielding a baton, the baker picks one up and twirls it around, first in one hand and then in the other,”the report said, describing Luigino’ Pizzeria Alla Napoletana in Times Square.

In the early 1800s, Naples was famous for working poor, the lazzaroni. Pizza was the answer to their need for quick and cheap food. Antica Pizzeria Port’lba opened in Naples in 1830 and is widely thought to be the world’ first pizzeria.

When Neapolitans began migrating in large numbers to the U.S., they brought their tradition of wood-oven bakeries. The first U.S. pizzeria opened in New York in 1905.

Some things have changed. Pizza is now embedded in much of the world’ culinary fabric. (Last week, our dining critic proposed that Jersey City actually has New York’ best pizza.)

But the gluttony that pizza can inspire is enduring.

“ach one will make four portions,”he Times wrote in 1944. “lthough many people can do away with a whole pie single-handed.”

Remy Tumin contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

This briefing was prepared for the European morning. You can browse through past briefings here.

We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.

Chang W. Lee/The New York Times | Chang W. Lee/The New York Times | Adriana Zehbrauskas for The New York Times | James Hill for The New York Times | Richard Wallbank/Smithsonian Institution and University of Cambridge | Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Lars Leetaru | Markian Lozowchuk for The New York Times | Dan Grossi/Associated Press | Hurricane Maria tore roofs off houses on the Caribbean island of Dominica and caused flooding in Guadeloupe. The Category 5 storm is now headed toward the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico. | By CHRIS CIRILLO, NATALIA V. OSIPOVA and SARAH STEIN KERR | Thousands have been returning to western Mosul after Iraqi forces pushed ISIS out of the city. The Salman family moves back amid risks and widespread damage to their neighborhood. They now hope to rebuild. | By JOHN BECK, VEDA SHASTRI and JOSHUA THOMAS 

Document NYTFEED020170920ed9k0012x



Briefing
Donald Trump, Hurricane Maria, Sean Spicer: Your Tuesday Briefing

By MARK A. WALSH 
1,195 words
19 September 2017
11:39
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•rump’ warning to North Korea.

If the U.S. is forced to defend itself or its allies, “e will have no choice but to totally destroy North Korea,”resident Trump told the U.N General Assembly this morning. Catch up with our live coverage.

Secretary General Antóio Guterres spoke about climate change, Myanmar and trust among nations. Also looming over the assembly this year are issues like the debate over climate change.

•o holds barred.

The special counsel inquiry into Russian interference in the presidential election is opting for aggressive tactics, if early actions are any guide.

Paul Manafort, President Trump’ former campaign chairman, woke up one morning in July to find federal agents with a search warrant had picked the lock of his home and raided it. Soon after, the special counsel threatened to indict him.

•“ind boggling”amage.

Hurricane Maria is barreling through the Caribbean, a region battered by Irma less than two weeks ago, and has struck Dominica, where the prime minister was rescued.

It was upgraded to a Category 5 hurricane this morning, and is headed toward the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico. Here’ a map of its projected path.

Our reporter set out to answer questions about possible links between climate change and extreme weather.

•evastation in Myanmar.

Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the country’ de facto leader, refused in a speech on Monday to criticize  security forces accused of ethnic cleansing.

Hundreds of thousands of Rohingya have fled to Bangladesh, and satellite images show more than 200 villages have been burned.

Despite outrage over the crisis, there have been few calls for sanctions.

•e could have been a contender.

German voters are widely expected to endorse Chancellor Angela Merkel in general elections on Sunday.

That raises the question of what happened to  Martin Schulz, whose chances of unseating her appear to have fizzled.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

We talk to Kenneth Vogel, a Times reporter who overheard talk of how tactics used by the special counsel were rattling the White House legal team.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•oys “”s, crippled by competition and debt, has filed for bankruptcy.

•he chief of Best Buy tells us how the electronics retailer has thrived in the era of Amazon.com.

•.S. stocks were up on Monday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ur guide to modern parenting: It’ all about juggling responsibilities.

•an we train ourselves to need less sleep? Sadly, no.

•ecipe of the day: a velvet-textured German chocolate cake.

Noteworthy

•eturn to Mosul.

In today’ 360 video, witness the Salman family’ homecoming after Iraqi forces declared victory against the Islamic State in the city.

•artisan writing you shouldn’ miss.

Writers from across the political spectrum discuss Hillary Clinton’ reckoning with the 2016 campaign.

•racing a Jewish ancestry .

From Poland to Lithuania, our writer navigates historic cities and out-of-the-way towns, finding remnants of the past at every turn.

•id crowd size matter?

After Sean Spicer poked fun at himself at the Emmys, we asked if he regretted his White House briefing about numbers at the presidential inauguration. “f course I do,”e said.

We also reviewed the best and worst moments of the awards show.

•he making of “other!”

Is it the most confusing movie of 2017, or the most provocative? The director Darren Aronofsky and the stars Jennifer Lawrence and Javier Bardem tell us all about it.

•n memoriam .

Stanislav Petrov was a Soviet officer who helped avert nuclear war by deciding —orrectly —hat a warning from a computer system in 1983 about a U.S. missile launch was a false alarm. He was 77.

•est of late-night TV.

James Corden denied kissing Sean Spicer —hen apologized, sort of.

•uotation of the day.

“hey are setting a tone. It’ important early on to strike terror in the hearts of people in Washington, or else you will be rolled.”

—Solomon Wisenberg, a veteran of the investigation that led to the impeachment trial of President Bill Clinton, referring to tactics by the special counsel, Robert Mueller, and prosecutors.

Back Story

North Korea’ economic output might be smaller than Vermont’, but it recently outpaced the entire U.S. in the production of at least one thing: tungsten.

That’ a rare element whose price has surged 50 percent since July.

Tungsten has the highest melting point of any metal, at about 6,192 degrees Fahrenheit, making it useful in light bulbs.

Smartphone makers need tungsten because it helps withstand electronic heat in touchscreens. Armed forces need it for its ability to harden the steel used in missiles. Automakers use 25 percent of the global supply for cutting tools, among other items.

Most of the world’ tungsten comes from China, where the government has been exerting greater control over production, in part because domestic demand has ballooned. The country makes more cars than the U.S. and Japan combined.

Until 1928, when an Appeals Court overturned it, General Electric had a 15-year patent on tungsten for electric light filaments, giving it a near monopoly in the American market.

The U.S. has had concerns about the increasing price of the rare element since at least the 1960s.

Thomas Furse contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated all morning. Browse through past briefings here.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Correction: September 19, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this briefing misstated, in one instance, the nature of tungsten. It is a rare metal, not a rare-earth metal.

President Trump, center, at a U.N. meeting on Monday. He will address the General Assembly today. | Doug Mills/The New York Times | Preparations for Hurricane Maria on the French territory of Guadeloupe in the Caribbean on Monday. | Dominique Chomereau-Lamotte/Associated Press | Daw Aung San Suu Kyi after a speech today in Naypyidaw, the capital of Myanmar, in which she addressed the plight of the Rohingya. | Soe Zeya Tun/Reuters | Sean Spicer at the Emmys on Sunday. | Chris Pizzello/Invision, via Associated Press | Tungsten is used in the filaments of incandescent light bulbs. | Associated Press | Thousands have been returning to western Mosul after Iraqi forces pushed ISIS out of the city. The Salman family moves back amid risks and widespread damage to their neighborhood. They now hope to rebuild. | By JOHN BECK, VEDA SHASTRI and JOSHUA THOMAS 

Document NYTFEED020170919ed9j00209



World; Asia Pacific
Captive Priest Is Freed as Philippine Troops Close In on Militants

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
878 words
17 September 2017
11:22
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ILIGAN, Philippines — Roman Catholic priest who was held hostage for months by Islamic State-inspired militants in the war-torn southern city of Marawi has been freed, the Philippine military said on Sunday, as it moved closer to rooting out the remaining gunmen from their strongholds.

The Rev. Teresito Suganob was rescued late Saturday by troops who cleared a mosque that militants had been using as a defensive post, the authorities said.

“e was rescued by our men on the ground,”aid Jesus Dureza, a senior presidential adviser.

The commander of naval forces in the southern region, Rear Admiral Rene Medina, gave a somewhat different account, saying that the priest had managed to escape with another hostage amid the heavy fighting. They were picked up by the military and brought to a safer place, Admiral Medina said.

No information was immediately available about Father Suganob’ condition or that of the other hostage, a teacher.

Father Suganob was among dozens of civilians taken hostage on May 23 as gunmen from militant groups affiliated with the Islamic State began a citywide assault on Marawi, the Philippines’nly predominantly Muslim city. The military soon began a counteroffensive; since then, the militants’umbers have been greatly reduced, much of Marawi has been reduced to ruins, and hundreds of thousands of people have fled to refugee camps.

In June, Father Suganob appeared in a video posted online by the militants, and he pleaded for President Rodrigo Duterte to stop the military’ air raids as bursts of gunfire rang in the background.

“r. President, we are in the midst of this war,”aid the priest, who added that the bombing was putting the hostages at risk. “e want to live another year, two years,”e said.

At one point, the Philippine military said the militants could be holding as many as 200 hostages, and it was unclear on Sunday how many were still captives. But the news of Father Suganob’ freedom suggested that the militants could be fleeing the battlefront to escape a punishing ground and air assault assisted by the United States and Australia, which have been flying spy planes over the scarred city.

Two weeks ago, troops recaptured Marawi’ Grand Mosque, where Philippine militants had been holed up with hostages, backed by several fighters from the Middle East and elsewhere in Southeast Asia. On Friday, after a five-hour battle, the military seized two other structures, including another mosque, that it said had been enemy strongholds.

Father Suganob had been a captive in yet another mosque, Bato Mosque, which the military took control of on Saturday.

“s follow-up and clearing operations continue, we expect the enemy to yield more previously occupied positions, but not without a fight,”aid the head of the armed forces, Gen. Eduardo Añ. “e are ready for that.”

He said the rebels had been denied “heir erstwhile command and control hub,”eferring to Bato Mosque, and he called the freeing of Father Suganob “n enormous gain.”

As of Saturday, the death toll from the fighting since May stood at 668 militants and 149 soldiers, according to the military. It said 47 civilians had been killed.

The military estimates that 40 to 60 rebels are still fighting. There has been no word of the fate of Isnilon Hapilon, the declared leader of the Islamic State in the Philippines, or of the brothers Omarkhayam and Abdullah Maute, leaders of an allied militant group.

The Marawi crisis has been the biggest security threat Mr. Duterte has faced since he became president last year. He has admitted that the military was caught off-guard by the militants’razen attack, which occurred as he was traveling in Russia with top officials, including military and police generals. Mr. Duterte has since placed the entire southern third of the country under martial law as the security forces pursue the militants and their supporters.

On Saturday, Navy commandos patrolled the city’ lakeshore area armed with high-caliber weapons and night-vision goggles, while P-3 Orion spy planes and drones provided by the United States tracked movements on the ground.

Ground troops, meanwhile, moved through streets littered with debris. Upturned vehicles and rows of heavily pockmarked homes lined the streets, where militants had dug in. The Philippine Air Force carried out bombing runs that sent up plumes of black smoke and rattled windows a half-mile away.

Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana said the fighting was nearing an end, although he declined to offer a specific time frame. The military has announced three different dates by which it said the fighting would be over, but it has continued nonetheless.

“here’ only a little resistance left,”r. Lorenzana said.

* In City of Ruins, Philippines’attle Against \b ISIS\b0  Rages On

* Philippine Congress Extends Martial Law in Besieged Region

* Catholic Priest Abducted in the Philippines Appeals to President in a Video

Philippine soldiers in Marawi on Saturday. Much of the southern city has been reduced to ruins. | Jes Aznar for The New York Times | Father Teresito Suganob, a Roman Catholic priest who was taken hostage last week, appeared in an undated video. | By ASSOCIATED PRESS 

Document NYTFEED020170917ed9h0015p



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTSR
The Boys of Brexit

By MAUREEN DOWD 
2,842 words
17 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON -- It seems like an impossible feat. But Tony Blair has done it. He has made himself even less popular in Britain.

And this, on the 20th anniversary of Princess Diana's death, when everyone should be grateful that he helped save the monarchy by forcing the royal family to put aside its distaste for Di's modern, confessional, subversive ways, climb out of its crusty shell and pay more respect to ''the people's princess,'' as Blair ingeniously christened her.

The 64-year-old Blair is more gray, but his eyes are bright blue and he looks trim in a navy suit, sans tie. The country he once worked to unite is fractured now over Brexit and he -- a decade after his time as prime minister -- finds himself as a key player in trying to undo what voters did last year. Nigel Farage, the Brexit ringleader, has blamed Blair, in part, for throwing open the borders to ''rub our noses in diversity.''

The two men, one working in London and one in Brussels, are not fresh faces in Britain. But they are facing off as nemeses, like Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Moriarty wresting on the edge of a cliff, over where the country will go next.

Recalling his intervention with the royal family, Blair said, ''You've just got to make sure that you try and keep the country together and united and, look, it was an extraordinary time because I'd literally just come into office.'' He related those days as we sat in his Mayfair office -- the same one used by John Adams when he was the ambassador here -- and sipped coffee out of white porcelain cups.

''If you think back to when she became queen, roughly when I was born,'' he said of Elizabeth, ''there was still an age of deference around. We're past the age of deference. So what she understood was, the monarchy could only stay the monarchy if it could justify itself on its own terms. That process of modernization of the monarchy was very important. But you have to do it without losing that mystique and mystery.''

He says he has never seen Michael Sheen's take on him in ''The Queen,'' and he has not watched ''The Crown,'' its twin jewel in Peter Morgan's prodigious effort to put a shine back on Queen Elizabeth after the Diana debacle.

(He has seen the famous Hugh Grant dance from ''Love Actually,'' and said he did it himself, not as well, after winning the Olympics bid in 2005 and almost did it again after the Irish peace deal was struck.)

Did Blair ever think he would see a time when the royal family would keep calm and carry on as the queen's grandson moved toward marrying an American TV actress who is divorced and half black?

''Yeah, I mean, it's great,'' he said.

And for Blair, all deference disappeared when the British had their suspicions confirmed that the selling of the Iraq invasion was based on sexed-up evidence, and that their prime minister's role as W.'s enabler and simultaneous translator had helped pave the path to endless war and ISIS.

Blair has plunged back into the fray as a leading advocate for overturning Brexit. His office -- along with David Geffen's yacht, to which Blair is no stranger -- is ground zero for the global elite. Although he bristled at that term. ''On this elite thing, the progressives are just going to stand up for themselves and push back against'' that hooey, he said, using a stronger word. ''The idea that the handful of right-wing media proprietors here are some ordinary Joes from the street, I mean, it's ridiculous. There are elites on both sides.''

While we're on the subject of right-wing media proprietors, I broached the subject of his former benefactor and buddy Rupert Murdoch, who cut him off when he came to believe that Blair had been involved with his then-wife, Wendi. (Blair denies it.) Will they ever be friends again?

''I don't think I'll comment on that one,'' Blair said with a tight smile.

I asked if his quixotic push against Brexit was an expiation for his push for the Iraq war -- even though he maintains that, as he looks at Syria, he still feels it was right to go into Iraq.

''No is the answer to that,'' he replied.

I've always thought Blair was one of a handful of people who could have stopped the Iraq war, and I was fierce in my criticisms of him.

In London, though, I stopped short of doing what some here, including a bartender at a hip London restaurant where Blair was dining, have done: a citizen's arrest for crimes against peace. (A website called arrestblair.org -- with a current pot of over 10,000 pounds -- offers a reward for Blair's capture, or attempted capture.)

Even though he stiffened, I asked why he helped W. switch 9/11 villains from Osama bin Laden to Saddam Hussein.

''What I would say is that our anxiety, particularly straight after 9/11, was that you would end up in a situation where these unstable dictatorships, you know, which combined with terrorism to cause mass destruction,'' he said. ''One of the things I've learned about this issue is that there's no point in me trying to relitigate it with people.''

I asked about speculation that he had bonded with W. over their strong Christian faith. ''Not really,'' he replied.

He's Teflon Tony no more. I wondered if he thought he could ever get beyond it, the way W. has become more popular in contrast to President Trump.

''I don't know is the truthful answer,'' he said.

Some Britains even blame Blair for Brexit, arguing that the emotional release he encouraged in the stiff-upper-lip country after Diana's death uncorked a reservoir of decidedly un-British visceral feeling.

''Drawing a line from Princess Diana to Brexit is a bit of a stretch, I would say,'' he said curtly.

Blair's office is decorated with paintings and a map of the Middle East, where he served as special envoy for the ''quartet'' of the U.S., the U.N., the E.U. and Russia. W.'s book of paintings sits on a shelf.

Blair knows Jared Kushner -- he has not met Trump -- so I asked what he thought of the son-in-law's epic task of making Middle East peace.

''The fact that someone's not got a long institutional experience of these issues isn't necessarily a disadvantage,'' Blair said.

Certainly, the Iraq war proved that a consortium combining decades of experience is no guarantee of wisdom.

The Tony Blair Institute for Global Change may sound like a front for the restoration of the global elite. But Blair said he has struggled to understand the forces that led to Brexit and Donald Trump: ''Making sense of it is very hard. I feel like a student of politics again.'' Odd, he added, since ''I spent most of my political life in a state of reasonable certainty.''

He said he still talks to his old Third Way pal, Bill Clinton. ''Spending time in his company is well spent because he's got an amazing political mind,'' Blair said. And he's still in touch with W.

The central question, he said, is whether politicians can change the status quo enough to steer people through this period when they feel they've lost control.

''I don't think you can adopt a politics that essentially says that those grievances are unjustified or irrelevant,'' he explained, ''or say, 'I'm just going to focus on something else because that's really more important than your grievance.'''

He could have been describing What Happened with Hillary's campaign, when she and President Barack Obama sniffed at the rise of Trump and Bernie Sanders.

The anger that buoyed Trump, he said, ''is not unjustified. You can't sit there and essentially blame the people.''

That approach can lead to the rise of strongmen, or what he called ''the Putinist model.'' ''The strongman form of government says, 'I'm just going to bust through the systems not delivering for you and I'm going to deliver,''' he said. ''It's got an appeal.'' He concluded: ''I think the threat to what I would call traditional democracy is bigger than we think.''

The weekend I talked to him, he told me he was publishing a report on how to deal with the immigration issue, which he said ''agonized'' progressives because they ''hate the tinges of racism and sometimes the overt racism that comes with anti-immigrant feeling.''

His report represented a radical pivot. He now believes that Brexit can never be undone ''unless we have an immigration policy that makes sense of the fact that people do worry about pressure on services and wages that can come from large accumulations of migrant labor and frankly, anxieties people have about whether there's a cultural divide from migrants, particularly if they come from a majority of Muslim countries.

''I think the only way of changing the Brexit situation is to say, 'We've listened, we've heard, we're going to act on these problems, but we're going to act in a way that is sensible, that is consistent with our values.'''

His U-turn showed up as a banner headline in The Sunday Times: ''Tony Blair Gets Tough on Migrants 13 Years After Opening Doors.'' The paper outlined Blair's ''explosive'' backtrack: Calling on Theresa May's government to force European Union migrants coming to Britain to register or face being barred from renting a home, opening a bank account or claiming benefits; recommending curbing unemployed migrants' access to free health care and permitting businesses and universities to discriminate in favor of British citizens.

Upon hearing the news, British tabloids, not to mention Cockney taxi drivers, went nuts.

''Migrant U-Turn Fury,'' shrieked The Sun. ''Blair Bitch Project.''

''Butt Out Blair -- You Ruined This Country,'' blared The Daily Star's headline.

The Daily Express lead editorial, headlined ''Tony Blair Is the Reason That We Are Leaving the EU,'' huffed about the jaw-dropping shift: ''If he had a shred of decency or integrity we would never hear from him on this subject again.'' It reminded readers that Blair's consigliere, Lord Peter Mandelson, said in 2013 that the Labour Party had ''sent out search parties for immigrants'' in what the paper called ''a cynical move'' to expand its voting base and be in a position to label Tories racist if they objected.

Farage called Blair's new stance ''beyond the pale.'' When I mentioned to Blair that Farage is surrounded at the E.U., where he is a member of Parliament, by people who loathe him, the former prime minister shot back, ''He rejoices in that fact.''

I flew to Brussels to track down Farage, who managed to turn Britain upside down after 20 years of not being taken seriously.

Although he thinks Blair was once a ''genius'' politician, Farage said, ''The thing about Blair is that, in terms of British public opinion, he's a busted flush.'' He added that May is ''a very, very cold fish.''

The 53-year-old hell-raiser was in his office in a modern Parliament building, the skunk at the garden party. All day long, E.U. members try to hammer out the terms of the blistering divorce with Britain. And here is the renegade who led the lemmings off the cliff, holed up, wearing a natty dark suit, wreathed in Camel smoke despite the no-smoking rules, sipping Welsh whisky and trashing his colleagues.

He told Herman Van Rompuy, who was then president of the E.U., in front of the whole European Parliament that he had ''all the charisma of a damp rag and the appearance of a low-grade bank clerk.''

Next to his desk Farage has installed a black coffin emblazoned with a golden emblem of the euro. ''I bought it on eBay for 180 euros,'' he said gleefully, ''which for a properly made coffin didn't seem bad.'' He has in a frame the infamous picture of him and Trump in front of a gold elevator at Trump Tower, gloating, thumbs up, the week of Trump's upset victory.

Farage loves Trump. He admits that padding around the lobby of the Trump International Hotel in Washington with a large glass of red wine is one of his favorite nocturnal activities.

When Trump tweeted in November that Farage should be named ambassador to the U.S., it caused an uproar at 10 Downing Street.

Farage mused that it would have been interesting to do something constructive, rather than stay on his usual destructive path, but the former banker said that those in the British establishment ''look upon me as a member of the lower orders.''

Although The Guardian reported that Farage had been named ''a person of interest'' in the F.B.I.'s Russia investigation, Farage shrugged it off, saying, ''I've got no Russian connections.''

Despite his stunning success with Brexit, Farage is now a man without a party. He resigned as leader of UKIP, which has basically sputtered out.

''What are political parties for?'' he said, philosophically. ''Are they there for their own sake? If you're in politics because you want to be something, then parties are essential. If you're in politics because you want to do something, parties are vehicles.''

His friend Trump, he said, took over his party. ''It's a complete hijack and I love it,'' he laughed, hoarsely. He called Trump the ''extreme alpha male, the silverback gorilla.''

But even those who like Trump, he said, wonder ''why he's picking a battle on so many fronts simultaneously'' -- especially with his own party. You know you're in trouble when Nigel Farage thinks you're picking too many battles.

Reviled by many at home in London and at work in Brussels, Farage is spending the autumn giving speeches all over Europe.

He recently got a standing ovation at a rally for a far-right, anti-immigration party in Berlin, where he said Angela Merkel's decision to maintain open borders during the refugee crisis was the ''worst decision by any leader in modern political history.'' He was invited by his fellow Parliament member Beatrix von Storch, a leading member of the far-right Alternative for Germany Party and a granddaughter of Hitler's finance minister.

''The hard left has made my life a complete misery over the last four or five years,'' Farage said. ''I've had to live with 24/7 security. I've had threats, physical assaults against me, my family. And this is all from people who are in organizations that profess themselves to be about love and hope and optimism, all right?''

Farage, who once dismissed France under the stewardship of Françis Hollande as ''a pipsqueak,'' said that with Emmanuel Macron, France would become even more of a pipsqueak. He loved Melania's hurricane stilettos, is excited about Kate Middleton's pregnancy -- ''I think it's absolutely bloomin' marvelous!'' -- and thinks that Prince Harry should not marry Meghan Markle. ''I don't think Harry's ready to marry anyone yet,'' he said.

He called Gary Cohn wrong to have publicly chastised Trump's response to Charlottesville and denied that Javanka's presence in the Oval was a detriment to the president, saying ''he needs family around him.''

Not only can the sun set on the British Empire. It can set on Nigel Farage. At dusk, we walked across the street to a favorite haunt, the Beer Factory, where he had a red wine.

He waved his hand at the crowded square, shrugging off the very idea of Brussels. ''Belgium's not a nation,'' he said matter-of-factly. ''Brit-bashing here in Brussels is about to become a registered E.U. sport, as every single one of them lines up to say we are wrong, we are deluded, we are stupid, we made a deplorable decision and they won't budge a millimeter in the negotiations and that we're going to be taught a jolly good lesson.''

Farage is the proverbial cat on a hot tin roof. The victory is just staying on it, I guess, as long as he can.

I invite you to follow me on Twitter (@MaureenDowd) and join me on Facebook.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

(PHOTOGRAPHS BY DANIEL LEAL-OLIVAS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES, AND CARL COURT/GETTY IMAGES) (SR1); Tony Blair, far left, and Nigel Farage. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TOM JAMIESON, LEFT, AND PASCAL BASTIEN, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (SR6-SR7) DRAWING (DRAWING BY JUSTIN RENTERIA) 

Document NYTF000020170917ed9h0006i



World; Middle East
Syrian Children Return to School Amid the Ruins in a Rebel-Held Area

By MEGAN SPECIA 
611 words
17 September 2017
00:04
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Small boys wearing backpacks gathered in a Syrian elementary school on Saturday, smiling as they walked between desks covered in dust.

In the classroom, light filtered in through a gaping hole in the ceiling, with crumbling concrete and exposed steel bars suspended overhead. The building was damaged at some point during Syria’ brutal six-year conflict, which has turned this residential area outside Damascus, the capital, into a battleground.

In another classroom on Saturday, the metal grate covering a window was bent inward, the result of a forceful blast. The walls of the school building were pockmarked by bullets and shrapnel.

Amid such destruction, Syrian children returned to classes —espite the war still going on around them —n the rebel-held suburb of Douma on the northeastern outskirts of Damascus.

Government airstrikes are a still a regular occurrence in Douma, as President Bashar al-Assad’ forces fight to wrest control of the area from opposition groups.

International monitoring groups say that the government has deliberately targeted schools and hospitals in rebel-held areas in the past.

In Douma, the battles have been underway since 2013. Airstrikes and ground battles have left much of the city in ruins. The same day that school started, a Douma-based medical group reported that a strike on the area had wounded several people.

But at the local school, students grasped on to some sense of normalcy despite the conflict around them.

In the building, children’ artwork and paper cutouts of Arabic lettering hung on the wall, a reminder that school was back in session.

In Douma, just six miles from Syria’ capital city, signs of war are everywhere.

It is one of the last remaining areas of significant size near Damascus that is still under opposition control. Residents have spent much time cut off from the outside world, relying on aid from humanitarian organizations to provide for their most basic needs.

Last month, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent delivered food, medical supplies and vaccines as part of an aid convoy.

The war has truncated children’ education. The protracted conflict has resulted in the partial or complete destruction of more than 5,000 schools, according to the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

With nearly six million Syrians displaced internally and five million more who have fled the country as refugees, lack of access to education has become a major issue. In the neighboring countries that host a majority of the Syrian refugees, at least 536,000 school-age children are not receiving an education, according to a recent Human Rights Watchreport. And on Sunday, Save the Children reported that the problem has gotten worse, and that a third more Syrian refugee children are out of school this year than last year.

A week before the Douma schools reopened, Asma al-Assad, the wife of President Assad, visited a newly opened school in the government-held area of Tartus, according to reports from Syrian state-run news outlet SANA.

Mrs. Assad is seen in the photos hugging children in brightly painted, pristine classrooms, a stark departure from the scenes in Douma.

* For Syrian Actors, a Maddening Road to America

* On Cloth Scraps, Syrian Names Are Immortalized in Rust and Blood

* Why the U.S. Allowed a Convoy of \b ISIS\b0  Fighters to Go Free

Students entered a damaged classroom on Saturday on the first day of school in the Douma suburb of Damascus, Syria. | Bassam Khabieh/Reuters | Bassam Khabieh/Reuters | Bassam Khabieh/Reuters | Bassam Khabieh/Reuters | Bassam Khabieh/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170916ed9g0040h



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Why U.S., Reversing Itself, Let Convoy of 300  ISIS  Fighters Pass

By ROD NORDLAND and ERIC SCHMITT; Reporting was contributed by an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria; Hwaida Saad from Beirut, Lebanon; and Falih Hassan from Baghdad. 
1,311 words
16 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Needing to relieve himself, the man stepped out of a bus into the night air of the Syrian desert.

The bus was part of a convoy carrying 300 Islamic State fighters that had been stuck there for days, prevented by American bombers from moving forward and prevented by the presence of women and children from being bombed.

The man walked a short distance away and began to urinate.

An American Hellfire missile ended the excursion.

By the American military's count, 20 Islamic State fighters in the convoy died like that.

Those killings were among the consolation prizes the Americans claimed after ending the two-week standoff this week, reversing a vow never to let the militants pass and yielding a tactical victory to the Islamic State.

American officials say the decision to withdraw was the result of a complicated trade-off of competing priorities and speaks to the kind of battleground Syria is, a three-dimensional chessboard with multiple players, constantly shifting strategies, and opportunities seized and abandoned on the fly.

''The truth is that war is messy and chaotic,'' said Thomas Joscelyn, a senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies in Washington. ''It's all a mess, who's got a right to do what at this point in Syria.''

The Americans had been furious about the convoy from the start. The Islamic State had cut a deal with the Syrian government and its Hezbollah militia allies to allow the fighters and their families safe passage to cross Syria from the Lebanese border in the west to ISIS-controlled territory in eastern Syria and Iraq.

Within days, American airstrikes cratered the highway in front of the convoy, stopping it in its tracks. American officials vowed not to let the convoy pass, or the fighters to return to the battlefield.

''Our coalition will help ensure that these terrorists can never enter Iraq or escape from what remains of their dwindling caliphate,'' said Brett H. McGurk, the American presidential special envoy to the anti-ISIS coalition.

But that American line in the sand was wiped away with a telephone call last Friday from Russian military headquarters in Syria to American headquarters in Baghdad. Russia asked the United States to remove aerial reconnaissance over the convoy, which both sides knew would allow the convoy to proceed.

The request was part of what the military calls ''deconfliction,'' a process to make sure the Russian-backed Syrian forces and the American-backed Syrian Democratic Forces do not inadvertently attack one another while both are trying to battle ISIS.

Cooperation with the Russians was important since Russian-backed forces and American-supported forces were separately closing in on the Euphrates River city of Deir al-Zour, with both sides launching numerous air raids in the area.

Moreover, the convoy was pinned down near the town of Sukhna, well within the Russian side of the deconfliction line, in the area reserved for Russian warplanes to operate under a longstanding American-Russian agreement.

''The way the deconfliction has worked, there are certain areas where the Russians have a sway over what happens, and this is one of them,'' said Mr. Joscelyn said.

The United States did not want to undercut a process it would need to rely on later.

The Americans agreed to the request, and the convoy slipped into Islamic State territory late Wednesday night, arriving in Mayadin 17 days after setting out from the Lebanese border.

On Thursday it headed further south to Abu Kamal, on the Iraqi border, and by Friday, according to Syrian anti-regime activists and to Iraqi officials in the border area, parts of the convoy had crossed into Qaim, Iraq, in western Anbar Province, also an ISIS-held area, arousing anger among Iraqi officials.

By the time of the Russian request, the standoff over the convoy had started producing diminishing returns for the United States.

They had already killed large numbers of Islamic State fighters, with the stranded buses having turned into a ''fortuitous'' shooting gallery, the spokesman for the American-led coalition, Col. Ryan Dillon, said.

As the Islamic State repeatedly sent rescuers down the single highway leading to the convoy, American warplanes and armed drones picked them off ''with ease,'' he said. Night vision technology made even midnight bathroom breaks perilous.

All told, American airstrikes had destroyed 40 ISIS rescue vehicles and killed 85 fighters, some from the convoy, others among would-be rescuers, Colonel Dillon said.

As the standoff stretched from days into weeks, the United States military was also concerned about bad publicity over the plight of the civilians stranded on the buses. Although food and water was being delivered to the convoy, temperatures were high in the desert and before it was over, according to a senior Hezbollah official in Syria, three babies had been born to women in the buses.

Colonel Dillon said this was not the main reason for the withdrawal but it was a factor.

Throughout the standoff, the Americans had been hampered by the presence of so many civilians, more than 300 according to Hezbollah. If the militants had intended them to be human shields, the strategy proved effective.

Hezbollah and the Syrian government, too, were concerned that the convoy get through. For Syria, whose government media suppressed news of the convoy, it was an embarrassment to see it stuck in the middle of its country, as many even pro-government Syrians commented on social media.

Its Hezbollah allies, and their Iranian backers, wanted the Islamic State to release prisoners and turn over the bodies of dead fighters. As a result, the senior Hezbollah official said, the Syrian government and Iran pressed Russia to close the file with the Americans.

''This was the deal to get ISIS fighters out of the Lebanese border area,'' said Mr. Joscelyn. ''The truth is even U.S.-backed forces have cut similar deals. Russia's allies, Iran, the Assad regime and Hezbollah, cut this deal, and they probably wanted to abide by the deal because they want to be able to make deals in the future.''

As the convoy arrived in the middle Euphrates River Valley, the battle followed them there.

American airstrikes killed two senior Islamic State leaders in Mayadin last week, the military said. And Colonel Dillon said Thursday that airstrikes had killed senior ISIS leaders and destroyed weapons caches and other military targets in Mayadin and Abu Kamal.

In the city of Qaim, on the Iraqi side of the border, residents reached by telephone said that ISIS fighters had begun filtering into the town, taking up residence in vacant homes.

''We heard they came from the deal made with Hezbollah,'' said one resident, who gave only his tribal name, al-Salmani, out of fear of ISIS reprisals.

[Video: The ISIS convoy as it set out from Lebanon en route to eastern Syria Watch on YouTube.]

Follow Rod Nordland on Twitter @rodnordland and Eric Schmitt @EricSchmittNYT

Russian-backed Syrian forces have sought to encircle remaining jihadist-held parts of Deir al-Zour, in eastern Syria. The town has also been a target of Syrian rebels supported by the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GEORGE OURFALIAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES); Buses carrying Islamic State fighters and their families in a convoy bound for Deir al-Zour on Aug. 28. By Friday, some of the fighters had entered Iraq. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LOUAI BESHARA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES); A Hezbollah fighter, Ahmad Maatouk, whom ISIS had detained in Syria, waved to supporters Thursday upon his return to his hometown in Lebanon. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) 

Document NYTF000020170916ed9g0005i



Europe Edition
Briefing
North Korea, Bitcoin, Malaysia: Your Friday Briefing

By STEPHEN HILTNER 
1,289 words
15 September 2017
06:14
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

The New York Times is providing full free digital access to European readers through Sunday.

Here’ what you need to know:

•orth Korea fired a ballistic missile on Friday morning, an act of defiance against the new sanctions resolution adopted days earlier by the United Nations Security Council.

The missile passed over Japan —here an alert was issued, on television and via cellphones, warning people to take shelter inside a building or underground —nd traveled 2,300 miles, the farthest of any of North Korea’ launches.

Check back for updates.

_____

• major public inquiry into the fire at Grenfell Tower opened on Thursday in London.

The inquiry is scheduled to produce an interim report by April that will address what caused the fire, why it spread and who should be held accountable, among other issues.

The retired judge leading the investigation cited a “ense of anger and betrayal”mong former residents. He also refused requests to allow survivors of the disaster to be part of the inquiry team.

At least 80 were killed in the blaze, the deadliest in Britain in more than a century.

_____

•resident Trump came under attack on Thursday from some of his strongest supporters, who were outraged after he compromised with congressional Democrats for the second time in a week.

Mr. Trump agreed to set aside a fight, at least for now, over building a border wall with Mexico as part of a deal with Democrats to protect young, undocumented immigrants.

Many Republicans are left wondering how much more his base will tolerate.

The president also repeated his claims that both sides shared blame for the racial violence last month in Charlottesville, Va.

_____

•lerics, academics, a poet, an economist, a journalist and the son of a former king.

Those are among the 16 people arrested in Saudi Arabia this week during a wide-ranging crackdown against perceived opponents of the policies of the kingdom’ new crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, above.

Those arrested have been held incommunicado; it is unclear whether they have been formally charged with crimes.

_____

•he authorities in Greece are scrambling to clean up fuel leaked by an oil tanker that sank this week near Athens.

The sunken vessel —he 45-year-old Agia Zoni II —as carrying more than 2,500 metric tons of oil.

The leak was initially thought to be contained to the area of the shipwreck, but it soon expanded to the coastline known as the Athens Riviera, where it raised fears of more widespread environmental damage.

Witnesses reported floating tar and dead fish on popular beaches.

_____

Business

•Deutsche Böse, the German stock exchange operator, has agreed to pay fines of 10.5 million euros, or about $12.5 million, to resolve an insider trading investigation related to a failed merger with the London Stock Exchange Group.

•Volkswagen’ problems with Takata airbags prompted a recall of almost five million vehicles in China.

•he Swiss food giant Nestlé announced on Thursday that it had bought a majority stake in Blue Bottle, a purveyor of artisanal coffee —ne of the surest signs yet that high-end coffee has become a hot business.

•TC China, a major Bitcoin exchange, announced plans to shut down at the end of the month as Beijing tries to curb virtual currencies.

• U.S. judge revoked Martin Shkreli’ bail and sent the former pharmaceutical executive to jail after he offered $5,000 to anyone who could “rab a hair”rom Hillary Clinton.

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

• fire at a Malaysian boarding school on Thursday killed 24 people, many of them boys who appear to have been trapped by barred windows. [The New York Times]

•n E.U. report affirmed the safety of a contested weed killer —ut parts of the analysis were copied and pasted directly from a study by the weed killer’ manufacturer. [The Guardian]

•n Islamic State convoy stuck in the Syrian desert was said to have crossed into ISIS territory despite a vow by the American-led coalition to trap it. [The New York Times]

• British tourist is missing and presumed dead after witnesses saw a crocodile drag him into a lagoon in Sri Lanka. [The Telegraph]

•n Israeli lawmaker caused an uproar in his party after disclosing that he had attended his gay nephew’ wedding. [The New York Times]

•everal n ational antidoping organizations have demanded that Russia be banned from the 2018 Winter Olympics. [BBC]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ere are five cheap(ish) essentials for your bathroom.

•ot a kale fan? A warm salad with coconut and tomato might persuade you otherwise.

Noteworthy

•NASA’ Cassini spacecraft is expected to vaporize today as it plunges toward Saturn, above; it’ moving so fast that just a few molecules from the atmosphere could rip it apart. We’e compiled 100 of the best images it sent back during its 20-year mission. And you can test your Cassini knowledge with our quiz.

•he discovery of female remains in a 10th-century tomb in Sweden has reignited a longstanding debate about the role of women among the Vikings, whose exploits are central to Scandinavian identity.

•e’ a flamboyant ex-athlete with a taste for self-promotion and  32 visits to North Korea under his belt. (And, no, he isn’ Dennis Rodman.)

• museum on the Isle of Skye celebrates two giants from the same Scottish family: one who lived in the 19th century, and one from YouTube.

•ilent films were once a thing of the past, but they’e making a big return —on social media, of all places.

Back Story

It’ one of the most famous movie images of all time: Marilyn Monroe standing astride a subway vent and laughing as her white dress billows above her waist.

That scene, from “The Seven Year Itch,”as shot on this day in 1954 around 1 a.m. on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. Billy Wilder, the director, had invited the news media to drum up buzz for the film. The breeze came from a fan placed under the subway grate.

Off camera, that night was hardly comedy. Hundreds of gawkers, mostly men, showed up on the set and heckled Ms. Monroe. Her husband, Joe DiMaggio, also appeared and was infuriated. She filed for divorce weeks later.

Photographs from that night circulated everywhere, but the film footage was never used. Mr. Wilder reshot the scene on a Hollywood lot. (The Times learned of other video taken that night in New York and wrote about it in January.)

Ms. Monroe died eight years later after an overdose of sleeping pills. Mr. DiMaggio sent fresh flowers to her grave twice a week for the rest of his life.

Charles McDermid contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

This briefing was prepared for the European morning. You can browse through past briefings here.

We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.

Issei Kato/Reuters | Toby Melville/Reuters | Doug Mills/The New York Times | Fayez Nureldine/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Louisa Gouliamaki/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Deutsche Böse, via Business Wire | Fazry Ismail/European Pressphoto Agency | Three Lions/Getty Images | Space Science Institute/JPL-Caltech, via NASA | Matty Zimmerman/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170915ed9f00105



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Southern Iraq Struck by  ISIS  As Dozens Die At Checkpoint

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS 
520 words
15 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- Militants attacked a checkpoint and a nearby restaurant in southern Iraq on Thursday, killing at least 60 people and wounding 83, according to a provincial official.

The Islamic State group, through its Amaq news agency, claimed responsibility for the attack.

The attack, in Nasiriya in Dhi Qar Province, started with militants opening fire at the checkpoint and the restaurant on the main highway that links Baghdad, the capital, with Iraq's southern provinces, said the provincial official, Gov. Yahya al-Nassiri. The gunfire was followed by two suicide bombers, including one driving a car filled with explosives, Governor Nassiri added.

Three police officers were among the dead. Many of the other victims are believed to have been Iranian pilgrims who were on their way to visit religious shrines and were resting inside the restaurant, he said.

Dhi Qar, a predominately Shiite province, is about 200 miles southeast of Baghdad.

The attack took place on the same day that Iraq's Parliament voted to dismiss the Kurdish governor of the ethnically mixed Kirkuk Province, a move that could increase tensions ahead of a planned Kurdish referendum on independence.

Iraq's Kurds plan to hold the vote on Sept. 25 in three governorates that make up their autonomous region as well as disputed areas like Kirkuk that are controlled by Kurdish forces but claimed by Baghdad. Late last month, Kirkuk's provincial council voted to take part in the referendum. Iraq's central government has rejected the polls as unconstitutional and illegal.

Hussein al-Maliki, an Iraqi lawmaker, said Parliament voted to dismiss Gov. Najmiddin Karim of Kirkuk based on consultations with Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi.

Mohammed al-Karboli, another Arab lawmaker, said Mr. Karim ''threatens the country's unity and civil peace in Kirkuk.''

All Kurdish members boycotted Thursday's session, while 187 mainly Arab and Turkmen legislators voted in favor of the dismissal, the two lawmakers said. The governor has the right to appeal the decision, Mr. Karboli added.

Shortly after the session, Mr. Karim rejected the Parliament's decision in a statement, describing it as ''invalid'' and insisting that he would stay in office.

The decision ''doesn't mean anything to Kirkuk and its governor who is still in office,'' the statement said.

Kirkuk, an oil-rich region, is home to a mix of Arabs, Kurds, Turkmen and Christians. Kurdish forces took control of the province and other disputed areas in the summer of 2014, when Islamic State fighters swept across northern and central Iraq and the Iraqi armed forces crumbled.

Iraq's Kurdish region has enjoyed a high degree of autonomy since the United States imposed a no-fly zone over northern Iraq after the Persian Gulf war of 1991. It has its own parliament and armed forces, flies its own flag and has been a close ally of the United States against the Islamic State and other militant groups.

But relations with the central government Baghdad have grown strained in recent years over oil and the disputed areas.

Document NYTF000020170915ed9f0005e



U.S.; Politics
Senate Rejects Bipartisan Effort to End 9/11 Military Force Declaration

By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG 
1,395 words
13 September 2017
18:45
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —early 16 years to the day after Congress first authorized a military response to the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, the Senate on Wednesday rejected an effort to repeal the virtual blank check that Congress granted to the president while smoke still rose from the rubble of the World Trade Center.

The debate pitted the Republican Party’ ascendant isolationist wing, represented by Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, against its old-line interventionists, led by Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, who is pressing his vision of a muscular military even as he battles brain cancer.

Mr. Paul pressed for the repeal vote, in a strange bedfellows alliance with Senator Tim Kaine, the Virginia Democrat who was his party’ vice-presidential nominee last year. But the effort failed when senators voted 61 to 36 to set the measure aside, rather than include it in the annual defense policy bill that senators are considering this week.

“hat we have today is basically unlimited war —ar anywhere, anytime, any place on the globe,”r. Paul told his colleagues in a speech Tuesday afternoon on the Senate floor. “ don’ think anyone with an ounce of intellectual honesty believes these authorizations allow current wars we fight in seven countries.”

Mr. Paul had proposed repealing the declaration in six months, to give lawmakers time to consider a new one. The issue has been around since 2015, when President Barack Obama asked Congress to replace the authorization of military force passed to battle Al Qaeda with a new one crafted specifically to take on the Islamic State.

But so far Congress has balked, declining to take on the difficult issue even as lawmakers such as Mr. Kaine insist that the legislative branch should reclaim its constitutional duty to declare war.

In the House, in another unlikely partnership, Representative Barbara Lee, the California Democrat who was the only member of the House to vote against the original resolution in 2001, paired up with Representative Scott Taylor, a freshman Virginia Republican and former Navy SEALs member, over the summer to persuade the Appropriations Committee to insert language repealing the original use of force declaration into a spending bill.

“ just felt compelled to stand up and say, now it’ time to look at the A.U.M.F.,”r. Taylor said, using the abbreviation for the authorization for the use of military force. He said once he spoke up, other Republicans joined in to support him: “t’ an issue that I don’ think is going to go away.”

But Republican leaders stripped the provision out of the spending measure; Speaker Paul D. Ryansaid at the time that the move was a “istake”nd that such language was not appropriate for inclusion in a spending measure.

“t was really shameful,”s. Lee said in an interview. “he Constitution requires us to do our job and debate the costs of war.”

Wednesday’ vote put the question of the president’ authority to commit troops overseas up for a vote for the first time in a generation, and some lawmakers, mindful of their obligations under the Constitution, seemed genuinely torn.

Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island, the senior Democrat on the Armed Services Committee, said that in forcing senators to take a stand, Mr. Paul had “een relentless in doing something that has to be done.”

But, he added, “ou can’ replace something with nothing, and we have nothing.”

Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, argued strongly against repealing the military force authorization, saying that ending the authority the president relies on to fight the Islamic State would create only confusion within the armed forces.

“e have an all-volunteer force that protects all of us and fights for us,’’r. McConnell told his Senate colleagues, adding, “e cannot break faith with these men and women by removing the authority they rely on to pursue the enemy.”

Wednesday’ vote cleared the way for the Senate to begin work on a $700 billion defense policy bill, championed by Mr. McCain, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee.

The bipartisan defense bill, approved by the Armed Services Committee in a unanimous 27-0 vote, is considered a must-pass piece of legislation —n part because the annual measure has been approved by Congress each year for more than half a century, and in part this year for sentimental reasons; it is deeply important to Mr. McCain.

The defense measure sets forth Mr. McCain’ interventionist vision of America’ role in the world — vision very different than that of the isolationist Mr. Paul, or President Trump. It includes $37 billion more in funding for the Pentagon than Mr. Trump asked for, authorizes $500 million to provide “ecurity assistance,”ncluding weapons, to Ukraine; $100 million to help Baltic nations “eter Russian aggression”nd $705 million for Israeli cooperative missile defense programs —558.5 million more than the administration’ request.

“t’ a grandiose spending plan,”aid Senator Dick Durbin of Illinois, the Democratic whip. “e expect it each year. He challenges us to move toward his direction, and usually has his way to some extent.”

Mr. McCain said he is using the measure to send a message to the president about the role of Congress: “e are a coequal branch of government.”

But before the Senate could move to the defense policy bill, it had to deal with the demand for the use of force vote from Mr. Paul. He and Mr. McCain have been at odds for years; Mr. McCain once called Mr. Paul a “acko bird”though he later apologized), and Mr. Paul called Mr. McCain “nhinged”nd “ast his prime”n an interview earlier this year.

Mr. McCain had hoped senators could begin considering the defense bill in July, shortly after his dramatic thumbs-down vote that killed a repeal of the Affordable Care Act. But Mr. Paul exercised his authority to block the bill from coming up for a vote, demanding that his use of force measure be attached as an amendment. Mr. McCain refused.

Congress first granted the president authority to use force on September 14, 2001, just three days after the terrorist attacks; the following year, with President George W. Bush threatening war against Iraq, a second use of force resolution was approved. The Trump administration, like the Obama administration before it, has claimed legal authority to wage war against the Islamic State under the initial authorization.

Mr. Paul has for years been pushing for a repeal of both resolutions, arguing that Congress never intended them to serve as the underpinning for combat operations in countries from Yemen to Somalia, much less against the Islamic State, which did not exist when the initial declarations were approved.

Three-quarters of the members of Congress —ncluding Mr. Paul and Mr. Kaine —ad yet to be elected when Mr. Bush signed the declarations into law.

“he current interpretation of the authorization essentially allows an American president, without any approval from Congress, to wage war anywhere against any terrorist groups for however long they want to,”r. Kaine said in a speech Tuesday afternoon on the Senate floor.

Both men argue that, in not reconsidering the force declarations, lawmakers are shirking their responsibilities under the Constitution, which grants Congress “he power to declare war and raise and support the armed forces.”ut Republican and Democratic leaders have been reluctant to take up the issue, wary of having to explain a vote granting the president war powers to constituents in a war-weary nation.

Follow Sheryl Gay Stolberg on Twitter: @SherylNYT

* An Obama Ally Parts With Him on War Powers

* Obama to Seek War Power Bill From Congress, to Fight \b ISIS\b0 

* Congress Shows a Lack of Enthusiasm for Giving Obama War Powers to Fight \b ISIS\b0 

* At 78, McCain Savors a New Dream Job in the Senate

Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, has been pushing for years to repeal authorizations of military force passed after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, arguing that Congress never intended them to serve as the underpinning to combat operations in countries from Yemen to Somalia, much less against groups like the Islamic State. | Tom Brenner/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170913ed9d005bp



World; Europe
Turkey Signs Russian Missile Deal, Pivoting From NATO

By CARLOTTA GALL and ANDREW HIGGINS 
1,411 words
12 September 2017
15:52
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ISTANBUL —n the clearest sign of his pivot toward Russia and away from NATO and the West, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan announced on Tuesday that Turkey had signed a deal to purchase a Russian surface-to-air missile system.

The deal cements a recent rapprochement with Russia, despite differences over the war in Syria, and comes as Turkey’ ties with the United States and European Union have become strained.

It is certain to stir unease in Washington and Brussels, where officials are trying to keep Turkey — longtime NATO member, and an increasingly unlikely candidate for European Union membership —rom entering Russia’ sphere of influence.

The deal comes as relations between Russia and the West are at a particularly low point. Tensions escalated in 2014 when Russia annexed Crimea and then began fomenting armed revolt in eastern Ukraine. They have grown still worse as evidence has mounted that Moscow was behind the hacking of the 2016 election in the United States and also tried to interfere in other nations’lections.

Although a prospective missile purchase from Russia was made public several months ago, Mr. Erdogan’ announcement was the first confirmation that Turkey had transferred money to pay for the missile system, known as the S-400.

“ignatures have been made for the purchase of S-400s from Russia,”r. Erdogan said in comments published in several newspapers on Tuesday. “ deposit has also been paid as far as I know.”

The purchase of the missile system flies in the face of cooperation within the NATO alliance, which Turkey has belonged to since the early 1950s. NATO does not ban purchases of military hardware from manufacturers outside the American-led alliance, but it does discourage members from buying equipment not compatible with that used by other members.

A NATO official in Brussels, the headquarters of the alliance, said that no NATO member currently operates the Russian missile system and that the alliance had not been informed about the details of the purchase by Turkey.

“hat matters for NATO is that the equipment allies acquire is able to operate together,”he official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity as required by alliance procedures. “nteroperability of allied armed forces is essential to NATO for the conduct of our operations.”

Turkey had earlier planned to buy missiles from China, but that deal fell through under pressure from the United States.

Western arms makers lobbied hard for the expansion of NATO into former Soviet satellite countries after the collapse of Communism. They have since lobbied both new and old NATO member states not to stray outside the alliance for weapons purchases that would cut into their business.

Mr. Erdogan dismissed issues of interoperability, brand loyalties or the geopolitical optics of such a sale. “obody has the right to discuss the Turkish republic’ independence principles or independent decisions about its defense industry,”he daily newspaper Hurriyet reported him as saying.

“e make the decisions about our own independence ourselves,”e said. “e are obliged to take safety and security measures in order to defend our country.”

Mr. Erdogan’ announcement —ade to Turkish journalists aboard his presidential jet as he returned from Kazakhstan —ppeared timed as a riposte to two judicial cases announced last week in the United States. One is against his presidential bodyguards, who are charged with assaulting protesters when Mr. Erdogan visited Washington this year. The other is against a group of Turks, including a former minister, accused of breaking United States  sanctions against Iran.

Mr. Erdogan has angrily criticized both cases.

Yet Turkey has other reasons for the missile purchase. It needs to cultivate good relations with Russia, and it also needs to build its own military defense, said Asli Aydintasbas, a fellow at the European Council on Foreign Relations. “urkey wants the deal,”he said, “nd Russia is only too happy to drive a wedge into the NATO alliance.”

NATO’ collective defense should be sufficient for Turkey; indeed, NATO deployed Patriot missiles there during a rise of tensions with Syria in the past. But Mr. Erdogan has lost trust in the West since last year’ failed coup, which he has interpreted as a Western plot to oust him, and appears determined to secure his own defense, Ms. Aydintasbas said.

Military and civilian plotters used jets and tanks to try to seize power last July and bombed several locations, including the Parliament building, before being faced down by loyalist security forces and public demonstrations. Mr. Erdogan narrowly evaded capture.

The transfer of technology from Russia is attractive to Turkey, Ms. Aydintasbas said. Mr. Erdogan has spoken also of his frustration at having requests to the United States for drones turned down, and of his satisfaction that Turkey developed its own.

Mr. Erdogan’ announcement of the deal with Russia came after Germany said that it was suspending all major arms exports to Turkey because of the deteriorating human rights situation in the country and the increasingly strained ties.

“e have put on hold all big requests that Turkey sent to us, and these are really not a few,”he German foreign minister, Sigmar Gabriel, said during a panel discussion in Berlin on Monday, according to Reuters.

As suspicions toward the West have grown, relations with Russia have warmed, driven by the personal relationship between Mr. Erdogan and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. Mr. Erdogan has expressed personal admiration for Mr. Putin, to the consternation of many European and American leaders, if not President Trump.

Mr. Erdogan has also shown a preference for the Russian model, with its sense of restoring a lost empire, returning Turkey to a more independent place in the world and rejecting Western democracy.

After a tense falling out in 2015, when Turkish jets shot down a Russian warplane on Turkey’ border with Syria, Mr. Erdogan sought to improve relations with Russia, sending two letters to Mr. Putin and then traveling to Moscow for a meeting in June 2016.

His visit represented a marked shift from the Cold War era, when Turkey was a staunch ally of the West in facing down the Soviet Union. (Turkey shares a border with Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan, former Soviet republics that remain, to varying degrees, under Russian influence.) Russian-Turkish rivalry in the Black Sea and the Caucasus dates back centuries.

Mr. Putin, at odds with the West since he annexed Crimea from Ukraine in 2014, also worked hard to patch up relations with Ankara, seeing in Mr. Erdogan a like-minded strongman who shares his distrust of meddling by the West.

The fact that Turkey belongs to NATO, whose unity Moscow has struggled for years to undermine, has only increased Mr. Putin’ desire to forge strong relations with Mr. Erdogan despite their differences over the conflict in Syria.

“r. Putin and myself are determined on this issue,”r. Erdogan told journalists about the missile deal.

Last year, Russia and Turkey reached an agreement to revive a suspended natural-gas pipeline project.

The purchase of Russian missiles would take cooperation to a new level, but is not the first time that Turkey has bought military equipment from Russia. It turned to Moscow in the early 1990s to buy military helicopters and armored personnel carriers.

After relations hit a rocky patch over Russia’ 1994 war in Chechnya, however, Turkey disappointed hopes in Moscow that it would become a major new market for Russian hardware.

Russia, largely squeezed out of the arms market in Western and Eastern Europe, even in countries that once bought nearly all their weapons from the Soviet Union, has looked for years to NATO’ eastern flank as a promising market and the alliance’ weakest link. It has also sold weapons to Greece, another NATO member and to Cyprus, which is not a member of NATO but houses British military bases and effectively serves as an outpost of the alliance.

Carlotta Gall reported from Istanbul, and Andrew Higgins from Moscow.

* Russians and Turks Conduct Joint Strikes on \b ISIS\b0  in Syria

* Russia Signs Deal for Syria Bases; Turkey Appears to Accept Assad

* Warming Relations in Person, Putin and Erdogan Revive Pipeline Deal

The S-400 missile system on display during a military parade in Moscow in 2015. Western officials are uneasy over Russia’ influence in Turkey, a NATO member. | Sputnik Photo Agency, via Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170912ed9c0043b



world
For Iraq’ Long-Suffering Kurds, Independence Beckons

By TIM ARANGO 
1,770 words
9 September 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BARZAN, Iraq — pair of rusted eyeglasses, a grimy antique watch, torn bank notes and old identification cards.

These simple items on display at a museum here in northern Iraq, dug from a mass grave of Kurdish tribesmen massacred by Saddam Hussein’ henchmen, help explain why there is little doubt about how Kurds will vote in a referendum this month on independence from Iraq.

“ow could the international community expect us to be part of Iraq after these crimes?”aid Khalat Barzani, who is in charge of the museum that memorializes the deportation and killings of thousands of Kurds in 1983.

Even if the outcome is a foregone conclusion —early every Kurd holds dear the dream of statehood —he vote in Iraqi Kurdistan represents a historic moment in the Kurds’enerations-long struggle for political independence.

Numbering about 30 million people spread across four countries –raq, Syria, Turkey and Iran –he Kurds are often described as the world’ largest ethnic group without their own homeland. Iraqi Kurdistan, an oil-rich enclave in northern Iraq, may be their best hope yet.

The referendum’ approval would start the process of turning the autonomous region into an independent state.

But outside of Kurdistan, every major player in the neighborhood opposes the vote, which could break up Iraq and further destabilize a volatile, war-torn region.

Baghdad has indicated that it would not recognize the results.

Across the border in Turkey, officials worry that Kurds declaring independence in Iraq would inflame the separatist sentiments of Kurds in Turkey. Turkey has opposed the referendum and warned that it could lead to a new civil war in Iraq.

American officials, concerned that it would hobble the fight against the Islamic State, have urged the Kurds to delay the vote. An open rift between Baghdad and Kurdistan could end the cooperation between Iraqi and Kurdish forces, which is seen as critical in the campaign to defeat the Islamic State. Kurdish secession would also deprive the United States of one of its primary goals since it invaded this country: keeping Iraq intact.

Iran, the pre-eminent foreign power in Iraq, with its close ties to the Shiite-led government in Baghdad and Iraqi Shiite militias under its control, has emphasized that its priority is maintaining the unity of Iraq.

Without the support of neighboring countries, the vote could backfire, failing to achieve independence and becoming another in a long history of lost opportunities for a long-suffering people.

It also could set off violence in disputed areas like Kirkuk, a multiethnic city under Kurdish control that has long been contested between the central government and Kurdish authorities.

“aving a referendum on such a fast timeline, particularly in disputed areas, would be, we think, significantly destabilizing,”rett H. McGurk, President Trump’ envoy to the international coalition battling the Islamic State, said last month.

But the Kurdistan Regional Government says the vote will go forward as scheduled on Sept. 25, and will be binding. Assuming it passes, Kurdish officials say, it will set in motion a formal breakaway process, including negotiations with the Iraqi government and a diplomatic push to win the support of regional powers.

“f you look at our history we have been mistreated throughout history,”aid Masrour Barzani, the chancellor of the Kurdistan Region Security Council and the son of the region’ president, Massoud Barzani, who is leading the drive for sovereignty. “e as a nation have every right to self-determination.”

He added, “e believe it is the right time”o seek independence.

Many believe it is only a matter of time before the Kurds have their own state.

“he final destination is clear –t is independence,”aid Peter W. Galbraith, a former American diplomat who has close ties to the Kurdish leadership. “y announcing the date of the referendum, it can’ be pulled back.”

As a young Senate staff member in the late 1980s, Mr. Galbraith traveled to Iraqi Kurdistan to document atrocities the Kurds suffered at the hands of Mr. Hussein, the Iraqi dictator, including the use of chemical weapons and the destruction of villages. His report helped raise international awareness of the Kurds’light and played a part in the United States’ecision to establish a no-fly zone in northern Iraq in 1991. That protection gave the Kurds breathing room to build an autonomous region and the bones of an independent state.

Mr. Galbraith likened the referendum to Britain’ decision to leave the European Union, a vote followed by negotiation. “t the end, it’ Brexit,”e said.

As the region has been troubled by turmoil, the Kurds have steadily capitalized on chaos to make gains. In northeastern Syria they have fought off the Islamic State, with support of the United States, and carved out a self-governing enclave. In Turkey, the Kurds won new political power in national elections and pushed for more rights.

And in Iraq, the onslaught of the Islamic State allowed the Kurds to claim new territory, including Kirkuk, which was abandoned by fleeing Iraqi soldiers.

But with each gain have come setbacks. In Syria, Turkey moved troops into the north to push back Kurdish advances. Turkey, after holding peace talks, reignited a long war with its own Kurds, and jailed Kurdish leaders. In Iraq, territorial gains were offset by a deep economic crisis after the price of oil collapsed and Baghdad stopped sending budget payments.

The economic crisis has created unease even among many Kurds who support the broader drive for independence but believe now is not the right time.

Thousands of Kurdish civil servants, including teachers, have not been paid their full salaries in years, and the regional government, which has not been able to export enough oil to achieve financial self-sufficiency, is close to $20 billion in debt.

“here are so many political, social, economic and legal issues in Kurdistan that we must solve,”aid Kamal Chomani, a Kurdish analyst who has opposed the referendum.

Mr. Chomani worries that a declaration of independence now could fail, much like the experience of the only Kurdish state in history, the Republic of Mahabad, carved from Iranian territory in 1946 with support of the Soviet Union. But the Soviets quickly abandoned the Kurds, and the republic crumbled.

“he Kurds don’ want to see a short-lived Kurdistan,”r. Chomani said.

Another hurdle to independence is the oil-rich city of Kirkuk. Baghdad has said it would never give up its claim to the city, and Iraqi Shiite militias with ties to Iran have indicated they would fight to keep Iraq intact, raising the possibility of a military battle.

Kirkuk, inhabited by Kurds, Arabs and Turkmens, has long been the center of dispute between Baghdad and Kurdistan. A referendum on the city’ fate, originally scheduled for 2007 and a key component of the Iraqi Constitution the Americans helped write, has never been held.

But in 2014, as the Islamic State’ fighters bore down on the city and Iraqi soldiers dropped their weapons and ran, the Kurds took the city, which they consider a spiritual homeland and whose vast oil wealth could sustain an independent state.

The governor of Kirkuk, Najmaldin Karim, dismisses the argument that the Kurds have too many problems –n economic crisis, political divisions, the uncertain status of Kirkuk and other disputed areas –o seek independence now.

“id the U.S. have a constitution when it declared independence?”e said. “o. Before African countries declared independence did they have everything in order?”

At 67, Mr. Karim is among a generation of Kurdish leaders who have come up in the Kurdish nationalist movement and now see, at the end of their careers, a chance to fulfill a long-held dream of independence. As a child, he saved his allowance to send money to the pesh merga, the Kurdish fighters who were battling the Iraq government then led by the Baath Party, to buy shoes and shirts.

Analysts say Baghdad is open to talking about independence with the Kurds, as long as their state does not include Kirkuk.

“eople in Baghdad are willing to negotiate on independence,”aid Joost Hiltermann, program director for the Middle East and North Africa at the International Crisis Group, a conflict resolution organization. “ut not with Kirkuk. That is an absolute red line for everyone in Baghdad who isn’ a Kurd.”

Mr. Hiltermann said he would not be surprised if the referendum was delayed for that reason.

Ceding Kirkuk to the Kurds is also anathema for the city’ Arabs and Turkmen.

The city’ Arab deputy mayor, Rakan Saeed al-Jibouri, ticks off a list of Arab grievances in Kirkuk, documented by Human Rights Watch: being forcibly displaced by Kurdish security forces, denied jobs and barred from buying land.

“or the Kurds to decide on their own the fate of the city is a mistake,”e said.

On the streets of Kirkuk, where Kurds, Arabs and Turkmens mingle in cafes and on street corners, talk of the referendum among them is taboo.

On a recent afternoon, Assam Hussein, a Turkmen taxi driver, was hanging out in the streets with his Kurdish friends. But when asked about the referendum, he insisted on finding privacy to talk.

“ cannot talk in front of the Kurds,”aid Mr. Hussein, who like most Turkmens does not want to live in a Kurdish state. “hey are my brothers, but they will be upset. To be honest, we cannot talk about politics.”

At a nearby cafe, Kamaran Mohammed, a Kurd who works for the local intelligence agency, was jubilant about the referendum. Mr. Mohammed nodded toward his brother, who was sitting next to him, and said: “e spent most of his life in Abu Ghraib prison. That is what happens when Arabs rule.”

As for the referendum, he said: “ou can imagine my feeling. I am free. I have power.”

Falih Hassan contributed reporting.

PHOTOS: Top to bottom: Kurdish men traded prayer beads at Erbil, the Kurdish capital; unmarked grave stones for Barzanis killed by forces loyal to Saddam Hussein in the 1980s; Kurdish pesh merga soldiers trained by Americanled coalition forces; Kurds at the Great Zab river last month near Barzan. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

* Mattis Asks Iraqi Kurds to Put Off Vote on Independence

* Kurds’isky Dream of Independence

* The Defeat of \b ISIS\b0  Must Mean an Independent Kurdistan

* Iraq Celebrates Victory Over \b ISIS\b0  in Mosul, but Risks Remain

* Amid Turkey’ Purge, a Renewed Attack on Kurdish Culture

Document INHT000020170914ed990000g



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Deadly Dilemma in  ISIS ' Base, Where to Stay or Flee Is Risky

By SOMINI SENGUPTA 
1,755 words
9 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

RAQQA, Syria -- Every few minutes, a deafening boom. Then a whistle of artillery. Occasionally, the clatter of a pickup truck, piled with soldiers, advancing to the front line.

This was the neighborhood, on the western edge of Raqqa, the Islamic State's de facto capital, where I met Hassan Hashem Ramadan on a scorching Thursday in late August.

He had been detained and flogged three times while the Islamic State ruled his city: Either his beard was too short or his pants weren't short enough. When he tried to escape across the Euphrates River, he was marched at gunpoint into the city center. Finally, on a Tuesday morning in August, his brother was hit by shrapnel from forces fighting the Islamic State.

Mr. Ramadan carried him in his arms, first to the hospital, then to the grave. Then he fled.

''Last few days,'' he said, ''I was just taking the wounded to the hospital or burying the dead. That's all I was doing.''

He was one of dozens of people who described to me life in the waning days of the capital of the caliphate, the symbolic heart of the territory the Islamic State sought to turn into its brutal version of God's rule on earth.

American military forces and their allies have all but encircled the city, reclaiming, they say, more than half of it. The Islamic State, also known as ISIS, is retreating, but not without a tenacious fight, trapping civilians in their last few enclaves.

Fewer than 25,000 civilians remain in what had been a city of 300,000. Those who fled described a death vise of airstrikes, artillery fire and land mines that litter every exit route. Also thirst: there's not much water left to drink inside the city, they said.

I found them during a six-day trip from the Kurdish area of Iraq into northeastern Syria. They were living in fear and uncertainty, either along the dusty bombed-out roads leading out of the city center, or in a transit camp two-and-a-half hours north, or lying in hospital beds further north, their bodies broken.

A doctor, a seamstress, children, their lives were frozen in a state of awful suspension. They couldn't say where they would go next, or under whose rule they would live.

In a western Raqqa neighborhood where ISIS had recently been routed, Fawza Hamedi lay on a mattress on the floor of her sister's house, wincing in pain. She had tried to get out of Raqqa weeks ago. But a woman ahead of her stepped on a mine and died instantly. Shrapnel punctured Ms. Hamedi's back and legs, an ISIS sniper shot at her, and then ISIS fighters dragged her away to a makeshift jail. Land mine victims are hastily buried there, she said. The smell is still in her nose.

Two women appeared in the house to tell their stories. One said ISIS had beheaded her husband for helping a Christian family escape. Another showed me her swollen hand. An ISIS man had cracked her wrist with the back of his gun, breaking her bones. Her crime was to be seen in the market without full face cover.

Outside, a young man said his father had been beheaded for plotting to join an anti-ISIS militia. He knew the man who did it. ''Why don't you kill him?'' a neighbor prodded.

''Let him leave the city and I will,'' he said. ''I will slaughter him.''

The neighborhood was largely deserted. A primary school had been converted into a military base by the main United States allies fighting ISIS, the Kurdish and Arab militias known as the Syrian Democratic Forces, or S.D.F.

At midday, temperatures soared past 104 degrees Fahrenheit. You could hear the roar of a fighter jet circling over the city center, followed by a thud, then a plume of white smoke rising and spreading into a cloudless blue sky.

The American airstrikes pose a new danger to civilians, killing an estimated 800 people since the United States-led coalition began its assault on the city in June, according to the Syrian Observatory, an independent group, and more than 150 in August alone, according to the United Nations.

Those who manage to get out often have a haunted, crazed look in their eyes. Memories taunt them, both good and bad.

Khawla al-Khallaf, a seamstress, lived near Naim Square, where families used to stroll at sundown and the loudspeakers played the songs of the Lebanese crooner Fairuz.

Now she can only think of the heads displayed on stakes there. Among the beheaded was one of her husband's relatives, an imam at a city mosque who had defied the Islamic State's edicts.

''It's no longer called Naim Square,'' she said. ''It's called Hell Square.''

For a year, she and her family moved from one town to another.

''I wish we had died in 2010 instead of being humiliated like this,'' she said.

She looked out at the broken road that ran alongside an empty tent assigned to her family, just beyond city limits. A funeral procession for a fallen Kurdish fighter hurtled down the road.

As evening fell, a convoy of armored personnel carriers advanced to the front line, carrying American troops. The Trump administration has not said how many troops are deployed in Syria, but you see them across northern Syria, from the banks of the Tigris River in the far eastern corner, along the border with Turkey, and down into Raqqa.

To live in a war zone is to calibrate your behavior according to the rules of the armed men who rule the patch you live in. You have to mind what color head scarf you can wear, or how long your pants are.

For the men who come out of Islamic State territory and into the transit camp in the S.D.F.-controlled town of Ayn Issa, a two-and-a-half hour drive north of Raqqa city, one of the first orders of business is to file into a tin-roofed barber shop.

The Abdallah cousins, tall, broad shouldered men with scruffy beards that hide their necks, settle into a chair, one after the other. They had fled Deir al-Zour, a city further down the Euphrates River, where the Syrian army claimed to have broken an ISIS blockade this week.

The men said they left their wives and children behind because it was impossible for the family to walk all night.

''I was crying,'' said Mahmood Abdallah, 38, a truck driver. ''My wife was crying.''

He kept only his mustache. His beard fell on the floor.

His cousin, Khallaf, got rid of it all. He said he hadn't shaved in six months, obeying Islamic State edicts.

''On the outside I was doing what they asked,'' Khallaf said.

It was impossible to know who among the men at the barber shop, if any, had been drawn to the Islamic State. The S.D.F. spokesman, Mostapha Bali, said his troops had detained many Islamic State members trying to blend in among the displaced civilians.

A young man named Ali, who wanted to keep a pencil line of a beard along his jawbone, still bristled at the ISIS rules. ''Even your face is not yours,'' he said. ''They want to control it.''

Many of the wounded who escape Raqqa end up at the hospital in Tal Abyad, a two-hour drive further north, where the Islamic State once detained its prisoners in a cage at the main traffic circle.

Doctors Without Borders, the aid group that treats the wounded here, has warned that many wounded may be trapped inside the city, unable to pass through the gantlet. By the time they arrive, the aid group says, their wounds are infected, and limbs harder to save.

Some of them find a familiar face in Dr. Muhammad Ahmed Saleh, former director of the government hospital in Raqqa. He worked for more than a year there under Islamic State rule.

''Their Kalashnikovs were always over our heads,'' he said. Like so many Raqqawis, he had chaos written on his face: gray flyaway hair, a day's stubble, frenzied eyes.

''Anytime you could be beheaded,'' he said. ''I tried to discuss things with them. They don't believe anything other than what they believe, even if it's facts.''

At the hospital entrance sat a young woman on a stretcher, her shattered leg held together by a metal brace. She had been inside a tent on the banks of the Euphrates during an aerial bombardment.

In nearly every recovery room, there were children. They are often the first to discover homemade bombs, in toys, teapots, under a carpet.

A 6-year-old girl, Judy, sat upright in bed, her back and abdomen chewed by shrapnel from a land mine; her three brothers had died.

A 4-year-old girl, Ahed, lay with her head on her mother's lap. They were walking out of Raqqa at dawn the day before when they heard a loud blast. The girl fractured her right leg. Her father had died days before in an airstrike.

Another mother walked from bed to bed. Five of her daughters had been wounded in the same blast.

Doctors huddled around another bed, delivering news to a man waking up from surgery. They told him that his wife had died as they tried to escape Raqqa, and that they had to amputate both his legs.

His 5-year-old daughter lay in the next bed, sleeping. Her left leg too was shattered. The good news, the doctors said: they had managed to save it.

In Raqqa, Syria, on Monday as the Syrian Democratic Forces, a Kurdish-Arab alliance backed by the United States, battled to retake the city from the Islamic State. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DELIL SOULEIMAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES); Above left, refugees being given water on the western front line of Raqqa in mid-July. Above right, for men from ISIS territory who reach a transit camp well north of Raqqa, a first stop is a barber shop. A Raqqa resident, Hassan Hashem Ramadan, said that under ISIS rule, he had been flogged because his beard was too short. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BULENT KILIC/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES; SOMINI SENGUPTA/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A8) 

Document NYTF000020170909ed9900057



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Islamic State Convoy Dwindles but Is Still Stranded in Syria

By ROD NORDLAND; An employee of The New York Times in Damascus, Syria, contributed reporting. 
910 words
8 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The Islamic State convoy stranded in the middle of the Syrian desert has whittled down in size as the American military and Syrian government allies traded accusations on whether food and water were reaching the hundreds of beleaguered bus passengers.

The Lebanese-based Hezbollah militia, which guaranteed safe passage to more than 600 Islamic State armed fighters and their family members claimed that American warplanes were not only blocking the convoy from reaching its destination on the Iraq border in eastern Syria, but were also preventing the resupply of food and water, according to the website of the Hezbollah-controlled television station Al Manar.

[Video: Hezbollah accuses the U.S. of putting lives at stake by hounding ISIS convoy Watch on YouTube.]

A spokesman for the American-led coalition fighting in Syria, Col. Ryan Dillon, said the convoy had been resupplied with food and water as recently as Tuesday night. ''We are not helping with that, nor are we hindering that from getting there,'' he said.

Coalition warplanes continued to monitor the convoy and were ready to bomb any Islamic State units that try to reach it, which the coalition has done repeatedly, although not in the past 48 hours, he said on Thursday from coalition headquarters in Baghdad.

Ten days after the 17-bus convoy set off from the Lebanese border, bound for Abu Kamal in Deir al-Zour Province, close to the Iraq border, it remains stuck in the desert near Sukhna, protected by escorts from Hezbollah, nearly 150 miles from its destination. Eleven buses remain while six have turned back since Sunday.

Hezbollah, fighting on behalf of the Syrian government, is normally a bitter opponent of the Islamic State. In this case, though, it has seemed determined to honor a deal it made in exchange for the bodies of Lebanese, Iranian and Hezbollah prisoners killed by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

Under the deal, which included the Lebanese Army and the Syrian Army, a group of ISIS fighters that was surrounded on the Lebanese-Syrian border would be able to return to another area the group controls, and keep their weapons.

[Video: ISIS Syria Convoy Splits In Two Watch on YouTube.]

The plight of the convoy is just one of many indications of the Islamic State's declining fortunes. Hezbollah has proved unusually solicitous of the welfare of the militants and their family members.

''The U.S.-led warplanes are besieging the convoy in the heart of the desert, and preventing any aid of the convoy which include sick and wounded people as well as elders,'' Al Manar said. ''If this situation continues, the imminent death will be the fate of these families, including pregnant women.''

The convoy stalled just as the Syrian Army was pressing an offensive to retake the city of Deir al-Zour, the provincial capital, which the Syrian government said fell on Wednesday, according to the official SANA news agency.

If confirmed, it would be the first time in three years that government forces had controlled the city, where 90,000 people have remained. On Thursday, SANA said government aid convoys had reached Deir al-Zour city, Reuters reported.

Perhaps coincidentally, the route that the ISIS convoy had tried to take, through the town of Sukhna, was also the route used by the Syrian Army to retake Deir al-Zour over the past week, according to official accounts.

The American military, along with its Iraqi allies, denounced the deal made by Hezbollah and declared that it would not let the convoy reach Deir al-Zour, but would not bomb it if that threatened the safety of family members on board.

''Coalition leaders have communicated a course of action to the Russians, providing the Syrian regime an opportunity to remove the women and children from this situation,'' the coalition said in a statement dated Tuesday. ''The Syrian regime is letting women and children suffer in the desert. This situation is completely on them,'' said Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, the departing coalition commander.

Colonel Dillon said the coalition watched as six of the buses turned back to territory dominated by the Syrian government, toward Palmyra.

When supplies were delivered Tuesday, Colonel Dillon said, ''We saw some ISIS fighters break out in fisticuffs, which we assess to be their frustration at being stuck in the middle of nowhere.'' He added that the coalition had not ''seen any traction'' on its proposal to the Russians to separate women and children from the convoy.

There were unconfirmed reports in local media that some of the buses had managed to find alternative routes to reach the Iraqi border, which American officials denied.

''Many false reports on ISIS terrorist convoy,'' wrote Brett McGurk, the American presidential envoy to the anti-ISIS coalition, in a Twitter message Wednesday. ''It has not reached Iraq and will not reach Iraq. Buses still in open desert, with food/water.''

Although official Syrian media made little or no mention of the convoy's situation, it was a popular topic on social media in the country. One much-shared joke referred to a Lebanese kebab chain, Kababji, and featured an ISIS militant telephoning Hezbollah and ordering food from Kababji as well as a fresh supply of disposable diapers.

Follow Rod Nordland on Twitter @rodnordland

Document NYTF000020170908ed9800049



Lens
Multimedia
Getty Images Grant Winners Announced for 2017

By JAMES ESTRIN 
425 words
8 September 2017
00:01
NYT Blogs
NYTB
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved 

PERPIGNAN, France —hotographers working on personal projects focused on underreported social issues, from poverty in Venezuela to sperm smuggling, received $10,000 each on Thursday from the 2017 Getty Images Grants for Editorial Photography.

Among the winners announced at the Visa Pour l’mage festival in Perpignan, France, are Paula Bronstein, for a project documenting the lives of the victims of wars; Alejandro Cegarra, for an exploration of poverty and conflict in Venezuela; and Barbara Peacock, for a project looking at what happens in bedrooms in the West. Also honored were Alessandro Penso for documenting the exploitation and displacement faced by refugees in Europe, and Antonio Faccilongo for a story about smuggling the sperm of Palestinian prisoners — practice that allows women to conceive children while their husbands serve time in Israeli jails.

Ms. Bronstein has been photographing in Afghanistan since December 2001 and last year published a book on the war’ impact on civilians. While most Western photographers have long lost interest in the country, Ms. Bronstein continues to return as the “umber of civilian casualties keeps going up and up, and it is completely underreported because no one cares.”oo often, she said, media attention flags over time and shifts to newer conflicts. Few outlets, she lamented, will assign photographers, even though civilians continue to suffer.

She will use the grant to expand her coverage of the human toll of the war to Iraq, and the war against ISIS as well as the conflict in Ukraine. Grants, she said, are “ery important, especially if you are passionate about still wanting to tell these stories but not expecting to get an assignment out of it.”

Mr. Cegarra, 27, who was born in Venezuela, has been photographing the political strife and violence in his homeland since 2015, when his work was featured on Lens. With this Getty grant, he plans to focus on “he human cost and consequences of the Venezuelan crisis in the countryside —utside the big cities —nd how the lack of medicines for chronic diseases, the death of the health care system, child malnutrition and the direct impact of the brain drain are affecting families.”

The judges of this year’ contest included Alice Gabriner of Time Magazine, Jean-Françis LeRoy, director of the Visa Pour l’mage festival, Chelsea Matiash of The Intercept, Damon Winter of The New York Times and Thomas Simonetti of the Washington Post.

Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.

Document NYTB000020170907ed9700001



Best of Late Night
Arts; Television
Trevor Noah Says  ISIS  Could Trick Deniers Into Acknowledging Climate Change

By GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO 
687 words
7 September 2017
10:47
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep —nd lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com .

Challenging the Deniers

By now, Trevor Noah said, it seems obvious that climate change is causing the catastrophic hurricanes that continue to sweep across the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean. Fed up with those who deny artificial climate change, he hatched a plan to change their minds.

“aybe ISIS should start taking credit for hurricanes. Every time a hurricane hits, ISIS should be like, ‘hat was us. We sent that storm to destroy America.’nd then Republicans will be like, ‘hat’ ridiculous. You guys can’ cause hurricanes!’nd they’l be like, ‘ell, then who causes the hurricanes?’hen they’l be like, ‘hey’e caused by climate change! Oh, man, nicely played.’”—REVOR NOAH

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Meanwhile, Seth Meyers and James Corden didn’ find President Trump’ tweet about Hurricane Irma very comforting.

“ey, man, could you try not to sound so excited? It’ a hurricane, not the ‘ame of Thrones’inale.”—ETH MEYERS

“ow insecure is this guy that he even has to brag that his hurricanes are bigger than Obama’? I mean, I understand it in a way. In Trump’ defense, it’ rare that he sees a natural disaster bigger than his administration.”—AMES CORDEN

‘hat Happened’

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Hillary Clinton takes swipes at Senator Bernie Sanders, her rival for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2016, in her new book, “hat Happened.”r. Meyers returned those jabs in a segment called “ey!”

“his isn’ the time to complain because Senator Woodstock didn’ roll over for you. Hey, if anything, he helped make you a better candidate —ou know, the candidate who beat Donald Trump by three million votes.”—ETH MEYERS

Jimmy Kimmel might not be the first in line at Mrs. Clinton’ book signing.

“Hillary Clinton has her name on a new book about her ill-fated run for the presidency —hich I am excited about. I was just thinking to myself this morning: ‘ would love to relive that magical election of 2016.’t’ like reading a book about why the Titanic sank while you’e sitting at the bottom of the ocean.”—IMMY KIMMEL

The Punchiest Punchlines (Sushi Burrito Edition)

“Starbucks has started selling a new sushi burrito. When asked how much it costs, Starbucks said, ‘on’ worry, you’l pay for it later.’”—IMMY FALLON

“linton referred to James Comey as a ‘ash F.B.I. director.’o she and Trump have that in common. Although, in fairness to Comey, he only got that rash after being forced to shake hands with her husband.”—IMMY KIMMEL, on Mrs. Clinton’ book “hat Happened”

The Bits Worth Watching

How many members of Congress can you name? If it’ zero, you could still get half a cookie.

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Boy bands or solo artists? The kind of question that keeps Mr. Corden up at night.

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

What We’e Excited About on Thursday Night

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

When it comes to Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Sanders, Stephen Colbert is more sympathetic to Mrs. Clinton than Mr. Meyers is. Mr. Colbert made that much clear on Wednesday’ “ate Show,”hen he endorsed Mrs. Clinton’ suggestion that Mr. Sanders’ campaign irresponsibly promised too much help to Americans. Still, Mr. Sanders will be on “he Late Show”n Thursday for an interview.

Also, Check This Out

Elizabeth McGovern, of “ownton Abbey”ame, is playing an Edwardian matriarch once again —ut this time, she’ on Broadway. Here’ our interview with Ms. McGovern.

Trevor Noah said he had a plan for changing the minds of Republicans who deny artificial climate change. | Comedy Central | Elizabeth McGovern of “ownton Abbey.” Aaron Richter for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170907ed97002p9



Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
A News Outlet Aimed at Campus Culture Grows With Big-Media Help

By TIFFANY HSU 
1,156 words
7 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
3
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The American news operations of Tab Media are on a Brooklyn side street in a nondescript brick building that also houses an acupuncture studio and a mortgage lender.

Most of the 13 editors working out of the office are younger than Taylor Swift. A white picnic table strewn with Dunkin' Donuts cups and magazines like Teen Vogue and The New Yorker doubles as a meeting hub. A box of wine is perched on a kitchenette microwave.

The déor fits the mission. Tab, a British import that recently received financing from backers including Rupert Murdoch and the Knight Foundation, is largely unknown to the general public but is gaining currency on college campuses around the country. It relies on a network of unpaid student journalists who write about youth and campus culture. It also has a small cadre of writers commenting, usually snarkily, on issues of interest to young women.

''The mind-set we're looking for is super hungry, anti-establishment and a little subversive,'' said Joshi Herrmann, who, at 28, is both editor in chief and office elder.

Ambition is also part of the mix. Since starting in the United States two years ago, Tab has set out to become a touchstone for the 18-to-22-year-old demographic it believes is underserved by other news organizations.

Jack Rivlin, who founded Tab Media with two other Cambridge University students in 2009 and now splits his time between New York and London, envisions the enterprise as a generation-defining media brand àa MTV.

Other publications should beware, said Mr. Rivlin, 28, who jokes that he has only recently begun to grow facial hair: ''I want to eat their lunch.''

In Tab's Williamsburg office -- there's another in London's Shoreditch neighborhood -- story ideas slingshot around the room, from the Pennsylvania State University hazing trial to wedding training programs at high schools to potential Dream Act-related deportations. There was also an idea from one correspondent to report on local sex parties by participating in several.

Tab uses traditional journalism tools like Freedom of Information Act filings, door-to-door sleuthing and libel training. But it also digs deep into Reddit, excavates meme chains and cultivates gossip.

Tab Media has two parts: The Tab, which publishes the college-centric content, and Babe, a website for young women that specializes in ''good news reporting, trash trends, personal stories'' and stories about men with certain unappealing qualities and ''the pettiest celebrity drama.''

Each month, 40 million people watch videos that the two outlets post on social media, according to data the company compiled from YouTube, Facebook and Instagram. Ten million people a month visit Tab sites, with roughly two-thirds going The Tab and the rest to Babe, according to Tab's Google Analytics data.

In the past year, 2,300 students globally have written for the organization, nearly 1,000 of them regularly. The Tab has outlets at every Ivy League university and plans to expand to more than 100 American campuses.

Mr. Rivlin and The Tab's other founders came up with the idea for company while working for the Cambridge student newspaper, a stuffy publication that none of their friends read, he said.

The Tab's name is a play on ''tabloid'' and ''Cantab,'' a nickname for Cambridge alums. The enterprise initially drew criticism for its ''Tab Totty'' feature, which showcased photos of scantily clad female undergraduates. While that feature was quickly eliminated, two of The Tab's British outlets still run a ''Rear of the Year'' competition.

But the website, which soon spread to other British campuses, also featured exclusive stories about a student who fought for ISIS and a Cambridge student in white tie burning cash in front of a homeless man. In the United States, much larger media organizations made reference to The Tab's reporting on campus protests, and the publication delivered a scoop last year by reporting on Malia Obama's decision to attend Harvard.

Mr. Herrmann, who first wrote for The Tab at Cambridge and later for The London Evening Standard, said that many of the volunteer writers sign up out of curiosity but eventually pursue media careers.

That is partly because The Tab offers its reporters training about sourcing, social media and privacy and sends out regular emails with journalism job listings. Editors at the two headquarters are paid, but few of the reporters are, and only for significant projects.

Roughly 70 percent of Tab Media's revenue -- $600,000 in August, the company said -- comes from sponsored stories commissioned by companies like Spotify and Unilever and written to resemble news articles. The rest comes from display advertising from companies like Netflix and Ikea.

The company completed a round of financing this year that brought in $6 million for website improvements, training and special projects. The lead investor was News Corp, which owns The Wall Street Journal and the New York Post.

Mr. Rivlin said he and George Marangos-Gilks, one of the other founders, pitched the site to the News Corp chairman, Rupert Murdoch, using a 100-page book of printed Tab stories. Mr. Rivlin attended the meeting wearing shoes borrowed from a friend's father. He still had traces of glitter on his face from a music festival he had recently attended.

The Tab is often compared to other youth-focused websites such as The Odyssey Online, launched from Indiana University in 2014, which also uses volunteer writers to cover a range of topics. Spoon University, which was bought in May by Scripps Networks Interactive, compiles articles about food contributed by college students and other young writers.

Balderton Capital, a venture capital firm in London, chose to invest in Tab Media. Suranga Chandratillake, a general partner, said he was impressed by company's high engagement rates and reader loyalty.

''In a world where most new media titles basically push themselves on social media with click-bait headlines and hope for a random click, The Tab was able to write high quality journalism on serious and fun topics and have a community of readers come back loyally every week and sometimes every day,'' Mr. Chandratillake wrote in an email.

Alumni of The Tab have gone on to work for Vice, The Guardian, Reuters, Huffington Post and many other publications. Several have stayed on to help shape the company as it evolves.

''In five years, what we're going to be doing might be a bit broader,'' Mr. Herrmann said. ''We'll keep passing this on, kind of recklessly throwing the keys to very young editorial people and see what they come up with.''

Joshi Herrmann, center, the editor in chief of Tab Media, at a news meeting in Brooklyn, where the editors number just over a dozen. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOLLY FAIBYSHEV FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170907ed970006l



business
With Rupert Murdoch’ Help, Tab Media Targets Young and Cheeky on Campus

By TIFFANY HSU 
1,153 words
6 September 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The American news operations of Tab Media are on a Brooklyn side street in a nondescript brick building that also houses an acupuncture studio and a mortgage lender.

Most of the 13 editors working out of the office are younger than Taylor Swift. A white picnic table strewn with Dunkin’onuts cups and magazines like Teen Vogue and The New Yorker doubles as a meeting hub. A box of wine is perched on a kitchenette microwave.

The déor fits the mission. Tab, a British import that recently received financing from backers including Rupert Murdoch and the Knight Foundation, is largely unknown to the general public but is gaining currency on college campuses around the country. It relies on a network of unpaid student journalists who write about youth and campus culture. It also has a small cadre of writers commenting, usually snarkily, on issues of interest to young women.

“he mind-set we’e looking for is super hungry, anti-establishment and a little subversive,”aid Joshi Herrmann, who, at 28, is both editor in chief and office elder.

Ambition is also part of the mix. Since starting in the United States two years ago, Tab has set out to become a touchstone for the 18-to-22-year-old demographic it believes is underserved by other news organizations.

Jack Rivlin, who founded Tab Media with two other Cambridge University students in 2009 and now splits his time between New York and London, envisions the enterprise as a generation-defining media brand àa MTV.

Other publications should beware, said Mr. Rivlin, 28, who jokes that he has only recently begun to grow facial hair: “ want to eat their lunch.”

In Tab’ Williamsburg office —here’ another in London’ Shoreditch neighborhood —tory ideas slingshot around the room, from the Pennsylvania State University hazing trial to wedding training programs at high schools to potential Dream Act-related deportations. There was also an idea from one correspondent to report on local sex parties by participating in several.

Tab uses traditional journalism tools like Freedom of Information Act filings, door-to-door sleuthing and libel training. But it also digs deep into Reddit, excavates meme chains and cultivates gossip.

Tab Media has two parts: The Tab, which publishes the college-centric content, and Babe, a website for young women that specializes in “ood news reporting, trash trends, personal stories”nd stories about men with certain unappealing qualities and “he pettiest celebrity drama.”

Each month, 40 million people watch videos that the two outlets post on social media, according to data the company compiled from YouTube, Facebook and Instagram. Ten million people a month visit Tab sites, with roughly two-thirds going The Tab and the rest to Babe, according to Tab’ Google Analytics data.

In the past year, 2,300 students globally have written for the organization, nearly 1,000 of them regularly. The Tab has outlets at every Ivy League university and plans to expand to more than 100 American campuses.

Mr. Rivlin and The Tab’ other founders came up with the idea for company while working for the Cambridge student newspaper, a stuffy publication that none of their friends read, he said.

The Tab’ name is a play on “abloid”nd “antab,” nickname for Cambridge alums. The enterprise initially drew criticism for its “ab Totty”eature, which showcased photos of scantily clad female undergraduates. While that feature was quickly eliminated, two of The Tab’ British outlets still run a “ear of the Year”ompetition.

But the website, which soon spread to other British campuses, also featured exclusive stories about a student who fought for ISIS and a Cambridge student in white tie burning cash in front of a homeless man. In the United States, much larger media organizations made reference to The Tab’ reporting on campus protests, and the publication delivered a scoop last year by reporting on Malia Obama’ decision to attend Harvard.

Mr. Herrmann, who first wrote for The Tab at Cambridge and later for The London Evening Standard, said that many of the volunteer writers sign up out of curiosity but eventually pursue media careers.

That is partly because The Tab offers its reporters training about sourcing, social media and privacy and sends out regular emails with journalism job listings. Editors at the two headquarters are paid, but few of the reporters are, and only for significant projects.

Roughly 70 percent of Tab Media’ revenue —600,000 in August, the company said —omes from sponsored stories commissioned by companies like Spotify and Unilever and written to resemble news articles. The rest comes from display advertising from companies like Netflix and Ikea.

The company completed a round of financing this year that brought in $6 million for website improvements, training and special projects. The lead investor was News Corp, which owns The Wall Street Journal and the New York Post.

Mr. Rivlin said he and George Marangos-Gilks, one of the other founders, pitched the site to the News Corp chairman, Rupert Murdoch, using a 100-page book of printed Tab stories. Mr. Rivlin attended the meeting wearing shoes borrowed from a friend’ father. He still had traces of glitter on his face from a music festival he had recently attended.

The Tab is often compared to other youth-focused websites such as The Odyssey Online, launched from Indiana University in 2014, which also uses volunteer writers to cover a range of topics. Spoon University, which was bought in May by Scripps Networks Interactive, compiles articles about food contributed by college students and other young writers.

Balderton Capital, a venture capital firm in London, chose to invest in Tab Media. Suranga Chandratillake, a general partner, said he was impressed by company’ high engagement rates and reader loyalty.

“n a world where most new media titles basically push themselves on social media with click-bait headlines and hope for a random click, The Tab was able to write high quality journalism on serious and fun topics and have a community of readers come back loyally every week and sometimes every day,”r. Chandratillake wrote in an email.

Alumni of The Tab have gone on to work for Vice, The Guardian, Reuters, Huffington Post and many other publications. Several have stayed on to help shape the company as it evolves.

“n five years, what we’e going to be doing might be a bit broader,”r. Herrmann said. “e’l keep passing this on, kind of recklessly throwing the keys to very young editorial people and see what they come up with.”

PHOTO: Joshi Herrmann, center, the editor in chief of Tab Media, at a news meeting in Brooklyn, where the editors number just over a dozen. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOLLY FAIBYSHEV FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Document INHT000020170910ed960000q



Foreign Desk; SECT
Pro-Government Forces in Syria Break  ISIS  Siege of Eastern City

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS 
462 words
6 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- Backed by Russian and Iranian firepower, the Syrian forces of President Bashar al-Assad reached besieged troops on Tuesday at a garrison in Deir al-Zour, a city in eastern Syria, breaking a nearly three-year blockade by Islamic State militants.

Re-entering Deir al-Zour would move the Syrian forces and their allied Iranian-backed militias a step closer to controlling the oil-rich eastern province of the same name, which borders Iraq. Such a move would also expand Iran's influence in the area.

But it could still take weeks, if not months, for Mr. Assad's forces to retake all of Deir al-Zour from the militant group, which controls about 60 percent of its neighborhoods.

Mr. Assad congratulated his troops on breaking the siege, calling it a ''resounding victory'' against the militants and vowed to forge ahead until ''the last inch'' of Syrian territory was liberated. President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, whose military had fired cruise missiles at Islamic States targets near the city, called it a ''strategically important victory over terrorists.''

Mr. Assad's critics called it an alarming development.

''It opens the whole province for Iran and its agents there,'' said Mozahem al-Salloum, an opposition activist from Deir al-Zour who has been in exile since 2013.

Militias backed by Iran and the Lebanese militant organization Hezbollah form the core of the pro-Assad forces advancing on Deir al-Zour, Mr. Salloum said.

Iran has been seeking to secure a land corridor from its territory, through Iraq, to the Mediterranean to give it unhindered access to its allies in Syria and Lebanon. Control of Deir al-Zour is a major step forward for that plan.

The advances by the Syrian troops could provide some relief for the tens of thousands of civilians trapped in the four government-controlled neighborhoods that have been surrounded by the extremists since 2015. The Syrian government estimates that 70,000 people have survived on erratic airdrops of food and supplies during the siege.

Activists said, however, that the new access road could not yet be used for delivering humanitarian assistance because it was still under attack from Islamic State fighters.

Since 2015, the Syrian government and the Islamic State have controlled separate sections of Deir al-Zour, Syria's largest eastern city. Extremists hold the province and are expected to fight their last battles there.

The Islamic State fighters have lost all other major cities they once controlled, including Mosul and Tal Afar in Iraq. Forces backed by the United States are bearing down on Raqqa, the Islamic States' self-proclaimed capital, which is northwest of Deir al-Zour.

Document NYTF000020170906ed9600060



Foreign Desk; SECTA
A Recruit For Jihad Deployed By  ISIS 

By RICHARD C. PADDOCK; Fira Abdurachman contributed reporting. 
1,582 words
4 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

PURWOREJO KLAMPOK, Indonesia -- The quiet young Indonesian aircraft mechanic dashed out of his relatives' home in a hurry in February and disappeared. The next time his anxious family would get word of him would be three months later, on the television news.

The authorities announced that the man, Yoki Pratama Windyarto, 21, was one of seven Indonesians who had joined the Islamic State and gone to the Philippines to fight on the island of Mindanao.

His family had not even known that he had a passport.

And then another shock: Weeks later, his mother, Sri Eny Windarti, received an anonymous call saying that her son had been martyred, and got a text message with a picture of him lying dead on the battlefield, a pool of blood under his head.

''What caused him to go there is a big question for us,'' she said. ''We have no idea what happened to him.''

Mr. Windyarto was one of about 30 foreign fighters recruited by Islamic State operatives to join the battle against the Philippines government in the city of Marawi, officials say. That fight, which has raged for months, has become the most intense military campaign that the Islamic State has supported outside Syria and Iraq.

The militants fighting in Marawi opposed the government long before they announced loyalty to the Islamic State, known as ISIS or ISIL. But in addition to the propaganda value of linking themselves to the militant group, recent evidence suggests that they have received financing and other assistance from the Islamic State command.

Among those helping to recruit foreign fighters have been Indonesians who went to Syria, joined the Islamic State and rose to leadership positions, said Sidney Jones, the director of the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict, a research organization in Jakarta. Another who has taken a leading role in recruitment for the group is a former law lecturer from Malaysia who is part of the inner circle of militant leaders in Marawi, the authorities say.

Once Mr. Windyarto arrived in the Philippines, he was told to recruit his jihadi friends to come to Mindanao for a ''big party'' in May.

''The Marawi operations received direct funding from ISIS central and reveal a chain of command that runs from Syria through the Philippines to Indonesia and beyond,'' said a recent report by the institute.

The siege of Marawi began in May, when Philippine troops tried to arrest Isnilon Hapilon, the Islamic State leader in Southeast Asia, and stumbled upon hundreds of militants massing for an assault.

In Manila, Brig. Gen. Restituto Padilla, a spokesman for the Armed Forces of the Philippines, said that most of the foreign fighters had come from neighboring Indonesia and Malaysia. Fighters from Arab countries and Bangladesh are believed to be among them, he said, but their sightings are unconfirmed.

''There have been a number of foreign fighters who made their way here under the guise of humanitarian workers,'' he said. ''Some come through the back door. It's a very porous border.''

Indonesian Islamists, in particular, have long had ties to Mindanao. In the 1990s, they received military training at a camp near Marawi. In the 2000s, Mindanao became a transit point for Indonesians returning from fighting in Afghanistan and a sanctuary for others wanted in a string of terrorist bombings in Indonesia.

''Marawi is not strange for Indonesian jihadis,'' said Ansyaad Mbai, the former head of Indonesia's National Counterterrorism Agency. ''All Indonesian jihadis are familiar with this place.''

A leader of today's Marawi militants, Omarkhayam Maute, is married to an Indonesian, Minhati Madrais, whose father is a conservative cleric. The couple met while studying in Egypt. For a time, Mr. Maute taught his radical views at his father-in-law's Islamic school in the city of Bekasi, east of Jakarta.

Today, the most prominent foreigner among the militants in the Philippines is Mahmud Ahmad, a Malaysian and onetime Islamic law lecturer who fled to Mindanao in 2014.

A seized video of a strategy meeting before the battle shows him in the militants' inner circle with Mr. Hapilon, Mr. Maute and Mr. Maute's brother Abdullah, a fellow leader of the Maute Group. The former lecturer is known among the militants there as Dr. Mahmud.

''Dr. Mahmud appears to be senior to anyone operating in Indonesia, meaning whatever the intergroup frictions, all recognize a chain of command within the ISIS hierarchy that they are obliged to obey by virtue of their oath,'' the report says.

Among those Mr. Mahmud helped bring to Marawi was Mr. Windyarto.

The young aircraft mechanic grew up in a mostly Muslim neighborhood in the central Java town of Purworejo Klampok, a tolerant community about 250 miles east of Jakarta. The family is doing well by local standards: His mother is an English teacher, his father a town official.

A few years ago, Mr. Windyarto was accepted into a university. But his parents said the cost was too high and sent him to the Indonesia Aviation School, a strict boarding school in the city of Tangerang, west of Jakarta.

He began studying aviation maintenance there in 2013. At first he was despondent. His head was shaved and he was not allowed to leave or talk to anyone by phone for three months. He graduated in September of last year, shortly before his 21st birthday, and moved in with his uncle while waiting to start a job as a trainee at Garuda Indonesia, the state airline.

Mr. Windyarto had always been devout. And during his stay in Bekasi he expressed conservative religious views to some family members, including the idea that women should not work outside the home.

But in interviews, more than a dozen relatives said they had not realized that he had embraced a radical ideology. He never spoke about the Islamic State or Syria, they said, speculating that he had been recruited online.

But Ms. Jones, a leading expert on terrorism in Southeast Asia, said evidence indicated that he had been recruited by Islamists in person after he was allowed to leave campus.

By 2015, he had joined a little-known Islamist network called Al Hawariyun, or ''The Helpers,'' and took part in military training outside Jakarta, according to her institute's report.

The network's first leader, the cleric Ustadz Nanang Ainur Rafiq, went to Syria in 2015 and was killed last year fighting Kurdish forces. The next leader, Abu Nusaibah, was arrested in November with eight followers on charges that they were plotting to set off a riot at a huge election protest against the governor of Jakarta.

Soon after, Mr. Windyarto began making plans to go to Syria along with another member, Anggara Suprayogi, whose wife worked as a maid in Hong Kong and was part of a radical cell of domestic workers there, Ms. Jones said.

More than 500 Indonesians have joined the Islamic State in Syria, including families with children, Ms. Jones said. About 100 fighters have been killed in combat or by airstrikes; others have risen within the Islamic State's ranks.

But when the two militants contacted Indonesian operatives with the Islamic State in Syria, they were urged to go to Mindanao instead and told to contact Mr. Mahmud, the report says. He agreed to help and directed a member of a rival Islamist group in Central Java to organize their travel.

In mid-December, even before starting his job with Garuda, Mr. Windyarto quietly got a passport.

Mr. Windyarto was briefly ill in mid-February, and his mother went to Bekasi to care for him. Even then, she said, he gave no hint of his plan to leave.

But after she left, he emptied his bank account, dropped out of the family WhatsApp messaging group and sold his motorbike and laptop, she said. Then, on Feb. 27, he made a quick visit to the house in Bekasi when only his aunt was home, retrieving a flash data drive before rushing off. He never spoke with a family member again.

On March 20, his parents, suspecting that he might have run off to join militants, filed a missing person's report and asked the police to block him from leaving the country.

Even so, they said they were shocked on May 31, when the Indonesian police announced on national television that their son and six other Indonesians were wanted for involvement in Islamic State terrorism in Marawi.

The phone call that Ms. Windarti dreaded came on June 20. A man speaking English told her that her son had become a ''shahid'' -- a martyr.

He texted her the picture of her son's body lying on the ground.

Family members cling to the hope that he may somehow be alive, perhaps having faked his death to escape. But there have been few answers.

''If we use our normal logic, it doesn't make sense,'' said his uncle, Anto Kuswanto, in Bekasi. ''We educated him to be a good guy. He had never even been in an airplane.''

Above, Yoki Pratama Windyarto at his graduation last September from the Indonesia Aviation School. Right, a soldier carrying a captured ISIS flag while clearing a city street of militants in May in Marawi in the southern Philippines, where Mr. Windyarto is believed to have been killed in battle in June. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY FAMILY OF YOKI PRATAMA WINDYARTO; JES AZNAR/GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170904ed9400049



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Best Sellers: Hardcover Fiction: Sunday, September 03rd 2017

504 words
3 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

About the Best Sellers:

These lists are an expanded version of those appearing in the September 03, 2017 print edition of the Book Review, reflecting sales for the week ending August 19, 2017. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above it. A dagger (†ndicates that some retailers report receiving bulk orders. For an explanation of our methodology, visit http://www.nytimes.com/best-sellers.

  Weeks


                              est Sellers: Hardcover Fiction

This Last On
Week Week List
  
1         1


SEEING RED, by Sandra Brown. (Grand Central) The TV journalist Kerra Bailey and former federal agent John Trapper join forces to expose a web of conspiracy behind a hotel bombing in Dallas.

2  1


THE STORE, by James Patterson and Richard DiLallo. (Little, Brown) Two New York writers go undercover to expose the secrets of a powerful retailer.

3 2 11


CAMINO ISLAND, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A search for stolen rare manuscripts leads to a Florida island.

4 3 5


THE LATE SHOW, by Michael Connelly. (Little, Brown) René Ballard, a young detective with the L.A.P.D., investigates crimes against two women.

5 1 2


ANY DREAM WILL DO, by Debbie Macomber. (Ballantine) As Shay Benson begins her life anew, building a relationship with Pastor Drew Douglas, her brother's return threatens to undo it.

6  1


EXPOSED, by Lisa Scottoline. (St. Martin's) Bennie Rosato and Mary DiNunzio find themselves on opposite sides of a lawsuit, threatening their friendship and their law firm.

7 4 4


THE LYING GAME, by Ruth Ware. (Scout) Four school friends reunite as their long-held secret threatens to emerge.

8  1


I KNOW A SECRET, by Tess Gerritsen. (Ballantine) Rizzoli and Isles investigate two separate homicides and uncover other dangerous mysteries.

9 8 39


A GENTLEMAN IN MOSCOW, by Amor Towles. (Viking) A Russian count undergoes 30 years of house arrest.

10  1


A STRANGER IN THE HOUSE, by Shari Lapena. (Pamela Dorman) Karen Krupp's life is turned upside down when she suffers amnesia because of a car crash.

11 9 6


HOUSE OF SPIES, by Daniel Silva. (Harper) Gabriel Allon, the Israeli art restorer and spy, now the head of Israel’ secret intelligence service, pursues an ISIS mastermind.

12 7 2


THE GOOD DAUGHTER, by Karin Slaughter. (Morrow) The lawyer Charlotte Quinn is challenged when violence returns to her hometown of Pikesville.

13 12 5


BEFORE WE WERE YOURS, by Lisa Wingate. (Ballantine) A South Carolina lawyer, researching her grandmother’ past, learns about a Tennessee orphanage that kidnapped children and placed them for adoption with wealthy people.

14 10 16


INTO THE WATER, by Paula Hawkins. (Riverhead) In this psychological thriller by the author of “he Girl on the Train,”omen are found drowned in a river in an English town.

15 11 3


MRS. FLETCHER, by Tom Perrotta. (Scribner) A divorced woman has a sexual awakening in the digital age.

Document NYTF000020170904ed930002z



world
A Mosque Was Bombed. What to Do With the Shoes Left Behind?

By MUJIB MASHAL 
802 words
3 September 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan —obody really knew what to do with the pile of shoes left outside a Kabul mosque targeted by a suicide bombing a few days earlier.

The shoes were both trivial and haunting.

Worshipers take their shoes off before entering the main hall of a mosque to respect the sanctity of the space. When Islamic State suicide bombers attacked this Shiite mosque in Kabul during crowded Friday prayers on Aug. 25, the lucky ones rushed through the back doors or jumped out of windows, running for their lives barefoot on warm asphalt.

About 40 people were killed, two dozen of them now buried in the mosque’ rose garden, and nearly 100 were wounded in the attack.

During the cleanup effort, a pile of more than 150 pairs of shoes was formed in a corner of the mosque’ yard. A lone pedestal fan, its front grill gone and its wires charred by the explosion, overlooked the pile, as if keeping watch.

In the pile were a variety of shoes: a pair of cream-colored women’ flats, two drops of blood dried on the label inside. A young girl’ glossy black shoes, with sparkling buckles. A pair of green boy’ sneakers, with straps that read “port”nd “ids.” pair of sandals with wasps clinging to the human remains in the toes.

About eight pairs were children’ sneakers and sandals, and another two dozen were women’. The rest were men’, mostly plastic and leather sandals.

Away from the pile, on a piece of torn-up rug, sat a pair of women’ plastic jelly shoes, their bows bent. The plastic spoke of modest means, the bows of taste.

Some of the shoes were crushed and crumbling, as if discarded after years of wear but in fact speaking of the economic status of the victims. Others, like a pair of navy loafers, were freshly polished for Friday prayers.

While mosques are known as a place where good shoes sometimes disappear during prayer, the pile of victims’hoes was respected days after the attack.

“ome came and took their shoes, some didn’ find theirs, and some returned the ones they had taken,”hah Agha, a police officer stationed at the mosque, said on the third day after the attack. His right ear and part of the back of his head bear scars from a rocket from a previous war.

He stopped to look at the shoes for a minute, sighed and then slung his American gun over his shoulder and went back to his duties.

“od bless them,”e said.

One man, Ghulam Sakhi, returned a pair of leather sandals in a plastic bag to the pile. He had come earlier in the morning looking for his nephew’ shoes, and had taken the wrong pair. The nephew, Abas Ali, 17, had survived the attack and was at home recovering from a bullet wound in his leg.

“hese weren’ my nephew’,”r. Sakhi said, as he dropped the shoes back into the pile. “t must be some other poor dead or alive person’.”

On the fourth day, Mohammed Reza, 15, came looking for his shoes. He had bought the pair of hiking sandals for a little over $5. He tiptoed around the pile and found only one of them. The straps were burned, the tip was gone.

“ will take this as a souvenir,”e said, picking up the burned sandal.

But minutes later, he returned to the pile and tossed the sandal back. His parents, who were praying at the graves of the dead in the mosque’ yard, already turning into a shrine, frowned on their son taking such a souvenir.

On the fifth day, scaffolding was in place inside the mosque’ hall, which still smelled of smoke. Painting was underway. Outside, the pile of shoes remained, but had been shifted away from a wall, which now had a fresh coat of white paint.

“e will keep these for another few days, so people can have a chance to come get their shoes,”aid Haji Khan Mohammed, one of the mosque’ elders. “fter that, what are we going to do with these? We can’ take them to people’ homes, we can’ sell them. We will just take them to the garbage and dump.”

Fahim Abed contributed reporting.

PHOTO: Shoes outside a Kabul mosque after an attack on Aug. 25. About 40 people were killed, and many survivors ran for their lives without their shoes. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MUJIB MASHAL/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

* \b ISIS\b0  Claims Deadly Attack on Shiite Mosque in Afghanistan

* Airstrikes in Afghanistan Kill More Than a Dozen Civilians

Document INHT000020170906ed930000r



FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The Bucks Start Here

By NICHOLAS CONFESSORE 
7,880 words
3 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
33
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

As for so many other people, election night did not pan out quite the way Robert Stryk expected. Stryk began the night slumped in a Morton's steakhouse in downtown Washington, tuning out the guests at his watch party to type out the campaign announcement of a buddy who -- in the wake of Donald J. Trump's all-but-certain defeat and the Republican Party implosion that was sure to follow -- planned to make a long-shot bid for chairman of the Republican National Committee. He ended it by closing down the bar at the Mayflower Hotel, and after the race was called, giddily marching down Connecticut Avenue with his friends as they chanted, ''Make America Great Again!''

Stryk, who owned a lobbying firm so small it didn't actually have an office, spent most of his time in California and owned a small vineyard in Oregon, and he had helped out the Trump campaign as a sort of informal West Coast hand. He was still reveling in Trump's upset win two nights later, over a bottle of wine on the patio of the Four Seasons in Georgetown, when a chocolate Lab padded over to his table to sniff his crotch. Stryk and the dog's owner got to talking about wine and cigars and finally, like most of the country, about Trump. It turned out that she worked for New Zealand's Embassy in Washington. New Zealand's prime minister still hadn't connected with the new president-elect, she told Stryk -- a diplomatic and political embarrassment. Stryk cocked an eye across the table. ''What if I said I could get you the number of someone to call the president?'' he asked her.

The following afternoon, Stryk found himself in a cab, headed for a meeting with New Zealand's ambassador to the United States, Tim Groser. Stryk was more than a little nervous. On the way over, he called a friend named Stuart Jolly, a retired Army lieutenant colonel who ran Trump's field operation during the Republican primary and spent election night with Stryk at Morton's. Jolly reached out to someone he knew in the Trump high command and delivered a cell number, but Stryk didn't know if it would actually work. At the embassy, Groser invited him in, uncorked a bottle of pinot noir and called the prime minister to pass along the number. A week later, President-elect Trump was finally able to accept a congratulatory phone call. But even before the call went through, plans and possibilities were blooming in Stryk's mind. ''I said to myself: 'This could be very, very interesting,' '' he told me when I first met him this spring. '' 'The world's going to change.' ''

Stryk, who grew up in Arizona, had bounced around the minor leagues of politics for most of his adult life. At 41, he has the frenetic energy of a serial entrepreneur and the motley réuméo match. After dropping out of college to intern on Capitol Hill, Stryk wrote voter-contact scripts for a Republican P.R. firm, helped start a political job-listing website and eventually opened his own Beltway lobbying shop, Sonoran Policy Group. The firm almost collapsed in 2009, after Stryk tried to acquire a troubled Maryland-based security-guard business. Stryk decamped to California, owing thousands of dollars in back rent, and reinvented S.P.G. as a procurement and political-consulting business. He traded tequila shots with the California congressman Dana Rohrabacher, ran for mayor of a town in Napa Valley, handled P.R. for an arms dealer accused of smuggling weapons to Libya -- the case was dropped last fall -- and helped clients sell the government everything from flashlights to missile-guidance software. By the time he hooked up with the Trump campaign, Stryk had hustled his way to a good living, and he knew his way around Washington. But he was no one's idea of a Beltway insider.

When the phone call to Trump went through, Stryk saw the geography of a new world forming before his eyes. Interests that spent millions of dollars studying Washington and shaping it to their liking had been taken totally by surprise by Trump's win. The rules had changed, and no one was sure what the new ones were. For Stryk, it was the opportunity he had been waiting for. As he saw it, the lobbying old guard -- the guys that threw down black Amex cards at Joe's Crab and sent fat quarterly bills to clients they barely did any work for -- were on the defensive. New people would have a chance. People like Stryk.

New Zealand was a prime example. Groser and his staff had spent months researching Hillary Clinton, calculating who among her vast claque would win positions of power and influence in her administration. The main thing they knew about Trump was that he had sworn to pull the United States out of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the complex 12-nation trade deal that Groser helped negotiate. Stryk, offering to work free, had a proposal. New Zealand would throw the biggest party of Trump's inauguration. Stryk would put the new administration's leading lights in the room; Groser would do the rest. ''It was about building brand recognition for New Zealand,'' Stryk explained. ''If we can get them there, then forever, bad or good, Trump and New Zealand are a co-brand.''

In the tumult following Trump's win, Stryk was discovering that many of his old friends -- most of them fellow Washington backbenchers, B-listers and understudies -- had vaulted to positions of unexpected influence. A guy Stryk knew at the inaugural committee put out the word among Trump alums that New Zealand's party was the week's hot ticket. Stryk called a friend at Salem Media, the right-leaning media-and-talk-radio company, which signed on as a party sponsor. Another friend, the actor Jon Voight, agreed to attend as a special celebrity guest.

In January, hundreds of guests packed into to the embassy's chancery, among them dozens of Trump-campaign alumni and future West Wing staff. Stryk rented a tuxedo jacket for the occasion. Groser gave a Trump-friendly speech, lauding the end of political correctness and the dawn of a new era in Kiwi-American relations. ''We had a party that rocked, frankly,'' he told me recently. In one night, New Zealand had upended Washington's elaborate diplomatic pecking order. Diplomats and social secretaries at other embassies were left wondering how the country had pulled in so many Trump V.I.P.s. Trumpworld, previously inscrutable and unreachable to Groser's team, was now populated by friendly faces. ''Robert showed, 'I'm connected,' '' he told me.

Groser decided to hire Stryk full time. Not long after, Stryk pulled $250,000 out of his savings, moved his family to the Washington suburbs and started hiring.

There are about 10,000 registered lobbyists in Washington -- roughly 20 for every member of Congress -- and thousands more unregistered ones: consultants and ''strategic advisers'' who are paid to help shape government policy but do not disclose their clients. By whatever name, they are the people companies and countries hire to help roll back regulations, unstick bids, tweak legislation or get meetings. Lobbying is at once Washington's most maligned, enduring and essential industry. Underpaid young politicos and retiring lawmakers depend on Beltway lobby shops -- known as ''K Street'' after the city boulevard that once housed many of them -- for the high-six-figure salaries that will loft them into Washington's petite aristocracy. Congress needs K Street, too: After decades of cutting its own staff and research arms, much of Capitol Hill's institutional memory and policy expertise now resides in the lobbying industry. But the private sector needs lobbyists the most. The modern federal government is so sprawling and complex that it practically demands a specialized class of middlemen and -women.

Over the decades, lobbying has evolved from a niche trade of fixers and gatekeepers to a sleek, vertically integrated, $3-billion-a-year industry. A good lobbyist doesn't go into a meeting asking for legislation; she or he already has the bill drafted, a coalition of businesses and trade groups poised to support it, a policy brief to hand out to reporters and to the officials positioned at dozens of decision points throughout the bureaucracy and relationships with advertising and polling firms to manage the public rollout. Everyone has a lobbyist -- or three, or 50 -- and the lobbyists know everyone. K Street is majestic and immovable, veined through Washington like fat through a prime steak.

Like virtually every other candidate for president, Trump campaigned against this thicket of money and influence, positioning himself as an outsider who would ''drain the swamp.'' This pledge would soon prove more rhetorical than real, but it contained a grain of truth. Trump arrived in Washington with a relatively short baggage train of Beltway relationships and obligations. He didn't read policy briefs; he barely had policies. His inner circle was a hodgepodge of Breitbart alumni, nominally Democratic financiers, Trump Organization employees on loan, the odd reality-show star and Republicans who would have been unemployable in almost any other administration. The smart money in Washington -- K Street and K Street's clients, the big corporations and trade associations -- didn't quite know what to expect. But mostly, they didn't know whom to call.

''Many companies want to understand: What are the president's priorities?'' Corey Lewandowski told me in February, a few weeks after the inauguration. ''But there are so few people in Washington who have a relationship or an understanding of him.'' Lewandowski, the president's former campaign manager, was happy to tell you that he was one of the few exceptions.

Lewandowski's journey from obscure New Hampshire political operative to celebrity power broker was emblematic of how Trump's election scrambled Washington's hierarchies. Much like Stryk, Lewandowski had spent years in the lower ranks of conservative politics and lobbying. Being hired as Trump's campaign manager moved Lewandowski into the political big time, and being fired, midway through the race, did little to dislodge him. There were speaking gigs, a stint as a reliably pro-Trump pundit on CNN. At one point last year, Lewandowski even tried selling a book, tentatively titled ''Let Trump Be Trump''; Stryk, introduced to Lewandowski by a mutual friend, helped him shop the proposal. ''Corey had a brand,'' Stryk told me, and that brand was valuable. HarperCollins offered Lewandowski $1.2 million, an astounding figure for a campaign manager -- though the deal evaporated when Lewandowski refused to show HarperCollins a copy of his nondisclosure agreement with Trump.

Through it all, Lewandowski remained close to Trump and spoke to him often. But after the election, the White House job Lewandowski hoped for never quite materialized. Now Lewandowski, too, was on K Street. He had joined up with another former Trump aide, Barry Bennett, to start a lobbying firm called Avenue Strategies.

Unlike other people on K Street, Lewandowski did not pretend to be an expert on the legislative calendar or the fine points of the Administrative Procedure Act. He was an expert on Trump. ''There are just so few people in Washington who know the president,'' Lewandowski told me in February. ''It's a comparative advantage.'' He was not shy about playing up their friendship. He sometimes tweeted from the White House grounds. When journalists or other visitors came to his office, on Pennsylvania Avenue a few blocks from the White House, he would point out his window to where, he claimed, he could see the president's bedroom.

His mind-meld with Trump was what made him valuable to clients, Lewandowski explained to me. ''I think what I bring is a level of understanding of the president's thought process,'' he said, ''only because I had the privilege of being next to him for so long.'' He was doing as many as nine or 10 meetings a day: Chief executives, prominent Republicans, even other lobbying firms wanted his advice. He offered it freely, Lewandowski told me. He wanted to be helpful. ''You know what a guy said to me the other day?'' he said. '' 'You've got a hot hand. Just remember, that hand's not going to be hot forever.' ''

One good source of business was the president's habit of calling chief executives to the White House for televised meetings. In January, when the chief executive of Whirlpool was summoned by Trump to discuss how to revive American jobs, the company asked Avenue Strategies to advise it. As one lobbyist who shared clients with Lewandowski put it to me, companies like Whirlpool needed to know the lay of the land inside the White House: How much sway did Wilbur Ross have? Was Steve Bannon for real? And what should the company do if Trump started dumping on it on Twitter?

Everyone had seen what happened to Lockheed Martin. Lockheed, the federal government's single biggest contractor, is a powerful presence inside the Beltway. But through the winter, Trump had lashed out at the company over cost overruns on the F-35 fighter jet. The company's shares dropped each time, taking Lockheed's value down by billions of dollars. These were the kinds of problems that Lewandowski believed others on K Street couldn't help with. ''If you're a corporate C.E.O. and the president has tweeted at you and your stock has dropped 4 percent, you say: 'Why am I paying all these guys so much money?' '' Lewandowski said. The old model of Washington influence wouldn't work on Trump, he believed. ''They don't know him, and they don't know any of his guys, and they don't understand how he thinks.'' Eventually Lockheed, too, turned to Avenue.

Over the course of a few conversations with the company's Washington office, Bennett told me, they advised Lockheed on how Marillyn Hewson, its president and chief executive, should approach conversations: ''Short, direct, honest answers,'' as Bennett recounted it for me later. ''Feel free to educate the president. In the end, it's going to be transactional.'' The next time Hewson met with Trump, a week before the inauguration, she came bearing gifts: a potential F-35 price cut and a promise to add jobs at a Texas plant.

The Twitter attacks ceased. By the end of February, Trump was praising Lockheed. ''They've just announced eighteen hundred new jobs,'' Trump told reporters after a meeting with Hewson and other manufacturing executives. ''I have to say this, Marillyn, you've gotten a lot of credit because what you did was the right thing.''

Lewandowski's help did not come cheap. A typical boutique lobbying firm might charge $10,000 to $15,000 a month. A big lobbying or law firm, with teams of para­egals or assistants and high overhead, might charge twice that, with a three-month retainer. Avenue sometimes asked for as much as $50,000 a month -- a top-shelf price on K Street -- and Lewandowski on occasion tried to go higher. But there were plenty of takers: By midwinter, Avenue had ''more than a dozen, less than 50'' clients, Lewandowski told me at the time.

The demand was so great that would-be Trump-whisperers were popping up in Washington like toadstools after a rainstorm. The former Trump surrogate Newt Gingrich, a ''senior adviser'' to the lobbying practice at Dentons, the world's largest law firm, was hawking a book titled ''Understanding Trump.'' Established K Street firms were grabbing any Trump people they could find: Jim Murphy, Trump's former political director, joined the lobbying giant BakerHostetler, while another firm, Fidelis Government Relations, struck up a partnership with Bill Smith, Mike Pence's former chief of staff. All told, close to 20 ex-aides of Trump, friends and hangers-on had made their way into Washington's influence business.

Beltway experience was not necessarily required. Squire Patton Boggs formed a ''strategic alliance'' with Michael Cohen, Trump's self-described ''personal attorney'' from New York, who had scant government experience. There was also Brad Gerstman, a brawny Long Island lobbyist and P.R. man who had done work for Trump in New York over the years. On election night, Gerstman was so sure Trump was going to lose that he got on a plane to Israel. As Gerstman tells it, his business partner called as soon as he landed. ''Why the hell are you in Tel Aviv?'' his partner asked. ''We have an office to open in Washington.'' Gerstman hung up and went to his hotel, where he looked out over the Mediterranean, put a cigar in his mouth and listened to the congratulatory messages piled up in his voice mail. In January, he set up an office in downtown Washington. ''We don't want to sell ourselves as just the Trump guys,'' Gerstman told me. ''But maybe that's what it takes for the first few years.''

Many of the Trump-connected lobbyists told me they were turning away as much business as they accepted. One person offered Lewan­owski $250,000 just to get the president to tweet about him. A lobbyist who worked on Trump's inaugural committee told me of a billionaire who, within a week of the inauguration, offered a million dollars if the lobbyist could arrange for his picture to be taken in the Oval Office with the new president. ''You can make $2 million if you want,'' Bennett told me, sounding almost apologetic. ''It's like: 'I've got a gold mine in Eastern Europe.' Or: 'My client is suing the I.R.S. -- can you help?' ''

Not all of the new arrivals affected to be part of a revolution. One day this spring, I met with Brian Ballard, a veteran Florida lobbyist and top-tier Republican fund-raiser. Ballard had recently opened an office in Washington just a few blocks from the new Trump International Hotel. He had known Trump since the 1980s, and he later started lobbying regulators and state officials on behalf of Trump's golf courses and his Palm Beach club, Mar-a-Lago, but he was practical about the realities of politics. Like most of Florida's Republican old guard, he started the 2016 campaign backing the state's former governor, Jeb Bush, before switching to the state's junior senator, Marco Rubio. Once it became clear that Trump would lead the Republican ticket, Ballard enthusiastically joined the campaign as Trump's Florida finance chairman.

Ballard, who is 56, had a ruddy Florida tan that marked him as new in town, and the serene confidence of a man who saw no way he could lose. At his office, an attractive receptionist led us into a spotless conference room. ''I'm not an expert in Washington, D.C.,'' Ballard told me when we sat down. ''I'm an expert in lobbying.'' In Florida, Ballard had a blue-chip list of corporate clients: Google, pharmaceutical companies, Big Sugar. His business plan was simple: to sign up his Florida clients for Trump-related advice in Washington. ''When I was on the campaign, they didn't want to pitch in,'' Ballard said of his clients. ''And now they say: 'How do I figure out what is going on here?' ''

By the end of his first 100 days in office, it seemed, Trump had not so much drained the swamp as enshrouded it with a billowing fog of uncertainty. No previous president had changed his mind more often, or contradicted his cabinet so frequently, or permitted such vicious ideological combat under his White House roof. Many clients just wanted to know what they could safely ignore. ''White Houses are always somewhat opaque places of fascination, where you don't quite know who is up and who is down, or how decisions are ultimately reached,'' said Bruce P. Mehlman, a prominent Republican lobbyist who served in the George W. Bush administration. ''The added complexity here was there was not a single consistent governing philosophy. It was not clear if the president saw trade the way that Gary Cohn sees it or the way Steve Bannon sees it.''

Moreover, some of the usual paths through the bog were now closed. Hundreds of senior administration jobs were going unfilled, as Trump's cabinet secretaries battled with his inner circle over potential hires from among the Republican regulars in Washington. One lobbyist at a well-regarded firm with numerous financial clients told me that his problem was less that he didn't know whom to call than that there was no one to call: Infighting and vetting problems had stymied so many appointments at the Treasury Department that many of the offices were empty.

All of this had inadvertently created an entirely new business model for Trump's friends and former employees. In normal times, K Street did much of its business on Capitol Hill, where the churn of legislation offered unending opportunity to deliver goodies for clients. But the power vacuum in Trump's cabinet agencies, and the inexperience of his West Wing staff, seemed to offer a different kind of opening. It was easy to imagine that a single phone call, coming from the right person, could redirect a major policy initiative. Some of the old firms would do O.K., Lewandowski thought -- the ones that had relationships in Congress, that understood the intricate ballet of lawmaking. But the real action, he was betting, would be at the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue. ''I think this particular administration is really going to be driving the agenda,'' he told me. ''Not Congress.''

After New Zealand, Stryk's phone barely stopped ringing, and he quickly built up his own shop. Stuart Jolly, the ex-Trump campaign aide who worked out the phone call for New Zealand, became the new president of S.P.G. Stryk hired a former Central Intelligence Agency station chief and a few other ex-military and intelligence types, people who had contacts and expertise abroad. He also brought on an earnest young small-town lawyer from Oregon named Jacob Daniels, whom he met through his vineyard business. Daniels had been working out of his car, mostly on drunken-driving cases, when Stryk recommended him to Jolly for a job with the Trump campaign. Daniels ended up as the campaign's second in command in Michigan, where Trump became the first Republican to win in almost 30 years, making Daniels a Trumpworld rising star. Now he was Stryk's vice president of policy.

On a balmy spring day in April, I met Stryk and a few of his colleagues on a terrace at the Army-Navy Country Club, a sprawling and immaculate golf club near the Pentagon; S.P.G. still didn't have a proper office. Stryk wore cowboy boots and a T-shirt under a rumpled black sport coat. Most of K Street, he told me, was ''a washing machine. Money just goes from one firm to another. No one creates any new wealth.'' Stryk's own politics leaned libertarian, he told me; despite his firm's ties to the Trump team, he didn't think of himself as particularly Trumpy. One of the new hires, a Democratic foreign-policy veteran, had been good friends with Paul Wellstone, the liberal senator who died in 2002. ''We're here for the opportunities,'' Stryk said. ''Not for the ideology.''

Stryk was focusing not on nervous companies but on nervous countries. He and his new team had made a list of the governments S.P.G. wanted to work for -- NATO allies mostly, nothing iffy like Ukraine or Pakistan -- and with New Zealand as his calling card, they pitched S.P.G. as the go-to foreign lobbying and advisory firm in Trump's Washington. Historically, foreign lobbying has been a specialized business dominated by a few big firms. Stryk viewed them as he viewed the rest of the lobbying industry: as a cartel ripe for disruption. Stryk pitched his clients policy expertise, round-the-clock work habits and personalized service.

Stryk believed his team could penetrate the uncertainty surrounding the White House. He wanted to be a ''calming resource for foreign countries and businesses,'' he told me -- and there was a lot of calming to do. Over the course of a few months, the new president had managed to start a trade war with Canada, picked a fight with the prime minister of Australia and hinted that the United States might need to pull out of NATO. He also wanted to slash the State Department budget, and through the spring and summer, many senior jobs at State would remain unfilled. Everyone, even close allies, was looking for Sherpas and back doors. R. Nicholas Burns, the veteran American diplomat, told me that Trump's denuded State Department had left diplomats from perhaps a hundred countries -- most of them smaller nations -- without their traditional liaison to the United States government. ''There's never been anything like this, ever,'' Burns said.

Trump's statecraft had a way of generating new business in other ways, too. The president of the Czech Republic, Milos Zeman, was not a popular figure in Barack Obama's Washington: A right-wing populist who preached closer ties to Russia, he once banned the United States ambassador from Prague Castle, the Czech seat of government. Trump, naturally, invited him to Washington, and Zeman's government hired Stryk's firm to help plan the state visit. New Zealand needed to talk to the administration about a new bilateral trade agreement, now that Trump was withdrawing from the Trans-Pacific Partnership. A Korean trade association wanted help planning a conference in Washington but didn't know anyone in the Trump White House. Stryk's people got on the phone, cold-calling around the Commerce Department to find a senior official who would speak at the event. ''Most lobbyists are afraid of a 'no,' '' Stryk said. ''A 'no' means you have no juice. I'm not afraid of 'no.' ''

But Stryk's greatest coup was Saudi Arabia. Gulf-state oligarchs spend tens of millions of dollars a year lobbying in Washington and larding influential think tanks with grant money, and Saudi Arabia is one of the biggest spenders. The country's then-crown prince and minister of the interior, Mohammed bin Nayef, was an exception: He enjoyed deep ties to the American intelligence apparatus under President Obama and had never needed a lobbyist. This spring, however, Trump invited Nayef's chief rival -- Mohammed bin Salman, the deputy crown prince and the king's son -- to a formal White House lunch. The lunch sent ripples through Riyadh. Did Trump favor Salman? Accidentally or on purpose, Trump had just waded into Saudi Arabia's treacherous succession politics. Nayef found himself in need of guidance.

In May, S.P.G. signed a contract to provide ''congressional and executive branch brand engagement'' to the Saudi Ministry of the Interior -- Nayef's domain. Stryk did not want to reveal much about his work for the Saudis, but lobbying records show that the fee was $5.4 million, payable up front.

That was the other thing about foreign lobbying: It paid even better than corporate lobbying. Inevitably, Stryk had competition.

In keeping with Trump's America First campaign pledge, Barry Bennett once told reporters that Avenue would not work for foreign governments. Foreign politicians were another matter. By March, Bennett was sitting in the lobby of the Trump International Hotel with an Albanian party leader named Lulzim Basha.

Basha was the young chairman of the Democratic Party of Albania, the country's conservative party, which was looking to unseat the ruling Socialist Party in elections scheduled for June. Basha borrowed liberally from Trump's playbook; he had attacked the Socialists for being in bed with crime syndicates and, simultaneously, with George Soros, whose foundation was active in Albania. His slogan was ''Make Albania Great Again.'' Now, according to Bennett, Basha wanted help beating the Socialists in June -- and who better to advise him than a couple of Trump-campaign veterans? Bennett told me that it was a cordial meeting and that he later sent Basha a proposed contract. ''I told him we'd love to be his political consultant,'' Bennett said. (Through a representative, Basha declined to comment.)

Through an intermediary, the Albanian Democrats also reached out to Ballard, who was making his own push into foreign lobbying. He had brought on board a couple of partners with experience in Eastern Europe and Latin America, including a former Democratic congressman and a former ambassador. ''They called me,'' Ballard said of Basha's party. ''I wouldn't know Albania in an atlas.'' Ballard told them he couldn't help them. He was already working with the Albanian Socialists.

When a friend referred the Socialists to him, Ballard told me, he had two questions. ''I asked: 'Is it a democracy?' Yes. 'Are they an ally of the U.S.?' Yes.'' The Socialists had a story that was becoming increasingly familiar in Washington. After Trump won, most of the American diplomats their government had worked with seemed to vanish, and no one replaced them. One Albanian official, who asked not to be identified by name, told me his government felt that ''we had to increase our presence in Washington.'' I asked him how his government picked Ballard. ''The internet makes it easy,'' he told me. ''You just Google.''

But as companies and countries vied for Trump's ear over the spring, the new Trump lobbyists found themselves competing with one another as much as with the established Washington firms. Ballard, for example, had explored working for members of the Venezuelan opposition. (''I'm no world-peace guy,'' he told me, ''but I think I can help a little bit.'') Lewan­owski's firm, meanwhile, was pitching Citgo, the American subsidiary of Venezuela's state-owned oil company. (Avenue eventually signed Citgo, and in August the Trump administration would partly exempt the company from a new round of sanctions on the Venezuelan government.) Ballard was also working out a $1.5 million contract with Turkey -- which put him up against Brad Gerstman, Trump's old New York guy. Gerstman's firm, Gotham Government Relations, had signed up a company linked to Fethullah Gulen, the Pennsylvania-based Muslim cleric whom the Turkish government blames for fomenting last year's failed coup.

Not many lobbyists wanted to represent the Gulenists, partly because Trump appeared to have already picked a side. When President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey won a widely disputed referendum in April granting himself expanded powers, Trump called to congratulate him. When Erdogan visited the White House some weeks later, Trump praised the bravery of Turkish soldiers and talked about beating ISIS together.

I watched Erdogan and Trump's joint news conference on TV with Gerst­an, who had been hired to spread the word about Erdogan's worldwide oppression of Gulenists. When Erdogan referred to the Gulen ''terrorist organization,'' you could see Trump purse his lips during the translation, then nod a few times. It wasn't totally clear what the president was nodding about. Gerstman remained hopeful. ''Our view is that six months from now, everything is going to look different,'' he told me. ''It's fluid. It's dynamic.'' He looked thoughtful. ''One thing we know about President Trump is he's not afraid to change.''

One afternoon in late April, Jolly, Stryk's marquee Trumpworld hire, called me out of the blue. He was leaving S.P.G., he said. He told me he had grown uncomfortable with the firm's auditions for foreign clients, so he was going back to his own political-consulting business.

Stryk was having his own qualms. Lewandowski had beaten him on some pitches, Stryk was told by prospective clients, by promising that he could get Trump on the phone -- a promise Stryk felt he could not make. ''We don't sell access to Trump,'' he told me. ''I don't know Donald Trump.'' He was increasingly impatient with the notion that he was simply providing entree to the new administration. He was in negotiations to acquire a small design and branding firm. He saw S.P.G. evolving into something bigger and more stable, a full-service ''advisory'' company that could compete with the most sophisticated shops on K Street -- and beyond. Stryk saw Lewandowski's firm, and some of the others associated with the new administration, as short-term plays. They could sell access or surf the disruption, but he aimed to outlast it. ''Do they have business outside of this Trump phenomenon?'' Stryk mused. ''The talk around town is, how long does this last before the business goes back to the establishment?''

Among the new arrivals, Ballard, at least, was doing pretty well. After only a few months in Washington, he had signed up more than 30 clients: energy companies, insurers, Amazon, American Airlines. The new Washington office would soon be on track to make $15 million in 2017, almost as much as his firm reported making in Florida last year. Ballard, unlike some of his competitors, was at ease in the swamp. He didn't want to beat the Washington establishment; he was here to join it. ''There's no big firm that should worry about us,'' Ballard told me. ''We augment other people, or they augment us. The Trump guys are not going to take over the town.''

If anything, the Trump guys were learning the downsides of proximity to the president. By spring, the Justice Department had appointed a special counsel to probe Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election, an investigation that would quickly reach into the president's inner circle. The various White House factions seemed to spend as much time planting negative press on one another as they did figuring out what the president should do. When the White House got involved in big legislative battles, like the Obamacare repeal effort, it tended to hurt, not help.

Proximity was proving an especially mixed blessing for Lewandowski. A stream of news stories had detailed promises he was supposedly making to clients, which he mostly denied -- not just phone calls with Trump but also visits with White House officials and even access to Trump's Twitter account. In late April, Politico reported that Lewan­owski and Bennett also owned another, separate company called Washington East West Political Strategies. This new firm, a vehicle for overseas consulting, had circulated at least one written proposal promising to arrange meetings with Trump and other administration officials, seeming to undercut Lewandowski's earlier denials. I later obtained a copy of the proposal, which named the potential client: Edi Rama, Albania's Socialist prime minister. The new firm -- or as Bennett later explained, a business associate in Europe, acting without authorization -- had pitched opposing candidates in the same campaign.

Official Washington professed itself to be aghast at Lewandowski, who did not bother to couch his sales pitches in the Beltway's customary euphemisms: He was what they pretended not to be. Ethics watchdogs cast him as living proof of the hollowness of Trump's campaign promise to ''drain the swamp.'' Lewandowski disagreed. In his view, the swamp was the sprawling, unresponsive bureaucracy, not the people you paid to help you get your phone calls returned. Still, friends of Lewandowski's told me that White House officials had advised him to keep a lower profile.

By that point, it was hard to know exactly how well Avenue was doing. As the summer recess drew near, the firm had disclosed fewer than 10 lobbying clients. Among them were a San Diego-based environmental consulting firm and an Ohio payday lender -- valuable clients, but not quite blue-chip. For every Whirlpool that asked Lewandowski for help, his rivals told me, there was another big company that decided he was too radioactive. Lockheed never actually signed a contract with Avenue; when news leaked of Lewandowski's role in advising it on Trump, a Lockheed spokesman issued a carefully worded statement that ''Lockheed has not retained Lewandowski, or his lobbying firm.'' In the same way that most big chief executives turned up their noses at Trump during the campaign but now hoped he would deliver tax reform and sweeping deregulation, they wanted Lewandowski's help without being too closely associated with him.

Then, too, Lewandowski's clout wasn't always what he promised. Puerto Rico's government, for example, hired Avenue to help ease the island's fiscal crisis. But the job pitted Lewandow­ki against a coalition of hedge funds that owned much of Puerto Rico's debt, and whose former lobbyist Trump had installed on his National Economic Council. The swamp's old guard prevailed: In late April, as Puerto Rican officials were begging Congress for more federal funding, Trump publicly dismissed their cause in his trademark fashion. ''Democrats are trying to bail out insurance companies from disastrous #ObamaCare, and Puerto Rico with your tax dollars,'' Trump tweeted. ''Sad!''

In a sense, Lewandowski's biggest problem was the president himself. Lewandowski had bet that the White House would be the center of energy and action in Trump's Washington, but instead the Trump administration was being swallowed by its own chaos. Divided by factions and backbiting, unable to wield full control of the bureaucracy or execute on many of its own ambitions, the administration was in danger of becoming a minor player in the policy debates of the day. Many companies were coming to the conclusion that on complex issues like tax reform, their energies were better directed at lawmakers on Capitol Hill -- and their money better spent at the traditional lobbying firms stocked with ex-lawmakers and their former aides.

Moreover, despite Trump's campaign pledges, many of the agencies he now oversaw had proved more than friendly to the legions of longtime Beltway lobbyists working for the energy, telecommunications and other industries. In many cases, Trump had hired them outright: By the summer, he had appointed more than 100 lobbyists to jobs in the Environmental Protection Agency, the Interior Department, the Federal Communications Commission and elsewhere. Their old clients didn't need much help from the new Trump guys on K Street. They already knew exactly whom to call.

Perhaps that's why the traditional lobbying shops were doing just fine. As for protecting clients from Trump's Twitter howitzer -- well, that had turned out to be easier than it looked, several lobbyists told me: Just show up in person, promise the president you'll create some jobs and publicly give him the credit. ''You make it about Trump and you link it to jobs, and you could be Russia or China and he will support you,'' one told me. ''It is that unsophisticated.''

Lewandowski's office, when I finally got to see it, turned out to be a cramped room with scuffed yellow walls. His desk held a couple of commemorative Trump pens and a warm can of Monster energy drink. A new whiteboard, still in its wrapping, leaned against one wall; a carry-on suitcase leaned against another. I could see the White House, but only if I leaned over his desk and craned my neck.

''There it is,'' Lewandowski said, a little halfheartedly, pointing out the window. His day had not gotten off to a great start. That morning, Puerto Rico had filed for a territorial version of bankruptcy. A prominent watchdog group had sent a letter to the Justice Department asking officials there to investigate why Lewandowski had never registered under the Foreign Agents Registration Act, a World War II-era law that imposes stringent disclosure requirements on Americans representing foreign governments in Washington. (Though Bennett and other Avenue employees had registered as lobbyists, Lewandowski insisted that most of his business was advising clients on strategy, not setting up meetings or contacting officials on their behalf, the kind of work that requires you to register.) Politico had struck again, revealing Avenue's Citgo contract. Technically, the United States-based company was owned by the left-wing government of Venezuela, whose vice president the Trump administration had accused of drug trafficking.

Lewandowski told me he didn't work directly for foreign governments, notwithstanding the stories and documents. Not that he wouldn't be good at it -- you know, if he wanted to. ''I don't work for foreign governments, but if I were a foreign government, and I wanted to hire people who understood how to get to the president, there are a small number of people I would think of,'' Lewan­owski said. As he spoke, he seemed to recover his familiar brio. ''The establishment is so afraid of President Trump they will do anything. Which includes hiring individuals who have purported to be tied to the White House who really aren't.''

The next day, Lewandowski announced he was quitting Avenue. In a lengthy interview with Bloomberg, he explained that Bennett and their employees had been using his name to drum up business he didn't want, exposing him to criticism and sullying his reputation. He insisted he had never asked Trump for anything. ''People want to see me fail,'' Lewandowski grumbled.

''I feel bad for Corey,'' Bennett told me when I went to see him the following week. ''He didn't do anything wrong. But he's a lightning rod.'' Bob Dole, he pointed out, had just signed a $500,000 contract for work on behalf of the Democratic Republic of Congo, a violence-racked country run by a kleptocratic strongman. But no one in Washington gave Bob Dole a hard time.

''He thought he could go in'' -- into the White House -- ''during the second wave,'' Bennett said of Lewandowski. K Street was just a way station for him, Bennett suggested, while he waited for the only job he truly wanted -- the one he could picture when he gazed out his window, down Pennsylvania Avenue. ''Looking back on it, he probably should never have owned a chunk of a lobbying firm. In the media's mind, every client we had was Corey's client.'' But even with Lewandowski gone, Bennett said, there was plenty of work. ''All of K Street is doing well right now,'' he said. ''Chaos is good for everyone's business.''

Lewandowski, I soon learned, hadn't really left the swamp. He had merely receded into the nebulous ranks of Washington's unregistered lobbyists. In July, he founded a new firm, Lewandowski Strategic Advisors. He offered clients ''strategic advice and counsel,'' according to a copy of one contract I obtained, and had picked up at least one client from Avenue, the Ohio payday lender. He was back on TV more and more, energetically defending Trump and plumping for various private interests. At one point, I got a tip that he had been spotted in Taipei, Taiwan. He wouldn't tell me what he was doing there, or for whom he was working -- ''I'm just a private citizen,'' he texted -- but weeks later, he tweeted about the Trump administration's decision to approve a $1.42 billion arms sale to the country. He hadn't yet landed that White House job, but he was in the West Wing often, and he had a new Twitter avatar: a picture of himself standing on the stairs to Air Force One. Newt Gingrich's publisher had bought Lewandowski's Trump book, and by the end of the summer, he had added yet another gig, joining Trump's official super PAC, American First Action. Lewandowski had absorbed the swamp's most essential trait: adaptability.

Not long ago, Stryk opened a proper Washington office, right in Georgetown, a stone's throw from the Four Seasons. The new space was undecorated and unmarked, and there wasn't much there yet but a couple of laptops. But Stryk was buoyant. He was about to sign two more big foreign lobbying clients, the governments of Afghanistan and Kenya, along with a pharmaceutical firm. Saudi Arabia had canceled its S.P.G. contract after Stryk's client, the crown prince, was deposed in a palace reshuffle, and New Zealand's foreign ministry had decided that its embassy no longer needed Stryk's services. But in Stryk's view, these were just hiccups. Competitors around town -- big firms that had never given him the time of day -- were starting to ask around about S.P.G., wondering who they were and how they were getting so much business.

In about a month, Trump's ham-handed defense of white nationalists and white supremacists rallying in Charlottesville would prompt most of the chief executives serving on White House advisory councils to quit in protest. It would cost the chief executives something, losing their face time with this impressionable, transactional president -- and their loss would be K Street's gain. Those same companies would now just rely more on their lobbyists, or on the trade associations they belonged to, to drive their agendas.

But as we sat down in his new conference room, Stryk was already looking beyond the Beltway. He saw Trump's disruption spreading beyond Washington, to foreign capitals and overseas markets. The chaos in Trump's government was creating a vacuum abroad, one that entrepreneurs like Stryk could fill with deal-making and private diplomacy. ''I want to grow a business that's 200 million a year,'' Stryk told me. ''You're not going to get that arranging dinners in Washington.''

The new contracts with Afghanistan and Kenya, Stryk explained, were prototypes for the kind of business he wanted to do, an escape from the washing machine. The Afghans and the Kenyans didn't just want help with the Trump administration. They wanted help with everything: attracting American investment, troubleshooting problems in other foreign capitals, finding companies that could build them roads or manage their health care records.

So recently, Stryk had begun pitching investors on a new venture: a $5 billion private-equity fund that would specialize in infrastructure and procurement. One side of the business, the lobbying, would identify government customers abroad; the other side would invest in companies that could deliver what those governments needed. Secure voting systems, border-security hardware -- the opportunities were limitless. ''It is our job, as conservatives and capitalists, to take the chaos and do with it what we can,'' Stryk said. ''Our goal is to take an environment that was created by the president and use it to --'' He paused for a second, thinking. ''To do some good.''

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Nicholas Confessore is a political investigative reporter for The Times and a writer at large for the magazine. He last wrote about the offshore financial system.

(MM32);  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SAM KAPLAN; DELCAN & COMPANY; PROP STYLIST: GOZDE EKER CARD) (MM35; MM36; MM39) DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS BY SAM KAPLAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM32; MM35; MM36; MM39) 

Document NYTF000020170903ed9300071



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  May Be on Its Heels, but U.S. Soldiers Say It's Fighting to the Death

By HELENE COOPER 
1,003 words
3 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ABOARD THE U.S.S. NIMITZ, in the Persian Gulf -- A few days ago, Capt. Mike Spencer of the Marines rocketed off the flight deck of an aircraft carrier in his F-18 to provide air support for Iraqi troops advancing on the dusty city of Tal Afar, one of the Islamic State's last strongholds.

A busy six hours followed in the skies over Iraq. As Islamic State fighters fired on Iraqi forces from a building, Captain Spencer dropped precision-guided munitions on them, destroying the structure and presumably killing the men inside. A short while later, he was ordered to take out another Islamic State fighting position nearby. He did so, and then eliminated another.

When he ran out of bombs, Captain Spencer headed back to the Nimitz.

The Risk board that is the map of Iraq may show almost certain defeat for the Islamic State as its territory continues to shrink, but American officials say the pace of the fight is not slowing. The aircraft carrier Nimitz, where Captain Spencer commands a Marine squadron, is launching as many sorties and strikes against Islamic State targets in Iraq and Syria as other American aircraft carriers were doing three years ago, after President Barack Obama opened the bombing campaign.

The militants have lost a long list of cities and towns in Iraq -- Baquba, Abu Ghraib, Falluja, Ramadi, Tikrit, Mosul and, now, Tal Afar, which the Iraqi prime minister declared liberated on Thursday -- and are under attack from all sides in a desperate fight over Raqqa, their self-proclaimed capital in Syria. But one would never know it from the way the extremists have continued to fight, American soldiers and Marines say.

''We definitely have the offensive,'' Captain Spencer said. But, he added, ''they have resigned themselves that they're going to fight to the bitter end, and they are going to take as many of us with them as possible.''

From Raqqa to Mosul to Nangarhar Province in Afghanistan, the presumed victors in the war against the Islamic State paint a picture of an insurgency that has not yet seemed to realize that it is on its heels. The Iraqi prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, on Thursday cast the fight in stark terms. ''Wherever you are, we are coming for liberation, and you have no option but to surrender or die,'' he said.

While small numbers of fighters are surrendering, with some fleeing to Turkey, many more are dying. Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, the American commander of the war effort against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, said that the final days of combat this summer in Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, resembled the worst fighting he had witnessed ''in 35 years.''

''They're fighting like a conventional army fights,'' said Maj. Jarrod A. Devore, another Marine fighter pilot stationed on the Nimitz.

He and other pilots said that the Islamic State fighters were behaving far differently than the Qaeda or Taliban fighters of recent insurgencies. Islamic State fighters, they say, are far slower to abandon entrenched fighting positions. They stay in the territory they have taken until they are, literally, blown out.

In a reflection of that tenacity, some Islamic State fighters in Mosul who refused to surrender were buried under rubble by Iraqi security forces in bulldozers, General Townsend said.

Once American-backed troops move on, the militants often return, no matter how intense the bombing campaign had been. The case of what is known as the Mother of All Bombs illustrates the militants' determination.

On April 13, Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., the American commander of the war effort in Afghanistan, ordered forces to drop the huge weapon, the most powerful conventional bomb in the American arsenal, on an Islamic State cave complex in the Achin district of Nangarhar, a remote area of eastern Afghanistan. The weapon is so large that it had to be dropped from the back of a cargo plane -- a regular bomber or fighter could not handle it.

The strike was the first combat use of what is formally named the GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast. It remains unclear how many Islamic State fighters were killed in the bombing, but Afghan soldiers of the 201st Corps, stationed nearby at Tactical Base Gamberi, celebrated the bombing and asked American troops stationed with them why the United States could not drop more such bombs.

The local Afghan troops did not want to take on the fierce Islamic State fighters themselves, American advisers at Gamberi said. In March, the 201st Corps had lost some 16 men in one night in a fight against the Islamic State. ''They did not have the appetite to go into southern Nangarhar and fight Daesh,'' said Maj. Richard Anderson, an American operations adviser to the 201st Corps, using an Arabic acronym for the Islamic State.

The Afghan soldiers' happiness at the dropping of the bomb soon changed to annoyance when the American advisers told them that they would have to go into the province and ''hold'' areas to prevent Islamic State fighters from coming back. At first, the Afghans balked.

''We kept telling them, there is no U.S. 'hold,''' Major Anderson said in an Aug. 21 interview at Gamberi. ''They didn't understand that. They said: 'You dropped the MOAB. Why don't you just drop another MOAB?'''

Eventually, the Afghan soldiers deployed into some of the areas in Nangarhar Province that had been cleared by American and Afghan Special Operations forces.

The fighting is still intense. The tunnel complex where the giant bomb was dropped has not remained clear of Islamic State fighters. While the bomb did initially clear the area of Islamic State fighters, many have returned.

''They're already proving that they're willing to go back into the area where the MOAB dropped,'' Major Anderson said. ''They're there today.''

Document NYTF000020170903ed930005g



Foreign Desk; SECTA
In a City of Ruins, the Philippines' Fierce Battle With  ISIS  Rages On

By BEN C. SOLOMON and FELIPE VILLAMOR 
1,068 words
2 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MARAWI, Philippines -- The houses still standing after more than three months of fierce urban combat in Marawi are barely holding on -- pocked with bullet holes on the outside and blackened by fire from within.

''I really can't say when we will be able to finish this,'' said Brig. Gen. Melquiades Ordiales, with the Philippine Marines. A cackle of small-arms fire and the thuds of mortar shell explosions could be heard in the distance as soldiers targeted another pocket of militant fighters.

Rubble and debris had been swept from the street around him, making room for a large group of journalists, including three from The New York Times, who were allowed to visit a newly recaptured part of the city this week.

With the battle now past the 100-day mark, it was the first time in months that the military had allowed the press in. And though the tour was tightly choreographed, there was no hiding either the profound destruction from airstrikes and artillery barrages, or the fact that the fighting remains intense. Just Thursday, three soldiers were reported killed, and 52 more were injured.

Marawi and the surrounding area, on the southern island of Mindanao, was once home to 200,000 people, the biggest Muslim-majority city in the Philippines. It is now a mostly emptied-out field of wreckage, contested by a dwindling group of Islamist militants who claim loyalty to the Islamic State, and by the government of President Rodrigo Duterte, who has vowed to root them out no matter the cost.

That cost has been grim, particularly for the civilians who had already felt like a mistreated minority and have now been displaced by the battle. Their frustration is rising.

According to the Red Cross, 300,000 people from the city and surrounding area have fled the fight, many taking up residence in camps just six miles away. Cramped inside hot tents with donated bedsheets to separate their rooms, most people here desperately want to return home but are coming to grips with the fact that they are stuck.

''They told us to pack for only three days,'' said Esnimeh Dago, 22. She was a makeup artist in Marawi and fled with her mother, grandmother and 1-year-old son on the first day of the militants' assault.

''The government is giving us food and some support, but we want to go back to our jobs,'' she said. ''Now it looks like there is nothing to go back to.''

This area has been a wellspring for resistance to the Philippine government for a long time -- by insurgent movements, Islamist groups, criminal gangs, sometimes all three together.

The militants who seized Marawi in May have pledged loyalty to the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. At the battle's start, there were thought to be about 600 fighters, led by the Maute brothers and their gang along with Isnilon Hapilon, the longtime leader of the militant group Abu Sayyaf and now the head of the Islamic State branch in the Philippines.

The attraction of the ISIS brand is obvious: a boost to recruiting and a fearsome reputation to graft onto their own. But in recent months, counterterrorism experts have acknowledged that real aid from the Islamic State's central command -- mostly financial, though including a few dozen foreign fighters -- has strengthened the local group.

Now, the government contends that only a few dozen militants are alive in the city. But the battle's end does not seem near, and the fact that the fighters have held on so long is troubling to many.

''I would guess that even the insurgents are surprised at how long this has gone on,'' said Zachary M. Abuza, a professor at the National War College in Washington who specializes in Southeast Asian security issues.

The army says at least 133 troops, 617 militants and 45 civilians have been killed in the hostilities. At least 1,728 people have been rescued after either being taken hostage or being trapped in the firefight.

The military said last week that it had cleared Marawi's grand mosque, which the militants had used as a headquarters and where they were initially believed to have taken dozens of hostages.

Afterward, Mr. Duterte visited to try to give a boost to his troops here. He put on a flak jacket and fired a sniper rifle in the militants' direction, again emphasizing his tough-guy image.

But for Camalia Baunto, whose entire clan voted last year for Mr. Duterte with his promise to bring peace and stability in the often violent region of Mindanao, the president's war to flatten Marawi has been a rude awakening.

Her husband, Nixon, 41, was trapped in the ruined city. She and their six children lost contact with him, apparently after his mobile phone died. When soldiers finally got to the family's house, they said it was empty.

''It's so painful because the military could have rescued him earlier,'' Ms. Baunto said, sobbing as her youngest child, Shayka, 3, hugged her. ''We voted for the president! Please, please, help us bring out my husband alive. We are just ordinary people.''

Within the city, the army maintains that the militants have been pinned down to a few square blocks. But commanders acknowledge that the fighters are well supplied with weapons and food. And the regional branch of the Islamic State here will certainly see their holdout as a propaganda coup.

Mr. Abuza, at the National War College, called the siege a ''strategic victory'' for the militants. ''After all of this, Southeast Asia is all of a sudden an important player in the ISIS world.''

Philippine soldiers on patrol this week in a part of Marawi that was recently seized from militants loyal to the Islamic State. Most of the city's Muslim-majority population of 200,000 has fled.; Some structures on the banks of a river in Marawi have been reduced to rubble. Fighting remains intense after over three months.; From left: An armored convoy; soldiers in a house seized from militants; and Camalia Baunto and her children in the home of relatives in Iligan City. Her husband, Nixon, is missing in Marawi. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JES AZNAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170902ed920004q



Washington; SECT
A Long-Pursued  ISIS  Preacher Is Finally Charged in New York

By ADAM GOLDMAN and SCOTT SHANE; Jim McKinley contributed reporting from New York. 
1,440 words
2 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- For two decades, Abdullah el-Faisal has preached jihad, on the streets and online, first promoting the grim theology of Al Qaeda and then endorsing the Islamic State. Imprisoned in England and later deported from Kenya to his native Jamaica, he has in recent years kept up his internet proselytizing from his home near Kingston. His influence has turned up repeatedly in major terrorism cases.

''Faisal was ISIS before there was ISIS,'' said Jesse Morton, a reformed American jihadist who worked closely with Mr. Faisal for years.

Now his long run may have come to an end. A week ago, Jamaican authorities arrested Mr. Faisal in Kingston, the Jamaican capital, after he was indicted in New York on charges that he assisted an undercover officer who pretended to be trying to join ISIS in Syria. New York police have requested his extradition to the United States.

The case is unusual because it was pursued not by the F.B.I. but by the New York Police Department, even though it was an international terrorism case with no direct connection to New York. One factor in the reluctance of federal prosecutors to build a case is what former and current law enforcement officials said were Mr. Faisal's helpful ties to a foreign government -- a complicating factor in any prosecution.

The charges against Mr. Faisal have also raised concerns among F.B.I. agents about whether federal prosecutors have lost their appetite to pursue overseas terrorists because Attorney General Jeff Sessions has said they should not be tried in civilian courts.

Either way, Mr. Faisal's arrest is a significant development because of his influence on would-be recruits to the Islamic State and other terrorist groups.

''Sheikh Faisal has dedicated his life to terror recruitment,'' Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus R. Vance, Jr., said late last month in announcing the charges. ''Through his lectures, website and videos, he incites untold numbers of people around the world to take up the cause of jihad.''

According to the New York indictment, Mr. Faisal exchanged emails and text messages in late 2016 with an undercover officer with the New York Police Department who was posing as an aspiring jihadist with medical training. The cleric said he would help the undercover officer join the Islamic State and directed him to travel with a man from the United Kingdom to Turkey for a ''holiday.''

He warned the undercover agent to be careful with his communications, and recommended an encrypted chat service. In January 2017, Mr. Faisal gave the undercover officer the name and phone number of someone who could make the connection with the Islamic State. The two later made contact, and the ISIS contact told the undercover officer that ''now is the time to come...we need people in the medical field.''

John J. Miller, the New York Police Department's deputy commissioner of intelligence and counterterrorism, said both the F.B.I. and Justice Department were aware of the case, believed to be the N.Y.P.D.'s first international terrorism prosecution. Neither raised objections.

Mr. Miller declined to comment on whether Mr. Faisal had ties to other governments. The F.B.I. also declined to discuss Mr. Faisal.

In the last decade, Mr. Faisal's name has surfaced repeatedly in terrorism cases. He was close to one of the suicide bombers in the 2005 London bombings that killed 52 people. Najibullah Zazi, who was convicted of trying to blow up the New York City subways in 2009 as part of an Al Qaeda plot, listened to his sermons condoning suicide bombings. His influence has been seen in an outsized flow of ISIS recruits from Trinidad and Tobago.

His name has been linked to three Islamic State terrorism prosecutions in New York, Arizona and Philadelphia, where he was in touch with a mother of three who was eventually arrested for trying to join the Islamic State. F.B.I. agents found CDs of Mr. Faisal's lectures in the apartment of two men killed in Texas in 2015 when they attacked an exhibition of cartoons depicting the Prophet Muhammad.

Most recently, the F.B.I. on Monday arrested a young man named Parveg Ahmed, 22, of Queens, and charged him with attempting to travel to Syria to fight for the Islamic State. An F.B.I. search of his computer revealed that he had been listening to lectures by Mr. Faisal, including one entitled: ''The 9 Reasons Why the Kuffar Hate the Believers.'' Kuffar is a derogatory term for non-Muslims.

According to Mr. Morton, Mr. Faisal had a considerable following in Jamaica, where he once debated a bishop on a television show called ''Religious Hardtalk.'' A spokeswoman for Jamaica's Ministry of National Security, Akierah Binns, declined to comment on the extradition proceedings.

Mr. Faisal, 53, was born Trevor William Forrest in Jamaica and took his Muslim name after converting to Islam as a teenager. He studied in Saudi Arabia and first came to public attention while working in London as an imam, known as Sheikh Faisal, after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. British press reports said that on cassette tapes distributed in London shops at the time, he urged young Muslim men to train for jihad.

''Is it sensible for you to be a soldier and you don't know how to shoot a Kalashnikov?'' he said on one cassette. He was convicted of encouraging the murder of Jews, Hindus and Americans and served four years. He settled in Kenya, where the government deported him to Jamaica in 2010.

Since then he has preached to a global audience via his website and the online chat service Paltalk. Mr. Morton, who in 2007 co-founded a radical site called Revolution Muslim, said he and his associates took their guidance on Islam from Mr. Faisal, whom he consulted several times a week.

''We'd listen to his lectures and write him with questions,'' said Mr. Morton, who was imprisoned from 2011 to 2015, abandoned his radical views and now works against radicalization. He said that among English-speaking Muslims attracted to the jihadist cause, Mr. Faisal probably ranked second in influence only to Anwar al-Awlaki, the American imam who joined Al Qaeda in Yemen and was killed in a drone strike in 2011.

''He was always very, very radical,'' Mr. Morton said of Mr. Faisal. ''He was quick to excommunicate everybody.'' His notion of Islam matched the teachings of the Islamic State, which Mr. Faisal supported wholeheartedly, Mr. Morton said.

Mr. Faisal's public statements were an eccentric mix of vitriolic and bizarre. ln a February 2016 lecture, he declared that under sharia, or Islamic law, ''you have to kill all the homosexuals. I cannot change Islam to please and appease the infidels.'' Last September, he declared that ''infidels'' were poisoning holy water from Mecca to give Muslims cancer.

On a website that posts notes and audio from Mr. Faisal's lectures, the latest addition is dated Aug. 16, days before Jamaican security officers took him into custody and searched his home. It warns Muslims in the West about the pernicious influence of non-Muslims.

''Going to their Christmas parties, sending Christmas cards or even saying 'Merry Christmas' is haram,'' or forbidden by Islamic law, Mr. Faisal declared, ''and makes a Muslim apostate from Islam.''

An overriding obstacle, however, is Mr. Sessions' view -- shared by President Trump -- that suspected terrorists should go to the military prison at Guantáamo Bay in Cuba and not to criminal court in the United States. The officials suggested there is currently little enthusiasm in top federal law enforcement circles to arrest overseas terrorists.

At least one major case has stalled, frustrating F.B.I. agents who had hoped to bring to an Al Qaeda suspect held in Yemen to face prosecution in New York. Mr. Sessions did sign off on the extradition of a terrorism suspect held in Spain. But officials say that he had little choice in that case but to approve the prosecution, because Spain would not have turned over the suspect if he were to be sent to Guantáamo.

In an interview on Friday, Mr. Vance said it made sense to pursue the terrorism charges in state court.

''We should be supportive and that's what we are doing here,'' he added. ''There were no complications that prevented us from going forward.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170902ed920003y



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Convoy's Ill-Fated Desert Crossing Comes to Symbolize Stalled Campaign

By ROD NORDLAND; An employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Damascus, Syria. 
1,447 words
2 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- The Islamic State militant, his AK-47 cradled between his legs, crouched next to the driver in the front of the bus, near a placard in the windshield that read B-9, which stood for bus No. 9 out of 17. The flash of a camera in the early dawn light showed him to be smiling broadly.

How his fortunes have fallen since the photo was taken on Monday, when it looked like the convoy of buses carrying more than 300 retreating fighters was safely on the road to territory controlled by the Islamic State.

Now the buses are trapped in the Syrian desert with nowhere to go, chased at every turn by American bombers determined not to let them rejoin the fight.

As the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, has lost city after city in Iraq and struggles to hold on to territory in Syria, the stranded buses have become a striking metaphor for the militants' stalled campaign.

This week, the Islamic State lost Tal Afar, one of the last cities it controlled in Iraq, less than two months after being expelled from Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city. In Syria, the once formidable caliphate is in danger of losing Raqqa, its self-styled capital, to American-backed forces there.

And it has likewise been powerless to save the convoy, sending fighters and fuel trucks into the desert only to have them destroyed by American forces.

Col. Ryan Dillon, the spokesman for the American-led coalition in Syria and Iraq, said recent airstrikes had killed 50 ISIS fighters and destroyed 20 vehicles sent to rescue the convoy, including fuel trucks apparently sent to refuel the air-conditioned buses.

''We have continued to conduct strikes,'' Colonel Dillon said Friday from Baghdad. ''We will continue to do that. If they want to continue to spend resources and put themselves out there, we will continue to strike them.''

The standoff in the desert started with a complicated deal between the Islamic State, Lebanon and the Iranian-back Lebanese militia Hezbollah. ISIS, cornered in territory it once controlled along the Lebanese border, agreed to turn over the bodies of nine Lebanese soldiers captured in 2014 in exchange for safe passage across Syria for 308 fighters and 330 of their family members.

The 17 buses and 11 ambulances were to travel 300 miles to reach the ISIS stronghold of Deir al-Zour Province in eastern Syria by the next day.

The Americans and the Iraqis were incensed. The Americans bombed the road and destroyed a bridge ahead of the convoy, blocking its eastward progress 100 miles from its destination. The presence of noncombatants is all that has stopped the United States from obliterating the convoy.

That the deal fell apart is a reflection of how complex the Syrian battlefield has become, with its dozens of factions and shifting alliances, but it is also an indication of how little capital the Islamic State has left to spend with any of the other players on that field.

It still controls significant territory in Iraq and Syria, and remains a force to be reckoned with, carrying out deadly attacks on both sides of the border and inspiring followers abroad.

But the convoy deal illustrates its increasing isolation. Syria has been so embarrassed by it that its official media have made no mention of it. One otherwise pro-government official in Damascus lamented that Syria had become a sewer through which every dirty thing flowed.

Iran, which also had a stake in the deal, was also silent.

Iraq, which had been expected to act as a guarantor for the convoy at the request of Iran, instead denounced it, even though Iraqi allies had brokered the deal. The Islamic State's own official media, faced with a humiliating mess, had nothing to say, according to the SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors jihadi groups.

It was not the first time ISIS had cut a deal in Syria, including with the American-backed Syrian Democratic Forces.

''The Syrian government does this fairly often,'' said Robert S. Ford, the former American ambassador to Syria. ''They have moved a lot of rebel fighters through these truce agreements, into Idlib, for instance, or Deir al-Zour. They're just kicking the can down the road, figuring there may be other ways to reduce Idlib or Deir al-Zour later.''

But deals between factions that are trying to kill one another depend not so much on good will as on a belief that keeping their word now will mean that future deals will be honored. It also assumes that the other side will have something to offer in the future.

The Islamic State faction, seemingly on its heels, held a weak hand. Mostly all it had to trade were some dead bodies.

When Lebanese Army and Hezbollah militiamen, along with the Syrian Army forces, surrounded them on the border near Arsal, Lebanon, they negotiated their freedom and safe passage to the town of Abu Kamal, on the eastern Syrian border with Iraq.

By the time the convoy was on the road across the Syrian desert toward Abu Kamal, the American Air Force had been alerted. ''So we decided to go look for these buses and we found them,'' said Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, the American coalition commander. ''And so we watched, and when ISIS came out to link up with them, we started striking ISIS. And again, we haven't struck the convoy, but we have struck every ISIS fighter and/or vehicle that has tried to approach that convoy, and will continue to do that.''

Even before the Americans struck though, the ISIS convoy ground to a halt, at a place called Humaimah, the last town before Deir al-Zour Province, and Islamic State territory. They were being escorted by Hezbollah, the Lebanese militia that is fighting for President Bashar al-Assad in Syria. Hezbollah is backed by Iran, which has both trainers and fighters in the country as well.

According to accounts from both the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a London-based group that monitors events in Syria, and from Syrian officials, Iran wanted Hezbollah to press ISIS to turn over the body of a commander of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, Mohsen Hagigi, who was close to the Quds Force commander, Qassem Suleimani.

ISIS confederates delivered the body to Hezbollah on Wednesday, and then American warplanes cratered the road in front of them.

Over the next two days, the convoy headed back west and then north. But it was turned back, apparently because of a Syrian Army offensive against other ISIS units near the town of Sukhna.

On Friday, it was on the move again and finally reached a position near Sukhna, according to both Syrian and coalition sources.

Along the way, the 11 Red Crescent ambulances separated from the convoy. Pro-Hezbollah news agencies said the 26 wounded on the ambulances had been taken east to Deir al-Zour.

Colonel Dillon said American aircraft tracked the ambulances returning to western Syria, but he did not know ''if there were wounded in those ambulances, or they were just transporting.''

Rami Abdul Rahman, the founder of the Syrian Observatory who is critical of all sides in the conflict, said the airstrikes to block the convoy were not just about keeping more fighters from joining the battle in the east, where the coalition is more active. When the coalition launched its offensive on Raqqa two months ago, the Syrian Democratic Forces made a similar deal with ISIS, to allow militants to flee Deir al-Zour.

''Russia opposed the deal and stated that it would target any convoy leaving Raqqa,'' Mr. Rahman said. ''Therefore, the international coalition and S.D.F. have been fighting ISIS for over three months now, which resulted in the killing of hundreds of S.D.F. fighters, more than 800 civilians and the destruction of the city due to constant airstrikes. Since Russia obstructed that deal, the U.S. is now obstructing the Hezbollah-ISIS deal.''

ISIS now has nearly every faction in Syria lined up against it, and as its fortunes decline it is finding it increasingly difficult to play those enemies off against one another. Even that truism of conflict in the Middle East -- the enemy of my enemy is my friend -- is not working for it.

For ISIS, the Damascus official said, the enemy of its enemy is still its enemy.

Follow Rod Nordland on Twitter @rodnordland

Document NYTF000020170902ed920003o



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Iraq's Fast Victory Over  ISIS  Leaves Much of Tal Afar Damaged but Standing

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI; Falih Hassan contributed reporting from Baghdad, and Alaa Mohammed from Tal Afar. 
1,307 words
2 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

TAL AFAR, Iraq -- An airstrike left a crater the size of a tennis court in one neighborhood. Artillery punched a gaping hole in the minaret of the city's main mosque. Some buildings were leveled.

But in the hard calculus of the war against the Islamic State terrorist group, which was evicted from Tal Afar this week after three years of occupation, that was good news.

The majority of Tal Afar's structures are still standing, even if many have been defaced. Compared with the wholesale destruction in the battle to retake Mosul, where the worst-hit neighborhoods resemble the landscape after a 7.0-magnitude quake, the smaller city to the north is largely intact -- even if it may still take months to repair the scarred masonry, cover up craters and sweep aside the detritus left by Islamic State fighters, including their graffiti of death.

The speed of the victory -- 11 days compared with nine months for Mosul -- is partly responsible for the comparatively limited damage.

Military commanders said that -- unlike in Mosul -- they had encircled the city but left an opening in the security cordon, intentionally creating an escape corridor for the trapped fighters, who they hoped would flee into the open desert where they could be picked off.

''I thought I would find my house demolished,'' said Mohammed Wahab, a soldier from Tal Afar who returned to his hometown for the first time on Friday, three years after having fled the Islamic State's advance.

The soldier described the utter destruction he had witnessed in Mosul, which was retaken from the Islamic State after grueling house-to-house combat. He had fretted that Tal Afar would face the same fate.

He headed to his neighborhood with trepidation, he said. When he walked inside his home, he found that Islamic State fighters had punched a man-size hole in the living room wall, a tactic to allow them to move from house to house undetected by aerial surveillance.

The television was gone, a window was broken and signs of the group's occupation were everywhere -- fighters had eaten off his plates and slept in his bed.

''I was expecting much worse,'' he said. ''I'm thrilled to see it in one piece.''

There are a number of reasons the city was spared, while others were not. Tal Afar had less strategic significance to the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, which invested fewer resources to defend it. Relatively few civilians were trapped inside, making it easier for troops to maneuver.

But commanders are also citing the decision they made to leave an exit for the militants, a tactic also used in previous battles including in the cities of Falluja and Ramadi.

It is a tactic that military officers rarely discuss, partly because it invites criticism that they were soft on the Islamic State by letting its fighters escape.

Using the ashtray in his office to represent the city of Tal Afar, Gen. Najim al-Jobori traced his fingers around the edge of the circular shape counterclockwise, stopping just before he completed the circle. The gap represented the spot purposely left open in Tal Afar's northern neighborhood.

''The security cordon in the north of the city was never fully closed so that the ISIS fighters could flee, with the plan of killing them later in the desert,'' said the general, commander of operations in Nineveh Province, which includes Mosul and Tal Afar. ''This was so that the city could be saved.''

The opening in the security cordon was confirmed by Gen. Haider Alubaidi, a deputy commander in Iraq's elite Counterterrorism Service. ''How we avoided destroying the city is that we opened a loophole for the terrorists to escape,'' he said.

But if the plan was to kill them in the desert, that did not fully pan out.

Hundreds of Islamic State fighters surrendered to Kurdish pesh merga forces about 16 miles north of the city. The mass surrender invited criticism, including from Iraq's former prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, whose relations with Iraq's Kurds were always troubled.

''The most important question, who allowed for hundreds of ISIS terrorists to withdraw from Tal Afar and deliver their weapons to the pesh merga forces?'' asked Mr. Maliki. ''Everyone knows that Tal Afar was not liberated by fighting, but by an agreement.''

Michael Knights, an analyst at the Washington Institute for Near East Studies, said that the escape corridor concept had been used in the battles for Ramadi and Falluja, Iraq's first two major confrontations against the Islamic State. ''It's a very Iraqi tactic -- this is not something that the U.S. military would think up on its own,'' said Mr. Knights, who has been studying Iraq for more than a decade.

Giving militants an exit has been part of the Iraq military's approach since 2015. ''The Iraqis have consistently said 'Let's give them a way out, because we don't want Ramadi or Falluja to get wrecked,''' Mr. Knights said.

Until Mosul, the evacuation corridor concept yielded mixed results. In Ramadi, Mr. Knights said, the militants simply used the opening to add reinforcements, lengthening the conflict. The city was finally retaken in early 2016, but left in ruins.

By contrast, in the fight for Falluja, convoys of Islamic State fighters used the opening to escape and their convoy was later bombed, said Mr. Knights, describing that example as a success.

When the operation began last October to retake Mosul -- by far the largest city controlled by the Islamic State -- Iraq's military and its coalition partners began with a push in eastern Mosul.

Three months later, the eastern half was declared liberated with limited damage, as the Islamic State fighters fled across the Tigris River to the city's western and more congested half.

That is when the battle got particularly ugly, as the militants became trapped in warrens of the Old City. Airstrike after airstrike pounded the area, obliterating buildings into powder. A senior American general described the combat as the worst he had seen in 35 years.

Based on the ferocity of the final months of the Mosul battle, coalition commanders expected fierce resistance in Tal Afar.

The objects that Islamic State fighters left behind indicate many had every intention of fighting.

In the Noor neighborhood, a bulldozer that the fighters had planned to use like a car bomb was still parked where the militants had left it. The bulldozer's chassis was obscured by green metal panels and grates the fighters had welded on, to protect the vehicle so that its suicide driver could reach the target.

Like a skirt, the paneling reached down over the wheels of the bulldozer, ensuring that they would not be shot out.

A soldier climbed on its hood and peered over the paneling, shouting back that he saw a wire that appeared to be part of the detonation system.

A few streets over in the Mualameen neighborhood, two car-bomb factories sat on opposite sides of the street. In one factory, a room was littered with car seats removed to make space for explosives. In another room, car doors were leaning against a wall, removed so that they could be replaced with bulletproof plating.

Nearby, the graffiti on the wall read: ''Oh Allah, avenge America and those allied with them. The Islamic State will remain under the noses of the spiteful.''

Top, Shiite militia fighters amid the rubble of Tal Afar. Left, a damaged house in the city. Right, Mohammed Wahab, an Iraqi army soldier, in his damaged house. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170902ed9200032



NEWS ANALYSIS
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Showdown Expected in the Euphrates Valley, but It's Complicated

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,197 words
1 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Islamic State fighters are expected to make their last stand in a series of Euphrates River Valley towns and villages that American-backed Syrian and Iraqi forces are not expected to attack for months, American officials said Thursday.

Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the extremists' self-styled caliphate, is believed to be hiding in the area, which stretches from Deir ez-Zor in Syria to Rawah in Iraq. So are the Islamic State cells that are responsible for planning attacks abroad, and were likely tied to Abdelbaki Essati, the shadowy imam who the authorities believe was at the center of the August terrorist attacks in Barcelona, Spain.

American military officials were quick to congratulate the Iraqi forces on their surprisingly swift victory in the northwest town of Tal Afar this week. But the seizure of that town is not seen by United States military commanders as an indication that the next phase of the campaign against the extremist fighters will be easy or quick.

Instead, the operation will need to deal with a complex array of political and military problems as American officials and their allies try to deliver the knockout blow against the militants. They must first ensure that American-backed fighters do not collide with converging Syrian government forces backed by Russia and Iran and Shiite militias supported by Tehran.

''The final stand of ISIS will be in the Middle Euphrates River Valley,'' Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, the top commander of the American-led task force that is battling the militants in Iraq and Syria, told reporters on Thursday as he wound up his one-year assignment in Baghdad. ''All these forces will converge there.''

A year and a half ago, the Pentagon had a simple way to describe the American strategy to collapse the Islamic State's caliphate. The group's military, economic and political power centers were based in Raqqa, Syria, and Mosul, Iraq -- both of which needed to be taken back.

''That's why our campaign plan's map has got big arrows pointing at both Mosul and Raqqa,'' Ashton B. Carter, who served as President Barack Obama's secretary of defense, told reporters during a visit to Fort Campbell, Ky., in January 2016.

But the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, appeared to have anticipated the loss of both cities. It has since moved its most important administrative functions, including operatives in charge of recruiting, financing and plotting external attacks, into the Euphrates River Valley.

While the resistance by foreign fighters in Raqqa has been fierce -- roughly half the city has been retaken and the hardest combat may lie ahead -- the city no longer functions as the capital of the caliphate.

Instead, the militants are operating from Syrian towns like Mayadin and Abu Kamal and Iraqi towns like Al Qaim -- all Sunni enclaves where the militants enjoy support, and where the American-backed campaign has no ground forces, at least not yet.

Operations in the Euphrates River area, which straddle the Syrian and Iraqi border, will be more complex than the battle for Tal Afar, which was surrounded for months by Iraqi forces.

''We're planning for tough fights ahead,'' General Townsend said.

The Syrian Democratic Forces, which are backed by the United States, are largely led by Syrian Kurds who may not be immediately acceptable to the local Arab populations. The Syrian Kurds provide most of the essential command-and-control for the overall fighting force, half of which is Arab.

But as they move into the Euphrates River Valley, the Syrian forces now are expected to recruit additional local Arabs as well other Arab fighters who have been trained by American and allied forces at al-Tanf, a desert outpost in southern Syria near the intersection of the Jordanian and Iraqi borders.

The Arab fighters from al-Tanf are vetted and supported with small arms, navigation tools and medical supplies. American and other allied advisers also provide basic combat training skills, including first aid, marksmanship and techniques on how to clear a house of militants.

American commanders remain worried about ensuring ''de-confliction'': avoiding potential clashes between United States-supported troops that are battling the Islamic State and eastward-moving Syrian forces that are backed by Moscow and Tehran with Shiite militias supported by Iran.

''We want to avoid inadvertent clashes,'' General Townsend said. ''It gets even tougher when you have a force that may be something other than friendly -- not necessarily an adversary, but something other than friendly -- and you don't have great communications with them, and you don't have an agreed-upon plan.''

It is not a hypothetical risk. American warplanes have already shot down a Syrian jet and two Iranian-made drones, and have mounted airstrikes against forces loyal to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad that appeared to menace American-backed Syrian fighters.

The United States military is not in contact with Mr. Assad's forces, but it is in daily discussions with Russian forces, including through a telephone line from General Townsend's headquarters in Baghdad to the Russian military in Syria.

Officials said American and Russian commanders had discussed making the Euphrates River a dividing line between Syrian government forces and those backed by the United States. But Russia has also suggested that Syrian forces should be able to operate north of the river in some areas, and the arrangements have not yet been settled.

''We've already established the measures that are in place that go down into the MERV a ways,'' General Townsend said, using a military abbreviation for the Middle Euphrates River Valley. ''When the time comes, we'll work out other measures in the future that will cover the entire area that needs to be covered.''

Tensions between the Assad government and the American military, however, have underscored the limits of the Russian influence and, thus, the potential difficulty of completing such arrangements.

The tensions escalated after Syrian authorities allowed buses of Islamic State fighters and their relatives to move from Syria's western border toward the country's east, where they hoped to link up with militants in Abu Kamal.

''The Syrian regime appears to be quite happy to deliver them right to Abu Kamal on the Iraqi border,'' General Townsend said. ''I know the government of Iraq doesn't appreciate that much, and we don't appreciate it.''

American warplanes have bombed the road to block the convoy and attacked Islamic State fighters from the town who were trying to reach it. As a result, the convoy was forced back into government-controlled areas of Syria.

For all the success that the United States has had in working out understandings with the Russians to avoid inadvertent clashes near Raqqa, the hotlines between the American and Russian commanders have been of little use in the episode with the convoy.

''We have communicated with the Russians, and I think that the Russians are basically telling us that that's not their activity, and they're not responsible for that,'' General Townsend said.

Document NYTF000020170901ed9100045



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Airstrikes Block an  ISIS  Convoy in Syria

By ROD NORDLAND; Nada Homsi contributed reporting from Beirut, and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul. 
1,620 words
31 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- American airstrikes stranded a convoy of Islamic State fighters in the middle of Syria on Wednesday, punctuating the United States military's anger over a deal struck a few days earlier giving them safe passage to militant-held territory on the border with Iraq.

The airstrikes blocked the road on which the Islamic State convoy of buses and ambulances was traveling. Other American airstrikes hit militants apparently racing to join the stranded militants, according to the spokesman for the American-led military coalition in Iraq and Syria, Col. Ryan Dillon.

''Earlier today, we did conduct strikes to crater the road, and we destroyed a small bridge to prevent that convoy from moving further east,'' Colonel Dillon said.

''The convoy of buses and ambulances has not been struck, but there have been individual vehicles and individuals clearly identified as ISIS, and we did strike those,'' Colonel Dillon said. ''If we can strike ISIS where we're able to do so without harming civilians, we will do that.'' The Islamic State is also known as ISIS or ISIL.

Colonel Dillon said the airstrikes had stopped the ISIS convoy before it reached militant-held territory, which meant the stranded fighters were deep within an area dominated by the Syrian government and its allies.

The convoy had been traveling from west to east. The ISIS fighters bombed by the coalition apparently had been coming to their rescue, on the same highway but from east to west. There were no reports from Syria that the convoy had reached its destination in Deir al-Zour Province in eastern Syria, the last major ISIS stronghold.

The Lebanese Army, in coordination with Hezbollah and the Syrian Army, arranged on Monday for 670 Islamic State fighters and their relatives to be taken in buses and ambulances from the Lebanese-Syrian border, near the town of Arsal, nearly 300 miles across Syrian government held territory, to Abu Kamal, close to the border with Iraq. Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of Hezbollah, said in a speech Monday night that the evacuees included 26 wounded fighters, 308 armed fighters and 331 civilians, presumably family members of the militants.

The Islamic State fighters had been surrounded by Lebanese and Syrian forces on both sides of that border. The group made the safe-passage deal to try to win the freedom of its fighters in exchange for turning over the bodies of nine Lebanese soldiers taken prisoner in 2014.

The bodies were given back to Lebanese forces between Sunday and Tuesday.

Colonel Dillon said the pact undermined efforts to fight the Islamic State in Syria. Iraq, normally an ally of the Syrian government, joined the American military in criticizing the decision to relocate the militants.

''The coalition, we are not party to this agreement between Lebanon, Hezbollah and ISIS,'' Colonel Dillon said. ''Their claim of fighting terrorism rings hollow when they allow known terrorists to transit territory under their control. ISIS is a global threat, and relocating terrorists from one place to another is not a lasting solution.''

Colonel Dillon said airstrikes directly on the Islamic State convoy remained a possibility but as of late Wednesday had not been carried out because coalition officials were trying to verify whether civilians were intermingled in the group.

''We are monitoring these fighters in real time, we will take action where necessary, those would be absolutely lucrative targets,'' he said.

''We've seen ISIS use protective sites like hospitals and mosques, seen them drive in ambulances,'' Colonel Ryan said. ''So if we do identify and find ISIS fighters who have weapons -- we can discriminate between civilians and ISIS fighters -- we will strike when we can. If we are able to do so, we will.''

The militants were loaded into 17 buses and 12 ambulances near Arsal, in northeastern Lebanon, on Monday morning, according to Hezbollah officials in Lebanon, and then taken to the Syrian city of Homs, to the north. Some of the buses were emblazoned with the name of a tour company, Happy Journeys.

In Homs on Tuesday, the Islamic State evacuees were transferred to buses and ambulances sent there by the Islamic State, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group based in London. They then began what would normally be a 10-hour journey to Abu Kamal.

By Wednesday, it was unclear how far the convoy had traveled, but Colonel Dillon said it was his understanding the coalition had stopped it before it reached militant-held territory in Deir al-Zour Province, and would not allow it to continue farther east.

Lebanese officials praised the safe-passage deal because it rid the country's borders of Islamic State fighters and assuaged public concern over the fate of the nine missing servicemen. But others in the region were critical. The Iraqi prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, faulted Syria for moving the Islamic State fighters to its eastern frontier, along the border with Iraq.

''We fight the terrorists in Iraq,'' he said in a speech on Tuesday. ''We do not send them to Syria -- we kill them in Iraq.''

Mr. Abadi called on the Syrian government to investigate the decision to relocate the Islamic State fighters.

''There should be full cooperation on the elimination of terrorism, not the evacuation of them from one place to the other,'' he said.

The Lebanese government took pains to play down the cooperation between Hezbollah fighters and the Syrian Army on the Syrian side of the border, and of those two forces with its own army on the Lebanese side. It insisted that it was merely coincidental that both sides simultaneously began an offensive against the Islamic State over a week ago and that both sides declared a cease-fire in their fights against the militant group about the same time on Sunday.

Lebanon, which relies on American military aid for its armed forces, does not want to appear to be acting as an ally of the Syrian government. Hezbollah, which dominates Lebanese politics, makes no secret that it sends militias to fight in Syria and maintains a close alliance with Iran.

The American presidential envoy for the anti-Islamic State coalition, Brett H. McGurk, denounced the pact in Twitter posts.

''Irreconcilable ISIS terrorists should be killed on the battlefield, not bused across Syria to the Iraqi border without Iraq's consent,'' Mr. McGurk wrote. He added a thinly veiled threat: ''Our coalition will help ensure that these terrorists can never enter Iraq or escape from what remains of their dwindling 'caliphate.'''

A State Department spokesman in Washington, Edgar Vasquez, also noted that the United States had not been a party to the safe passage deal. ''We have obvious concerns, however, for any action that provides ISIS capabilities to shift its forces and thus put more civilians in harm's way,'' he said.

Fighting in the Raqqa area of Syria, where the American-led coalition and allied Syrian groups are actively battling the Islamic State, has increased in intensity recently. The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported on Wednesday that 64 combatants had been killed in the last 24 hours and 150 in the last six days.

On Tuesday, the coalition reported, its warplanes carried out 56 airstrikes against Islamic State targets, including 51 airstrikes in the Raqqa area, four in Abu Kamal, where the convoy of Islamic State evacuees was headed, and one other.

On Wednesday, the Syrian government announced that its army had entered Deir al-Zour Province from the west to try to increase its encirclement of Islamic State positions. It was not clear where the Syrian Army's positions were in relation to the trapped convoy.

It was also not clear whether the American airstrikes against the ISIS convoy took place over government-held territory in Syria, but the battlefield in Syria has become crowded and complicated.

Colonel Dillon confirmed earlier reports that American military forces in northern Syria were fired on by Turkish-backed anti-regime units near Manbij on Aug. 21 and returned fire against them. Colonel Dillon said the Americans had fired ''less than 100 rounds'' and took up defensive positions before the fighting was defused. He said an American mobile unit had clearly been flying the American flag and was deliberately targeted.

The American coalition supports Kurdish groups in northern Iraq, along with some Arab fighters in the Syrian Democratic Front, who are leading the attempt to retake the city of Raqqa from the Islamic State. To the west, insurgent fighters, including Arabs and Turkmen, aligned with Turkey, are fighting the government. Turkey has criticized its American allies for working with the Kurds, whom it views as allies of Kurdish separatists inside Turkey.

Mustafa Seijari, a rebel commander in the Turkish-backed Euphrates Shield, claimed that the shooting on the American forces had been accidental. ''Our fighters received gunfire from S.D.F. positions nearby,'' he said, referring to the Syrian Democratic Forces. ''They returned fire not knowing of the presence of any coalition forces there.''

Follow Rod Nordland on Twitter @rodnordland .

Islamic State fighters and their families at the Lebanese border on Monday after the Lebanese Army arranged for hundreds to be given safe passage to Syria's east. (PHOTOGRAPH BY OMAR SANADIKI/REUTERS); ''If we can strike ISIS where we're able to do so without harming civilians, we will do that,'' Col. Ryan Dillon said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KARIM KADIM/ASSOCIATED PRESS); Buses carrying members of the ISIS group on Tuesday, on their way to Deir al-Zour in Syria. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LOUAI BESHARA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170831ed8v0005h



World; Middle East
U.N. Peacekeepers in Lebanon Get Stronger Inspection Powers for Hezbollah Arms

By RICK GLADSTONE 
701 words
31 August 2017
03:17
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The United Nations Security Council on Wednesday voted to renew the peacekeeping mission in Lebanon for another year after addressing American and Israeli complaints that the force was ignoring a Hezbollah arms buildup near Israel’ border.

The vote came a day before the peacekeeping force’ mandate was to expire, which theoretically could have led to a suspension in operations or even withdrawal of its 10,500 soldiers, who come from 41 countries.

The force’ presence has helped keep the peace along the Israel-Lebanon border since the war between Israeli forces and Hezbollah, the Lebanese militant group, 11 years ago.

The annual renewal of the mandate for the force, known as the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, or Unifil, had become a contentious issue in the council. It basically pitted the United States against members led by France, which has made significant troop contributions to Unifil.

The United States had insisted that Unifil must be more muscular in policing Hezbollah weaponry, and had suggested that it would not agree to renewing the mandate without significant changes.

France, along with other members, objected to any adjustments in Unifil’ role —uthorizing its soldiers to inspect private homes, for example —hat would be seen as infringing on Lebanon’ sovereignty.

They also argued that the resolution of 2006, which empowered Unifil’ border functions, already included language authorizing the force to “nsure that its area of operations is not utilized for hostile activities of any kind.”

Lebanon opposed any change in Unifil’ role, but wanted the force to remain in the country. “reserving the mandate of @unifil is necessary for peace and stability, otherwise will jeopardize efforts of @UN,”he foreign minister, Gebran Bassil, said in a Twitter posting on Tuesday.

Under compromise language in a Security Council resolution reauthorizing the mandate, Unifil’ soldiers will play a greater role in assisting Lebanon’ military in keeping the border area secure. The resolution requests that Secretary General Antóio Guterres examine ways to “ncrease Unifil’ visible presence, including through patrols and inspections.”

Both Israel and the United States have grown increasingly strident in recent days over what they have described as a blatant buildup of Iranian weaponry by Hezbollah in southern Lebanon including hidden rockets. They have accused Unifil of turning a blind eye to it.

On Monday, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel said Iran was even building factories in Lebanon to make precision-guided missiles to threaten Israel.

Less than a week ago, Nikki R. Haley, the United States ambassador to the United Nations, publicly criticized the Unifil commander, Maj. Gen Michael Beary of Ireland, accusing him of displaying “n embarrassing lack of understanding”n not finding or reporting Hezbollah’ weapons.

Unifil has been deployed in Lebanon for nearly four decades but its mandate was widened to patrolling Lebanon’ border with Israel after the 2006 war between Israeli forces and Hezbollah.

Israel and the United States regard Hezbollah as a terrorist group, financed and armed by Iran, and sworn to Israel’ destruction.

The compromise language of the Unifil mandate renewal appeared to give all sides a way of saying they got what they wanted.

“he status quo for Unifil was not acceptable, and we did not accept it,”s. Haley said in remarks after the vote.

“his resolution demands that Unifil step up its efforts at a moment when Hezbollah is stepping up theirs,”he said. “ur action today will help ensure that this peacekeeping mission has the power and the will to do its job.”

Israel’ ambassador, Danny Danon, called the renewed mandate“ significant diplomatic achievement that could change the situation in southern Lebanon and expose the terror infrastructure that Hezbollah set up on the border with Israel.”

* Lebanese Army, Hezbollah and Syrian Army Declare Cease-Fire With \b ISIS\b0 

* Next Door to War, an Indie Arab Band Sings of Defiance and Joy

* Michel Aoun Rises to Lebanese Presidency, Ending Power Vacuum

United Nations peacekeepers in southern Lebanon kept watch during a media tour organized by Hezbollah in April. | Ali Hashisho/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170831ed8v000gq



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Israel Warns Iran Poses New Threat On Doorstep

By ISABEL KERSHNER 
725 words
30 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDJERUSALEM -- Israel is using a visit this week by the United Nations secretary general, Antonio Guterres, to highlight concerns about what it says are Iran's efforts to produce advanced, precision weapons in Lebanon and Syria.

''Iran is busy turning Syria into a base of military entrenchment,'' Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said at a news conference with Mr. Guterres on Monday, ''and it wants to use Syria and Lebanon as war fronts against its declared goal to eradicate Israel.''

Mr. Netanyahu asserted that Iran ''is building sites to produce precision-guided missiles toward that end in both Syria and in Lebanon.''

He added: ''This is something Israel cannot accept. This is something the U.N. should not accept.''

Israel's defense minister, Avigdor Lieberman, also spoke in his meeting with Mr. Guterres about Israel's concerns about factories for precision weapons and what he called Iran's repeated attempts to smuggle arms into Lebanon.

''We are determined to prevent any threat to the security of the citizens of Israel,'' Mr. Lieberman said, according to a transcript of his remarks from his office.

The assertions are not new, but Israel now appears to want to put them on the international agenda.

Israel's chief of military intelligence, Maj. Gen. Herzl Halevi, told an audience at a policy conference in Herzliya, Israel, in June that Iran had been working over the past year to set up independent production facilities in Lebanon to manufacture precise weapons, which use advanced technology to guide them to specific targets.

The beneficiary, he said, would be Hezbollah, the Lebanese Shiite organization, with which Israel fought an inconclusive, monthlong war in 2006. Adding that Iran was setting up similar facilities in Yemen, General Halevi warned, ''We cannot remain indifferent to this and we don't.''

Israeli leaders also pressed Mr. Guterres to prod the United Nations peacekeeping force in Lebanon, UNIFIL, into fulfilling its mandate to prevent Hezbollah's weapons buildup.

''I will do everything in my capacity to make sure that UNIFIL fully meets its mandate,'' said Mr. Guterres, visiting Israel and the Palestinian territories for the first time since taking up the top United Nations post in January. He added that ''the idea or the intention or the will to destroy the state of Israel is something totally unacceptable from my perspective.''

Israel has carried out several airstrikes in Syria in recent years against convoys or stores of advanced weapons said to be destined for Hezbollah in Lebanon. Acting under the cover of the Syrian civil war, the Israeli strikes have prompted little retaliation from Hezbollah, which is fighting in Syria to prop up the government of President Bashar al-Assad, an Iranian ally.

Through Hezbollah and other proxies, Iran has been extending its influence and its reach in the region and, according to Israeli officials, is working to provide Hezbollah with more precise weapons to hit valuable targets in its next war against Israel.

But while Israel has acted with relative impunity in the chaotic environment of Syria, any pre-emptive strike on Lebanese soil could spiral into a broader conflict over Israel's northern border.

Israel's Yedioth Ahronoth newspaper reported this week that in the face of the Israeli warnings, Prime Minister Saad Hariri of Lebanon has been working to stop Iran's construction of the missile factory in his country.

More generally, Israel has been voicing concern that arrangements for cease-fires and de-escalation zones in southern Syria will help Iran and its loyalists consolidate their presence across Israel's frontiers.

Last week Mr. Netanyahu traveled to Sochi, Russia, on the Black Sea to confer with President Vladimir Putin. ''The victory over ISIS is welcome,'' Mr. Netanyahu told Mr. Putin, referring to the Islamic State, which has been battling Mr. Assad's forces. ''Iran's entry is unwelcome, endangering us, and in my opinion, endangering the region and the world,'' Mr. Netanyahu said, according to his office.

Israeli officials have also raised these concerns with American officials.

Correction: August 31, 2017, Thursday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Wednesday about the construction of weapons factories in Lebanon and Syria misspelled the given name of the Israeli defense minister. He is Avigdor Lieberman, not Avidgor.

Document NYTF000020170831ed8u0000e



opinion
Many Shades of the U.S. at War; Op-Ed Columnist

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
1,584 words
30 August 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

I’ just back from visiting all of our key air bases in Iraq, Afghanistan and along the Persian Gulf, and I find myself wrestling with two stark contrasts: the contrast between what is happening there in the air and what is happening on the ground, and the contrast between the decency of the U.S. military personnel fighting this war and how unworthy Donald Trump —ho has become our divider in chief —s to be their commander in chief.

The first contrast was summed up in two wall-size digital maps at our Kuwait-based command center for the war on ISIS. One map displays every military aircraft the U.S. has in the skies over Syria and Iraq (as well as Russian, Syrian and Iranian aircraft) pounding ISIS targets. There are little symbols for B-52s, U-2s, F-16s, F-22s, F-15s, MQ-9 Reapers and jet refuelers. It is a giant aerial armada, a flying killer symphony orchestrated by the U.S. Air Force.

The other map uses different colors to depict the disposition of forces on the ground. It looks like a broken kaleidoscope. Our U.S. military briefer explained: Purple is for Syrian regime forces and their Russian, Hezbollah and Iranian allies; light green shows Syrian Kurds and dark green Iraqi Kurds; light blue represents “isciplined”raqi Shiite militias, while the “ndisciplined”nes are another shade. Pro-Turkish Sunni militias have their own color, as do the pro-American Syrian Sunni militias. ISIS fighters are another color, and the official Iraqi security forces are a different one still.

As our briefer noted dryly: “ot everyone here has exactly the same endgame in mind.”

This is our war in the Middle East today in two maps: “tar Wars”eets “ame of Thrones.”

You can’ look at these two screens without thinking about the power that comes from our ability to make one out of many —r the power that is lost to a society like Syria or Iraq that needs an iron fist to make its many into one, and when that fist is removed, how the society fractures into small shards. So you can’ help but get upset seeing our own president deliberately dividing our country between his tribe and the rest of us —ndermining what truly makes America great.

Fortunately, though, you also can’ help but be buoyed by the young men and women you meet visiting our key air bases in the war effort. They remind you what America is on its best days —till resistant to Trump’ divisive dog whistles.

You’e standing on the tarmac at Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar and the heat index is 140 degrees and the only thing the maintenance crew members of a B-52 want to tell you is how they’e kept this plane running for 573 straight missions, without missing one for service repairs.

You’e standing outside the mess hall at Bagram Air Field in Afghanistan, and the Lutheran Air Force chaplain is telling you about his preparations to make sure the dozen or so Jewish service members at the base will have everything they need for the High Holy Days.

You’e sitting in the cockpit of a C-130 as the woman pilot from the Minnesota Air National Guard does a complex corkscrew —ptly known as a “uker landing”—nto Baghdad, while her all-male crew carefully executes her orders.

You’e talking to the young man piloting an F-22 stealth fighter who is describing how careful he has to be when he engages Russian or Syrian fighter jets. The stealth technology of his plane is so good he is basically invisible to the Syrians and Russians until he pops up right on their tail. His rules of engagement, he says, dictate that if they are not threatening him, he warn them by radio that he’ behind them. “hey just can’ see us,”e told me, “nd you don’ want to spook the herd.”

You’e on the tarmac at Al Dhafra air base in the United Arab Emirates going 90 miles an hour in a Dodge Charger, following right behind a U-2 spy plane as it lands, helping to “atch”t. The U-2 pilot is in a spacesuit —e flies above 70,000 feet —nd has little peripheral vision or ability to look downward. So a chase car carries another pilot, who tells the U-2 pilot by radio how many feet he is off the ground so he knows exactly when to stall the engines and hit the runway gently, balancing delicately on his plane’ two tiny wheels.

The skill involved to get the landing right —ll in about five seconds —s stunning. “t’ like a wrestling match”n the cockpit to get the plane down, explained the pilot driving our chase car. Such skill comes only from hours of practice, study and trust building, which comes only from being committed to a cause larger than yourself.

One of the things you learn when you travel with the Air Force is how reliant we have become on R.P.A.s —emotely piloted aircraft, like MQ-9 Reapers —or killing enemies and for surveillance. I stayed up late one night to watch two pilots at their controls in a small computer-packed shed at Kandahar air base, remotely bringing Reapers in for a landing. The clichés that this has turned the war into an impersonal video game, often conducted by people 8,000 miles from the battle. Indeed, many of the Reapers operating here are flown by airmen at Creech Air Force Base outside of Las Vegas. But in some ways they’e actually emotionally closer to the fight.

Gen. James B. Hecker, who used to command the R.P.A. pilots at Creech and is now the senior air war commander in Afghanistan, explained to me that when you are flying an F-15 over a target, you drop your bombs from miles above using laser-guided coordinates and then fly off. Often you never see the actual blast, let alone any human casualties.

If you are an R.P.A. pilot sitting outside Las Vegas and operating a Reaper over Afghanistan or ISIS-controlled Syria, said Hecker, “ou will sometimes do circles around someone’ family compound for three weeks at a time. During that time you’l try to establish the patterns of life of the target individual or group: When do they wake up? When do they go to bed? When do they go to the bathroom outside? During that time you get emotionally involved with their whole life —hether it is the dad playing soccer with the kids or flying kites with his daughter or kissing his wife.”

But then one day you’l see Dad get on a motor scooter and place a roadside bomb aimed at killing U.S. soldiers. “o you take out Dad”sing a precision-guided missile fired from a Reaper, said Hecker. And then, if you’e back at Creech, “ou get in your car, go home, kiss your wife and maybe play soccer with your son, knowing that the guy you were watching for three weeks, and just took out, will never do that again with his wife and kids. But if you didn’ do it, some American mom would not be welcoming her husband home.”

So, “t’ not a video game,”oncluded Hecker, shaking his head. Indeed, he said, there has been enough post-traumatic stress among Reaper pilots that the Air Force instituted a rule that anytime one shoots someone remotely “hey have to see either a therapist, an operational psychologist or a chaplain to be sure they’e O.K.”

This is real war, and its effect on people —unter and hunted —s profound.

Finally, you’e sitting at breakfast in the mess hall at Al Udeid and watching a raven-haired Air Force servicewoman at the next table quietly saying grace over her tray of cereal and fruit. Her colleagues around her are as diverse as the colors on that Syrian map. But they’e all on the same team, bound not by race, religion, tribe or sect, but by a simple Air Force credo: “ntegrity first; service before self; excellence in all we do.”

For a moment you wonder, How crazy is it that you have to come to Qatar, Kuwait, Kabul and Kandahar to see the best of America and America at its best?

But then you remember: America produced these people. Their ethos is both latent and present throughout our society. We just need to inspire more of it. And now more than ever, because other forces are latent, too, and ominously surfacing —y permission of our president —ike white supremacy.

Precisely because we have a president with no moral authority, we need parents and principals, mayors and teachers, to be our “ommanders in chief”—or the next three and half years —o inspire and scale the best of what is in our society, what’ so clearly on display in these far-flung military outposts. Indeed, we need it now as much as the Middle Easterners do.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document INHT000020170830ed8u00001



New York Today
N.Y. / Region
New York Today: The Evolution of City Pools

By ALEXANDRA S. LEVINE 
1,124 words
30 August 2017
12:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning on this cloudy-to-clear Wednesday.

August is winding down, but there’ one thing that’l help us hold on to the summer a tad longer.

Swimming.

Most of the city’ public pools are open until Sunday, Sept. 10.

You can look for a location nearest you here. But before jumping in, here’ a little trivia on our city’ pools:

Before there were pools, we had public baths.

The city opened its first municipal bath in 1901 at 326 Rivington Street — bathhouse that became so coveted that during a fatal heat wave a few years later, a small riot broke out in the long line there. The site, later renamed the Baruch baths, is no longer in use, though the building remains.

But several of the city’ former bathhouses are still up and running —n the form of swimming pools. The pools presently at the Asser Levy, East 54th Street, Tony Dapolito and Gertrude Ederle recreation centers “ll began life as bathhouses,”aid Liam Kavanagh, the first deputy parks commissioner.

The city also saw unusual “loating baths”—ectangular structures perched atop pontoons on the Hudson or East Rivers —s early as the 1800s, but they disappeared in the 1920s for sanitation reasons.

In the 1930s and 1940s, under Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia, Robert Moses created a new set of outdoor pools that, with their heating and filtration systems, were considered at the forefront of engineering.

Portable mini-pools, which Mr. Kavanagh described as “arge metal tubs that were towed from place to place,”ecame part of our city’ landscape in the 1960s and 1970s, intended to provide relief to neighborhoods that would not otherwise have access to facilities to beat the summer heat. But as more permanent pools were built over time, the more than 70 movable mini-pools have dwindled to a mere 18 today (and they’e now fixed in place).

One pool that remains bobbing in New York Harbor in 2017 —ombining traits of the many pools that came before her —s Floating Pool Lady. She’ a barge-turned-swimming-oasis floating off the tip of Barretto Point Park in the Bronx, holding a hefty 100,000 gallons of water each summer, and weighing a whopping 4,040,960 pounds when full.

Ready to dive in? The city’ free public pools are open from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. (Mini-pools will close on Labor Day.)

Here’ what else is happening:

Weather

Things are looking up, and by day’ end it should be nice enough to go for a dip.

This cloudy morning should make way for sunshine by the afternoon, with a light breeze and the high nearing 80.

The rest of the week (and holiday weekend) are still looking promising —ingers crossed.

In the News

•Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo stirs the pot in an effort to unseat six Republican members of Congress in New York State. [New York Times]

•he family of a young boy who wears dresses sued the education department, alleging the boy’ school was hostile towards him. [New York Times]

•tate lawmakers who live hundreds of miles from New York City are in control of the subway’ future, even if they rarely ride it. [New York Times]

• Queens man was charged with trying to enter Syria to join ISIS. [New York Times]

•dvocates are against Mayor Bill de Blasio’ plan to turn five apartment buildings into homeless shelters, for fear that bad landlords would profit from negligent behavior. [Gothamist]

• man got his leg stuck in a sinkhole in the street in Bed-Stuy. [DNAinfo]

•oday’ Metropolitan Diary: “The Connection Holds”

•or a global look at what’ happening, see Your Morning Briefing.

Coming Up Today

•Dames of Thrones, a comedy show about women taking back Westeros, at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre in Chelsea. 7 p.m. [$7]

•Learn to double dutch from the jump-rope masters of Double Dutch Empire, by the Pier 2 picnic tables in Brooklyn Bridge Park. 7 p.m. [Free]

•n tap for outdoor movie night: sunset screenings of Moonlight and Aladdin on Staten Island, School of Rock and Jump In in Brooklyn, The Jungle Book in Manhattan, and Middle School: The Worst Years of My Life in the Bronx. [Free]

•ooking ahead: Take a jewelry-making workshop, where you’l learn to create sterling silver rings, on Thursday at the Prospect Heights Brainery in Brooklyn.

•Yankees host Indians, 1:05 p.m. (YES). Mets at Reds, 7:10 p.m. (SNY).

•lternate-side parking remains in effect until Friday.

•or more events, see The New York Times’ Arts & Entertainment guide.

And Finally...

Have you heard of the Aquazanies? Think of them as the Harlem Globetrotters of city pools.

The performance troupe combined swimming and diving with comedy, theater and other fanfare —ike music, props and zebra-striped costumes —o offer New Yorkers poolside entertainment beginning in the 1940s. They got their start at Astoria Pool in Queens, garnering so much enthusiasm from citydwellers that their stunts evolved into a larger, annual spectacle called the “Aquashow,”n Flushing Meadows.

It grew into “n extravaganza of splashing aquabelles and aquabeaus, graceful skaters, comics and music,”he New York Timeswrote in 1954. That year, in addition to the Aquazanies, the show boasted numbers with a long-tailed monkey named Herman and the Aquadorables, a group of water ballerinas.

Members of the Aquazanies would later become lifeguards, famous swimmers, professional divers, and even a special agent with the F.B.I.

New York Today is a morning roundup that is published weekdays at 6 a.m. If you don’ get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.

For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.

Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe , on Twitter.

You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.

Crowds outside the city’ first municipal bath, on Rivington Street. | New York City Department of Parks and Recreation | A floating bath at 96th Street. | New York City Department of Parks and Recreation | “e doesn’ get under my skin at all,”epresentative Christopher Collins said of Gov. Cuomo, “ut I know I get under his.” Nathaniel Brooks for The New York Times | The Aquazanies tumbling from a high-dive in 1951. | Sam Falk/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170830ed8u001xm



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Queens Man Accused of Trying to Join  ISIS 

By ALAN FEUER 
539 words
30 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
24
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A 22-year-old Queens man was charged on Tuesday with attempting to provide material support to the Islamic State, after he flew from New York to Saudi Arabia this spring with the intention, federal prosecutors said, of entering Syria to join the terrorist group.

The man, Parveg Ahmed, flew to Saudi Arabia in early June with a friend, the prosecutors said, ostensibly to celebrate the fasting holiday of Ramadan. But according to a criminal complaint unsealed in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the two men actually planned to travel to Syria to fight alongside the Islamic State, or ISIS. They were stopped from entering by officials of an unidentified country that borders Syria, and were taken into custody.

Though it remains unclear how or why the investigation started, prosecutors said that in October 2014, Mr. Ahmed wrote on one of his social media accounts that ''jihadis'' are ''Muslims who fight to establish the Sharia IN THEIR OWN LANDS,'' and that Americans ''are the real terrorists.''

A few months later, according to the complaint, he posted a message on Twitter saying that ''the war on the Islamic State is a war of the ideologies'' and sent a private Twitter message to a friend declaring that the only country still working in reverence ''to the Almighty is the Islamic State.''

In January 2016, federal agents stopped Mr. Ahmed at Kennedy Airport as he was returning from Bangladesh and questioned him. When the agents confronted him with his social media posts, he claimed that they were made ''at a low point in his life and at a time when he was smoking a large amount of marijuana,'' the complaint said.

But when the government learned that Mr. Ahmed had been stopped in the Middle East while trying to enter Syria, the agents obtained a warrant for a laptop computer in his home in Queens. The agents searched the laptop last month, the complaint said, and discovered recordings of sermons by Anwar al-Awlaki, an American-born Islamic cleric who was assassinated in a drone strike in Yemen in 2011 but continues to be influential in jihadi circles.

The agents also found a lecture by Abdullah el-Faisal, a Jamaican-born Islamic radical who was charged in absentia on Friday by the Manhattan district attorney's office with recruiting would-be terrorists.

Just last week, the complaint said, federal agents traveled to the Middle East and interviewed Mr. Ahmed's friend, who was not identified. The friend claimed that while staying in the unnamed country, Mr. Ahmed had hired a taxi to take them to the city of Idlib in Syria, but had actually meant to go to Irbid, a city in Jordan, the complaint said.

But when the agents searched Mr. Ahmed's phone, the complaint said, they found photographs of ISIS figures and text messages indicating that the two men were trying to make their way into ''ISIS-controlled territories.'' The agents also found a text message that Mr. Ahmed had written to members of his family wishing them farewell, the complaint said.

Mr. Ahmed was ordered held without bail on Tuesday by Judge James Orenstein.

Document NYTF000020170830ed8u0003a



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Lebanon Frees Hundreds of  ISIS  Fighters in Exchange for Soldiers' Bodies

By ROD NORDLAND; Nada Homsi contributed reporting. 
990 words
29 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- Lebanon began transporting an estimated 400 armed Islamic State fighters and family members from its northern border to the militants' stronghold in eastern Syria on Monday, according to official sources in Lebanon and Syria.

The militants were transferred as part of a deal between the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, and its Syrian and Lebanese enemies. Under the agreement, the bodies of eight people believed to be Lebanese soldiers were to be returned, while Islamic State militants were to receive 17 air-conditioned buses, 11 ambulances and a free pass through territory held by the Syrian government.

Hezbollah, the Shiite-dominated group whose militia was among the parties to the deal, announced through its War Media Center that the transfer of the Islamic State fighters had begun on Monday morning. First to go were 25 wounded fighters in ambulances, followed by busloads of fighters and others.

The Syrian state news agency, SANA, also confirmed that the transfer of fighters was underway.

Maj. Gen. Abbas Ibrahim, the Lebanese intelligence chief who was the government's chief negotiator in trying to win the return of Lebanon's captured soldiers, defended the arrangement.

''The return of Daesh militants in air-conditioned cars to their countries is permissible because Lebanon adheres to the philosophy of a state that does not exact revenge,'' he said in a radio interview, using the Arabic acronym for the Islamic State, according to the Lebanese newspaper The Daily Star.

Former President Michel Sleiman was among the Lebanese leaders who declared the deal a win for the government. ''Military victory must be supplemented by chasing down those who executed the soldiers and prosecuting them before international and Arabic tribunals,'' Mr. Sleiman said on Twitter.

Nine Lebanese soldiers were taken prisoner during fighting in the Arsal area of northeastern Lebanon in 2014. Since then, there had been little information on their fate, even though relatives have staged numerous protests in Beirut, the capital.

Just over a week ago, the Lebanese Army launched an offensive in the border area to pressure Islamic State militants into negotiating the soldiers' release. Simultaneously, Hezbollah and their allies in the Syrian government began an offensive in the same area, from the Syrian side of the border. That the operations coincided was unplanned, they said.

Both sides declared a cease-fire with the Islamic State on Sunday to allow for the recovery of the service members. General Ibrahim said it appeared that the eight bodies handed over were those of the missing soldiers, although DNA identification is pending. No information about the ninth missing soldier was provided, but there have been reports that one may have joined the Islamic State militants during his captivity.

SANA reported: ''Following the victories made by Syrian armed forces in cooperation with the Lebanese national resistance Hezbollah in the western Qalamoun area, and to prevent shedding of blood of the armed forces supporting forces and civilians, a deal reached between Hezbollah and ISIS terrorist organization on the withdrawal of the remaining ISIS terrorists from western Qalamoun toward the eastern region of Syria was agreed on.'' Qalamoun is the name of the mountain range on the Syrian side of the border, opposite the Arsal area of Lebanon.

There was no immediate statement from the Islamic State on the deal.

It is the first time the group is known to have negotiated a settlement to stop fighting involving a large number of militants and to give up territory.

The agreement calls for Islamic State fighters and their families to be escorted to Boukamal, an area in Deir al-Zour Province, large parts of which are dominated by the militants.

The Lebanese government referred to the deal as a ''surrender'' by the extremist group that would remove the last of Islamic State fighters from its border region with Syria. However, the militants were simply being relocated from the northern Lebanese border, where they were surrounded by hostile, pro-Syrian government forces, to an area in eastern Syria where they are largely engaged in fighting other Syrian opposition groups or the Western-backed Syrian Democratic Front.

Lebanese Army soldiers in Ras Baalbek, near the scene of the Islamic State forces in Lebanon, said the group's fighters had been permitted to keep light weapons when they were relocated. The official Syrian news media said the militants had destroyed their fortifications and equipment before the transfers took place. There was no suggestion that they would be prevented from returning to combat.

Robert Ford, the former United States ambassador to Syria and now a teaching fellow at Yale as well as a fellow at the Middle East Institute, said this was just the latest in a series of accommodations the Syrian government had made with rebel groups around the country as it consolidates its control.

''It's not at all unprecedented,'' Mr. Ford said. ''There was a similar deal to the north of Raqqa; the Syrian government has cut deals like this many times with rebel groups it is fighting.''

Much more important than the return of the bodies, militarily, was the removal of the Islamic State from the Lebanese frontier. ''The Syrian government and the Lebanese government get what they want, which is better control over that border, so that there aren't any more Sunni refugees and their supporters coming into Lebanon,'' Mr. Ford said.

Hezbollah, while a Lebanese party, has been supporting the Syrian government in the civil war. It is a staunch ally of President Bashar al-Assad's government in Syria and of Iran.

Follow Rod Nordland on Twitter @rodnordland.

Syrian forces escorted Islamic State fighters to the militant group's territory in eastern Syria on Monday. The move removes ISIS from Lebanon's border with Syria. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LOUAI BESHARA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170829ed8t0005f



Briefing
Hurricane Harvey, Uber, MTV: Your Monday Evening Briefing

By KAREN ZRAICK and LISA IABONI 
1,069 words
29 August 2017
00:14
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good evening. Here’ the latest.

1. Pounding rains and rapidly rising floodwaters from the most powerful storm to hit the U.S. in a decade have brought Houston, the country’ fourth largest city, to its knees.

The region looks like an inland sea after Hurricane Harvey, and officials fear the worst is yet to come. Nearly two feet of rain is still expected. An enormous and frantic rescue operation is underway. The toll —t least 10 dead —s almost certain to rise. President Trump plans to visit Texas on Tuesday.

Our reporters on the ground are creating a detailed picture of the disaster in photos, videos and articles. Here’ a quick guide to what’ happening, with links. We’e also running a live briefing with continuous updates, and offering free access to all hurricane-related content.

_____

2. North Korea fired a ballistic missile that flew over Hokkaido, Japan, defying an escalation in international sanctions.

The Japanese government sent a text alerting citizens and advising them to take cover. Japan’ chief cabinet secretary called the launch “n unprecedented, serious and grave threat to our nation,”nd Prime Minister Shinzo Abe invoked “he strong Japan-U.S. alliance”nd insisted his government would “ake all the measures to protect people’ lives.”Check back for updates.

Above, Japan tracked another North Korean missile launch on Saturday.

_____

3 . Criticism is building over President Trump’ flexible approach to the rule of law, manifest most recently in his pardon of Joe Arpaio, the 85-year-old former Arizona sheriff who defied a court order to stop detaining suspected undocumented immigrants. Mr. Trump said he timed the announcement to the arrival of Hurricane Harvey, to attract maximum attention.

Today on “he Daily”odcast, our former Phoenix bureau chief shares clips and memories of her interviews with Mr. Arpaio, above, over the years. We collected the best writing from the right and left on the pardon.

Mr. Trump is also reversing Obama-era restrictions on military hardware for police departments, meaning officers will be able to obtain and deploy grenade launchers, armored vehicles and bayonets.

_____

4 . Uber’ new top executive has his work cut out for him.

Dara Khosrowshahi, 48, who previously led the travel site Expedia, must repair Uber’ culture and reputation while preparing for a self-driving future that many other companies are already vying to dominate.

_____

5 . The U.S. Navy said divers had recovered the remains of 10 missing sailors from the destroyer John S. McCain, above, all from compartments that were crushed and flooded in a collision with a huge tanker near Singapore last week.

The Navy is investigating the crash, as well as another lethal collision near Japan in June. Naval ships are designed to be hard to detect, but more than a dozen current and former Navy officers told our reporters that another problem is the sailors’rueling schedule.

_____

6 . Power struggles in the Middle East have created many changes, not least of them a new role for Hezbollah. Long focused on fighting Israel, the group has become the spearhead of an international militia network led by Tehran.

Hezbollah is also party to a rare deal with the Islamic State that will remove the last \b ISIS\b0  fighters from Lebanon’ northern border with Syria.

_____

7 . Our S cience desk teamed up with our product-testing site, The Wirecutter, to examine the growing number of DNA analysis services that promise to pinpoint customers’thnic heritage and identify relatives.

The answers hidden in DNA can be revelatory, in some cases rewriting family history. (While working on the report, one of our researchers discovered that a grandparent was not biologically related. Above, family photos of another user, who discovered relatives he hadn’ known of.)

But the testing has real limits. “NA can’ always provide a definitive answer to your ancestral roots,”ur writer concluded. “ut it can suggest the questions you should ask in search of them.”

_____

8 . The 24th novel by John le Carré, “ Legacy of Spies,” is a throwback to his best-known book, “he Spy Who Came in From the Cold”1963). It rehashes decisions made in the coldest years of the Cold War.

Our critic says it offers prose that “emains brisk and lapidary”nd a pleasant reminder “hat adults were once in charge of the destiny of the free world.”

_____

9 . The U.S. Open got underway in Flushing Meadows, Queens.

Here’ our tally of the day’ matches so far, and the ones to watch tonight, including Simona Halep vs. Maria Sharapova and the young Sascha Zverev vs. Darian King. Above, JC Aragone to Kevin Anderson.

And here’ the complete U.S. Open schedule and scoreboard to bookmark.

_____

10 . Finally, our pop music critic described this year’ MTV V.M.A.s as “acky and woke.”bove, the host, Katy Perry. And our TV writer concluded that Season 7 of “ame of Thrones” delivered “rguably the most impressive visceral thrills and the least satisfying storytelling of the show’ run.”

More TV is just around the corner, with a new slate of shows for fall. Here’ your catch-up guide to returning series.

And before you write to ask, our Best of Late Night comedy roundup is on break this week, since all the hosts except Trevor Noah are on vacation. The column will return after Labor Day.

Have a great night.

_____

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes.

Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.

Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

Joe Raedle/Getty Images | Koji Sasahara/Associated Press | Laura Segall/Reuters | Matthew Lloyd/Bloomberg | Roslan Rahman/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Sergey Ponomarev for The New York Times | Brian Flaherty for The New York Times | Tom Jamieson for The New York Times | Hilary Swift for The New York Times | Mario Anzuoni/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170828ed8s0073l



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Lebanon Reports a Cease-Fire With  ISIS 

By ROD NORDLAND 
461 words
28 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

DUBAI, United Arab Emirates -- The Lebanese Army and its Syrian and Hezbollah allies separately declared a cease-fire with the Islamic State after a weeklong joint campaign against the militant group along the border with Syria in northern Lebanon, the Hezbollah-controlled television channel Al Manar said Sunday.

There were conflicting accounts, however, about the outcome of the border fighting. The Lebanese Army, which announced the cease-fire in a statement, said the truce had been intended to allow negotiations for the recovery of its missing soldiers. It did not claim to have defeated the Islamic State.

Hezbollah, however, said that fighters from the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIS or ISIL, had surrendered, had turned over the bodies of two Hezbollah combatants and had agreed to help determine what had happened to a number of missing Lebanese Army soldiers.

The Lebanese intelligence chief, Maj. Gen. Abbas Ibrahim, said Sunday that the authorities were awaiting DNA identification for six bodies recovered from the area.

''It has not been confirmed yet that these remains belong to the military soldiers, although we are almost certain they are'' the missing, General Ibrahim said, according to the official National News Agency.

The general made the remarks as he arrived at Riad el-Solh Square, in downtown Beirut, Lebanon, where families of the missing soldiers had pitched tents as part of a sit-in demanding action. The sit-ins have been held since ISIS captured the soldiers in 2014.

In a speech on Thursday, meanwhile, the Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah had said that ISIS had been defeated, but that the authorities were still negotiating to find out the fate of the missing soldiers.

''The remaining ISIS terrorists are completely confused and seek an escape or any settlement to exit the area which they have occupied after being besieged,'' he said in a statement reported by the Syrian Arab News Agency.

A week ago, the Lebanese Army, operating on its side of the frontier, along with the Syrian Army and allied Hezbollah militias fighting on Syrian territory, began a simultaneous offensive against the Islamic State in the border area, although neither side acknowledged that they were acting in concert.

Lebanon would not want to appear to be operating alongside the Syrian government, and the presence of Hezbollah militias from Lebanon fighting in Syria is also politically sensitive.

The Islamic State took nine Lebanese soldiers prisoner in northeastern Lebanon in 2014. The army was believed to be seeking information about them.

Follow Rod Nordland on Twitter @rodnordland .

In Beirut on Sunday, relatives learned bodies of soldiers seized in 2014 might have been found. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANWAR AMRO/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170828ed8s00046



FIRST WORDS
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
Hidden Agenda

By BEVERLY GAGE 
1,472 words
27 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
15
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Is it easier to keep secrets when you have fewer of them? Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan seemed to think so. Twenty years ago, he was chairman of the Commission on Protecting and Reducing Government Secrecy, insisting that the ''protecting'' and the ''reducing'' parts went hand in hand -- that in order to safeguard the secrets that really mattered, those secrets would have to be few and far between. The commission combed through a long history of protected information, concerning everything from bomb tests to Communist infiltration, before calling for a vast reduction in the amount of federal information deemed ''classified.'' Moynihan hoped that the end of the Cold War had made Washington's pernicious ''culture of secrecy'' obsolete. But history did not go his way. Congress continues to hold hearings on the same stubborn problem, and every year, the state continues to generate tens of millions of new classified documents.

During the campaign, Donald Trump repeatedly accused Hillary Clinton of endangering national security by keeping classified email on a private server. Already, though, his administration has helped show how confusing and how politicized classification can be. As president, he seems to have only the foggiest idea of how to handle such information himself: He reportedly divulged ''highly classified'' material from an undercover ISIS operative to the Russian foreign minister right in the Oval Office. And in August, he retweeted a Fox News report featuring leaked intelligence about North Korea -- even as Nikki Haley, his own United Nations Ambassador, refused to discuss it, explaining that she ''can't talk about anything that's classified.''

Trump has been merciless toward anyone else in government who reveals his administration's secrets, tweeting that ''the real story that Congress, the F.B.I. and all others should be looking into is the leaking of Classified information.'' This summer, after the former F.B.I. director James Comey produced what he said were unclassified personal notes on their meetings, Trump complained that ''Comey leaked CLASSIFIED INFORMATION to the media. That is so illegal!''

This marks a shift from the Obama years, when the debate over classified information focused on military and intelligence revelations, from the likes of Chelsea Manning and Edward Snowden. Under Trump, things are more personal. ''What's new,'' says the Columbia University historian Matthew Connelly, author of a forthcoming history of government classification, ''is the volume and sensitivity of what's being leaked and the fact that at least some of these leaks seem intended to show Trump is unfit to be president.'' ''Classified'' still conjures images of top-secret government plots, but in Trump's Washington, it's more often used to describe information that the president would prefer to keep quiet, from allegations of collusion to reports of White House infighting. What started out as a way to safeguard national security has also become a means of protecting -- or destroying -- the president himself.

For much of American history, politicians viewed secrecy and spying with disdain; these practices seemed suited for Old World autocrats and royal-court conspirators, not for citizens of a democracy. As late as 1908, when Attorney General Charles Bonaparte appealed for funds to create a small bureau of investigation within the Justice Department, Congress met his proposal with cries of dismay. ''If Anglo-Saxon civilization stands for anything,'' the Kentucky representative Swagar Sherley declared, ''it is for a government where the humblest citizen is safeguarded against the secret activities of the executive of the government.''

Bonaparte went ahead and created his bureau anyway: the forerunner of today's F.B.I. World War I gave that bureau a new raison d'êre, transforming a small band of detectives into a modern intelligence operation, charged with investigating wartime loyalty under new laws like the 1917 Espionage Act. After World War II, a permanent classification system took hold. The Oxford English Dictionary identifies 1940 as the moment when ''classified'' began to mean ''designated as officially secret; accessible or known only to authorized people.'' Before that, to be a ''classified'' employee was simply to be a member of the Civil Service whose job could be sorted into some grade or rank.

Some of what was ''classified'' under the new system involved vital intelligence matters: military plans, weapons technology, the names of informants overseas. But government officials also claimed the right to conduct sensitive negotiations in confidence, and the system rapidly expanded to include routine bureaucratic business. This secrecy was a useful tool, but it became a crutch too -- a way for federal employees to cover up mistakes or to inflate their own importance. ''In a culture of secrecy,'' the Moynihan Commission noted, ''that which is not secret is easily disregarded or dismissed,'' producing powerful incentives for government officials to classify pretty much everything. (And little incentive not to; why risk scrutiny?) Thus began the problem of overclassification, in which even humdrum exchanges end up labeled ''Top Secret,'' ''Secret,'' ''Confidential'' or at least ''Restricted,'' the four categories laid out by Harry Truman in his 1951 executive order establishing the modern classification system.

This could produce absurd results. In the 1950s, according to the historian Sam Lebovic, the Labor Department refused to say how much peanut butter the Army had purchased, for fear that enemy number-crunchers might figure out the size of the armed forces, a statistic that was already public. Vast amounts of information -- some of it no doubt revelatory, some of it innocuous -- remain similarly hidden. In the 1990s, the Moynihan commission estimated that 1.5 billion records dating from more than 25 years back remained inaccessible. In fiscal year 2014 alone, the decision to classify a document was made 77.5 million times. Year after year, the result is an astonishing backlog of classified material.

Even as the Freedom of Information Act allows some of that material to drip into view, many documents emerge heavily redacted, with entire paragraphs or pages blacked out according to one or another legal exemption. The nonprofit National Security Archive has fun matching up different versions of such documents, exposing the ''inane and contradictory'' outcomes that can result when different agencies review what's acceptable for release. On one 1974 document, the C.I.A. redacted news that terrorists in the ''Group of the Martyr Ebenezer Scrooge'' planned to sabotage the Dec. 24 flight of ''Prime Minister and Chief Courier S. Claus''; the Ford Library found no national-security threat in revealing a Christmas joke.

Government officials recognized a problem early on. In 1956, the Defense Department estimated that about 90 percent of its classified documents could easily be made available to the public without damaging national security. Around the same time, Washington observers noticed another disturbing phenomenon: the government-employee ''leak.'' As Lebovic notes in his 2016 book ''Free Speech and Unfree News,'' the introduction of a permanent classification system had ''transformed the practice and culture of journalism,'' creating a Washington press corps dependent on tips and information from government employees. The new system also weighted the political scales in favor of officials adept at hiding unflattering facts and publicizing useful ones. At the F.B.I., the former director J. Edgar Hoover insisted that investigative files be kept secret, waging repeated battles to keep them away from the courts and Congress. But he also became a master of the leak, parceling out choice tidbits to reporters at strategic moments. The competing factions in today's White House appear to understand this technique, even as Attorney General Jeff Sessions promises to step up the administration's war on leaks.

During the 1970s, under the Nixon administration, this wobbly system of secrecy and leaks came near to collapse. In his 1971 Pentagon Papers opinion, Justice Potter Stewart of the Supreme Court noted how longstanding tensions over the public's right to know had produced a vicious politics of deception and subterfuge. ''When everything is classified, then nothing is classified,'' he wrote, ''and the system becomes one to be disregarded by the cynical or the careless, and to be manipulated by those intent on self-protection or self-promotion.'' Stewart meant this as a call for reform. In Trump's Washington, where the struggle over classified information plays out in day-to-day politics, it sounds more like a description of business as usual. The year after Stewart's opinion was issued, a break-in at the Watergate set off a cycle of leaks -- and a scramble to protect secret information -- that ultimately brought down the president.

Beverly Gage is a professor of American political history at Yale. She is the author of ''The Day Wall Street Exploded: A Story of America in Its First Age of Terror'' and is writing a biography of the former F.B.I. director J. Edgar Hoover.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY DEREK BRAHNEY) (MM16) 

Document NYTF000020170827ed8r0007e



National Desk; SECTA
A Vandal's Act, Met With Mercy

By SABRINA TAVERNISE; Alain Delaquéièe contributed research. 
6,945 words
27 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

FORT SMITH, Ark. -- Abraham Davis was sitting on a thin blue pad on the concrete floor of Cell 3 in a jail in western Arkansas when a guard came around with stamped envelopes and writing paper.

The first person he wrote to was his mother. Abraham, just shy of 21, had barely spoken to her since his arrest a few days before, and he had a lot to explain.

It all began on a night last October when he borrowed her white minivan and drove to the home of a friend. They'd gotten drunk on cheap whiskey. Kentucky Deluxe. Abraham agreed to drive his friend to a mosque in town. His friend drew swastikas and curses on the mosque's windows and doors while Abraham stood watch in the driveway.

The next day, the vandalism was all over the news. Abraham watched the reports over and over on his phone, his stomach curdling with regret.

Even now, as he was facing up to six years in prison for the act, Abraham could not explain why he had done it.

He had grown up in Fort Smith, a city of tall oak trees and brick churches that has the look of a faded Polaroid. His father, charismatic but violent, died when Abraham was 5, leaving him with a feeling of powerlessness so intense that he has been trying to conquer it ever since. ''Most of my life I've spent trying to train myself to become something that's too strong to be broken through,'' he said. Life has teed him up for a fight, and he walks tilted slightly forward, as if someone is pulling him with an invisible wire.

As a poor student in the high school on the wealthier side of town, Abraham often felt like an outsider. He walked, not drove, hung out on playgrounds, not in restaurants. He got into a lot of fights. He did poorly in school, but he doesn't remember his teachers seeming surprised. Expectations were low, and he bent to fit them. He slept a lot in class. At 18, he dropped out.

Fort Smith has two country clubs, several golf courses, a Talbots and a symphony orchestra. But a proliferation of pawnshops and a circuit court crowded with indigent defendants are reminders of the grinding poverty all around, in the rural areas of western Arkansas and eastern Oklahoma.

For years, those divisions had been etched into the city's geography. Poorer families lived on the north side of town and wealthier families on the south. Race followed the same pattern, with the south predominantly white and much of the city's black population in the north.

But time has scrambled those old lines. Latinos came here to work in the poultry industry. Pho shops dot the city's main drag, property of Vietnamese who began arriving as refugees after the fall of Saigon. R & R's Curry Express serves deliciously spicy North Indian food at a Finish Line gas station.

Muslims from different countries came, too -- some to study, some to work in the city's growing medical industry. Many had money. Hisham Yasin did not.

A Palestinian who grew up just outside Damascus in Syria, Hisham sold fruits and vegetables in an outdoor market. He came to the United States in 1996, joining his parents and an older brother. Hisham imagined Beverly Hills, but found himself in western Arkansas in a rotting house with rats and cockroaches. He washed dishes at the Golden Corral. His father collected cans. He and a brother, Abdul Rahman, opened a used-car business. They called it A & H Auto Sales.

Today, Hisham lives in a grand house in Fort Smith with sparkling chandeliers on the edge of a thick green forest of oak and pine. He is 49 and has the look of an affable neighborhood baker, with a big belly and a broad smile. He is giving his three children what he calls a ''five-star life'' compared with his own, which he says began at ''below zero.'' He follows the news about Syria daily. But Arkansas is his home. He considers the day he came to the United States -- Feb. 11 -- his birthday.

Hisham was one of the founders of the mosque that Abraham helped vandalize. They called it Al Salam -- meaning ''peace'' in Arabic. Since 2009, it has been in a brick ranch formerly used as a law office. It is on a busy road, South 28th Street, between a library branch and a nursing home. The founders wanted it that way. They thought the Muslims of Fort Smith should be forthright and confident, not hiding somewhere off the beaten path. This, they believed, would gain the community's trust and respect, maybe even help guard against the noxious stream of negative news about Muslims.

The truth was that until the vandalism, few people in Fort Smith knew that Muslims lived in their city.

Abraham did. He had gone to high school with Hisham's older son, Wasim Yasin. They often ate lunch together in the cafeteria. Sometimes it wasn't easy being Muslim in high school, Wasim said. But around Abraham, it was.

''Abraham was a good guy, a 'whatever' kind of guy, he never had any problems with that,'' Wasim said. ''You know how people can talk about Muslims. He came up to me and he said: 'I'm with you, man. If anybody bothers you, just let me know. I'm your friend.'''

Months passed after the vandalism without contact from the police, and Abraham began to feel relief. He had only helped a friend, he told himself. ''My mind was trying to let me off the hook,'' he said.

But his dreams were less forgiving. In one, he was walking through a crowd of parents and their children. The children were looking at some writing and crying. ''It was like one of those Scrooge stories,'' he said. He could see the children, but they could not see him. He saw their frightened faces and woke up sweating.

Now, sitting in the Sebastian County jail, Abraham was not entirely surprised he had ended up here. Expectations for him were so low -- at his church, at school, even in his own mind -- that he sometimes saw the line of his life pointing toward prison.

But not like this. Not with swastikas. So Abraham decided to use another piece of paper the jail guard had given him to write to the mosque. He wanted to tell the people there how sorry he was for what he'd done. What, after all, did he have to lose?

He sat on the floor of the cell, and placed a yellow sheet of paper on one of the metal seats bolted to the wall. He did not know the mosque's name. So he copied it, a letter at a time, from his paperwork.

''Dear Masjid Al Salam Mosque,'' he began.

Countering a Dark Impulse

The sky was just brightening the morning of Oct. 20 when Hisham pulled into the mosque's driveway. He liked to do his morning prayers there when he could. The quiet of the early hour was soothing, and he'd been told that praying at the mosque meant more rewards from God. But he had not come to pray this morning. He had sped there in his white Infiniti, carrying his gun, after receiving a distressed phone call from the imam.

Al Salam's members had already been anxious. For months the year before, a man had sent the mosque disturbing emails. ''Sharia is a cancer that must be eliminated,'' the man warned, until someone called the Federal Bureau of Investigation. And the Republican presidential candidate Donald J. Trump was calling for a ''total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States.'' Few thought that was possible, but it seemed to loosen some dark impulse in the land.

Rolling up to the mosque, Hisham saw the first swastika from the street, spray-painted in black on the bottom left corner of the small curbside sign. It was off-kilter, like a creeping spider.

There was more on the building: ''Go Home'' on the wooden front door, just above a babysitter-wanted sign. On the garage: ''We Don't Want You Here U.S.A.'' And on one of the front windows, among profanities about Islam and Allah, a phrase Hisham did not recognize: ''Deus Vult.'' It is Latin for ''It is God's will'' -- a medieval rallying cry for the Crusades.

Hisham's heart hurt. He thought about how little the vandals understood. America was the only true home Hisham had ever known. As a Palestinian in Syria he had been stateless. America gave him a country. America gave him a kidney, through a transplant. It gave him the dignity of being able to travel in the world. He still cries when he explains this.

''They never let me go to Dubai,'' Hisham said, blowing his nose and wiping his eyes. ''Then I went with my American passport, and they stand up straight -- they say, 'You're welcome, Mr. Hisham!'''

At the mosque that morning, Hisham sprang into action like a rescue worker after an earthquake. He called the police. He called the mosque's board members. He called journalists.

By early afternoon, the story was breaking.

Then something wonderful happened. The mosque's phone started ringing, and didn't stop. Churches called. A synagogue called. Buddhists called. So did residents who had seen the news or simply driven by. One man called, crying. His daughter had seen the graffiti on her way to work and told him about it. He said the vandals could not have been Christians. No true Christian would have done it.

Anas Bensalah, a mosque member who had taken the day off to help with the cleanup, told the man that he understood completely: That was exactly how he felt every time there was an attack by the Islamic State.

Over the next week, the mosque was snowed under with cards and letters. Some people brought flowers. Most of the letters were from Fort Smith and the surrounding towns, but some were from as far as Reston, Va.

Hisham was overjoyed. He kept them, as if they were jewels, in a drawer in his office.

'A Big Heart and a Short Fuse'

The night the mosque was vandalized, Kristin Collins, 45, had been worrying about her white minivan. There was a knocking sound under the hood, and it sometimes lurched unexpectedly. She was afraid the transmission was going, and she could not afford to fix it. Her last job was at a day care center in 2013. She quit after her husband, who had Parkinson's, began having trouble putting diapers on their 1-year-old. The next year, Kristin learned she had leukemia. She and her husband receive disability insurance -- a total of about $1,700 a month to support them, Kristin's son Abraham and his younger brothers, Noah Davis and Gabriel Collins.

Fixing the van was on a long list of things they couldn't afford: the $25 monster costume that Gabriel, 4, wanted for Halloween; the several thousand dollars in back rent on their small brick ranch house. Kristin sometimes had to go to church food banks at the end of the month. And she had the sinking feeling she would have to rely on charity for a turkey on Thanksgiving, only a month away.

So when Abraham asked to borrow the van, she was reluctant. Kristin loved her son. At 20, he was still more a teenager than a man, with a sparse goatee and -- at 5 feet 11 inches and 139 pounds -- a boyish frame. He was outgoing, loved people and liked to show off his break dancing and singing. She remembers his sweet head, hair dyed green, asleep on her hospital couch during her cancer treatment. But he was also directionless and unemployed, and spent too much time drinking and smoking pot with his friends.

Kristin's boys were so different. Her middle son, Noah, was shy and sensitive but also a striver. He rose many days at 6 a.m. to work at a sandwich shop downtown. He had a girlfriend and a car. Where Noah was determined, Abraham just floated through, escaping into comic books and cartoons.

Yet the brothers, only 15 months apart, were extremely close. As kids they played pirates, drinking sweet tea as whiskey on bunk bed boats. Abraham was protective of Noah, a frequent target for bullies with his surgically repaired cleft palate. Abraham was also quick to fight. At 9, he pummeled a boy who had made fun of Noah.

Something was lodged in Abraham from the beginning, like a shard of glass in his heel. Kristin says it came from his father, Hud Davis, who grew up in a violent home. He had one real leg and cartoon flames painted on his fake one, the result of stepping on a downed power line. To his friends, he was full of life. At home, he was cruel. Kristin remembers him grabbing her by the neck and slamming her into the laundry-room door.

Noah would sit on his toy dump truck and wheel himself backward into the closet to hide during the eruptions. Abraham remembers his father screaming that he would not have had to marry ''your whore mother'' if Abraham had not come along.

At 5, Abraham said, he got down on his knees in his bedroom and asked God ''to take him and save my mom.'' When his 33-year-old father died a month later, after a seizure, Abraham believed he was responsible.

As he grew older, Abraham had trouble controlling his anger. Hank Needham, the principal of Cavanaugh Elementary in Fort Smith, remembers him as a polite little boy -- but one with an angry streak. He once threw a fit when the school took away his screwdriver, which had belonged to his father.

''He had a big heart and a short fuse, and he'd just start cussing,'' Mr. Needham said. ''He had an adult mouth in the second grade.''

Mr. Needham gained Abraham's trust, and medication for hyperactivity helped smooth his moods. By the sixth grade, he was an all-star student. His picture still hangs in a hallway promoting good attendance: Abraham, in a yellow sweatshirt, grinning.

It didn't last. By the time he got to Southside High, Abraham had made peace with his place in the social hierarchy. He was, as he put it, ''one of the outcasts.'' But he was O.K. with that. He did not crave being in the popular crowd, which would have been impossible anyway.

He didn't have money for meals at the mall or the latest phone. He couldn't afford fashionable sneakers or jeans; Kristin shopped at Goodwill. When Mr. Needham bought sneakers for Abraham one year, he expected the teenager to pick out the most expensive style. He chose a modest pair.

''He said, 'Mr. Needham, that is not me,''' the principal remembered. '''That is not who I am.'''

Abraham was himself with a small, tight group of friends, which included Craig Wigginton, a tall, intense teenager who lived in a small apartment across town. They bonded over their backgrounds. Craig had spent his early childhood on the carnival circuit with his parents, his father, Rick Wigginton, said. His mother eventually left the family. Last year, when his father was sent to prison for a while, Craig was left alone to care for his younger brother. Abraham helped babysit.

Abraham believed Craig was ''college professor brilliant.'' He sometimes walked eight miles across town to see him. But Craig made Kristin nervous. She was driving him and Abraham somewhere once and a woman in a hijab drove by. She remembers Craig pointing out the ''sand monkey in a Cadillac.'' He seemed jealous.

Mr. Wigginton said his son never used words like that around him. Craig did not respond to requests for comment for this piece.

Craig was the friend Abraham wanted to meet up with the night he asked his mother for the van. Kristin let him take it. It would be four months before she learned what he'd done with it.

The Power of Ignorance

Fort Smith was on the edge of the United States when it appeared in 1817 as a military outpost in Indian Territory, along what is now the Oklahoma-Arkansas border. A federal judge, Isaac Parker, made the place famous in the 1870s by presiding over one of the most prolific courts in the country. Known as the ''Hanging Judge,'' he sentenced 160 people to death; 79 were executed.

Today, Fort Smith is a mix of the South and the West, a peanut butter cup of libertarian and Southern Baptist sensibilities. The Old South still haunts the place: A monument to the first white child born in Fort Smith, erected in 1936, still stands, barely noticed, in a small park behind a beverage distributorship. Southside High's Dixie fight song was not retired until 2015, and its Johnny Rebel mascot a year later -- and not without a fight.

But the New South is here, too. Vibrant murals adorn downtown buildings, including a 100-foot-tall painting of an African-American woman and an Apache man on a grain tower. And while the city had a precipitous decline in manufacturing jobs, its economy is now doing other things.

In February, a Milwaukee-based real estate company bought the old Whirlpool building, where thousands of workers made refrigerators. A large ''Available'' sign is now stuck to its facade. Health care and transportation companies have been hiring, particularly people with an education. The city's unemployment rate is lower than the national average, and its population -- 88,000 -- is up since the last census.

Fort Smith may have its country clubs, but the city's residents are largely middle and lower-middle class. Some homes cost more than $1 million, but a typical home is around $113,000.

No one knows exactly when the first Muslims immigrated to Fort Smith. Dr. Louay Nassri, a pediatric pulmonologist who is the president of Al Salam Mosque and who came to Fort Smith in 1980, said there was at least one Muslim living here in the early 1970s.

Nearly 450 people attended the main Ramadan celebration in June, the closest thing the community has to a census. They are for the most part educated, affluent, integrated. Many are doctors. Others are accountants, business owners, professors and teachers.

Hisham remembers when they were just a curiosity.

''Before 9/11, people thought we were Mexican,'' he said. ''We'd go to Walmart and they'd say, 'Como está amigo?' We were laughing. I said, 'Excuse me, I don't speak Spanish.' They say, 'Where you from?' I say Palestine. They say, 'I never heard about it.' I say, 'I think you hear about Israel, right?' They say yes. I say, 'That's my homeland.'''

Each family adapted in its own way.

Dr. Hania Al-Shahrouri, a kidney specialist from Jordan, got used to people staring at her head covering. Wearing a hijab in the United States is as much an act of bravery as it is an act of faith, she said. When she first moved to Fort Smith, a man walked up to her in the grocery store.

''In our religion, we don't hit our women,'' he said. ''We let them wear whatever they want.''

Tall and confident, with the poise of a ballet dancer, Dr. Al-Shahrouri tells herself that people stare because she is pretty, or because they like the color of her hijab. But she worries that her children, including her 13-year-old daughter, may not be able to summon the same self-confidence. So she wields what weapons she has to protect them: her status as a doctor and her wealth. She drives a Mercedes-Benz sport utility vehicle. She carries an expensive hand bag.

She doesn't like herself for it, but she knows that money commands respect, and in some ways, the Muslims who have it are often spared the bigotry that can bedevil those who do not.

Mr. Bensalah understands, too. He came to Fort Smith from Morocco in 2000 to attend college. His first job was as a dishwasher. He fell in love with and married a local woman whose family refused to accept him -- more because of his skin color, he said, though looking back it was also probably his religion.

''They kept telling her, 'Why aren't you marrying your own kind?''' he said. ''White women were supposed to marry white men.''

On Sept. 25, 2001, his wife was in the hospital for the birth of their first child, and several of her relatives stopped him from entering the building. Standing outside, pleading with them to no avail, was one of the worst experiences of his life, he said. He did not witness the birth of his son. Nor did he tell his mother that he had become a father, fearing she would try to visit.

''I saw the power of anger and ignorance,'' he said.

Determined, Mr. Bensalah wore down his in-laws with wit and generosity. He started with the smokers, standing around and cracking jokes. He bought beer. He went hunting. One day he came home from his job as an accountant to find his wife's cousin on his couch, and they talked for hours. The man became addicted to drugs, and Mr. Bensalah visited him in the hospital after he overdosed. He brought a Bible. As the man recovered, Mr. Bensalah taught him how to budget. He told him that he was worth something. Now the man lives in Colorado with three kids, a wife, and a good job at a mining company.

Out of the worst of America could come the best of America.

This is what makes Dr. Al-Shahrouri love the United States fiercely: There may be bigotry, but the system is fair, she said. She remembers entering a kidney transplant ward in 2004 with her medical team in San Antonio and being told to leave by the patient's wife, who raved that Dr. Al-Shahrouri would kill her husband ''like they killed us on 9/11.'' The doctor in charge warned the woman that if Dr. Al-Shahrouri wasn't allowed to treat her husband, no one would. Then the entire medical team walked out.

Loyalty, Then Regret

On the night of Feb. 17, nearly four months after the mosque was vandalized, the police came to Abraham's house with a warrant for his arrest. Noah thought it was a case of mistaken identity. His brother had been in trouble twice before -- once for having pot paraphernalia in his backpack, once for hanging around too late on a playground -- but nothing that had required a $15,000 bond.

Abraham wasn't home, but Noah knew where he was. ''Dude, the cops came to arrest you,'' he said, driving to pick Abraham up in the minivan so that he could turn himself in. ''What'd you do?''

Later, when Abraham really thought about it, he saw so many things that had brought him to this point. Too much Kentucky Deluxe. An inescapable feeling of worthlessness. Unquestioning loyalty to his friends.

Craig lifted Abraham up. He made him feel good about himself. A history buff, Craig liked to use Hitler as an example, Abraham said.

''He said, 'I understand Hitler did bad things, but on the other side of the coin he is the shining example of why no one can ever say that one man can't change the world,''' Abraham recounted. '''He was just one man from a broken country that was being destroyed by its debts, and he turned it into the most formidable fighting force and almost took over the world.'''

Abraham, Craig and another friend, Ezra Pedraza, would sit around in Kristin's garage, amusing themselves with conspiracy theories and talking about their lives. Ezra went with them on the night of the vandalism.

''He used to tell me and Ezra that we have the power to change the environment around us, too, to do great things and to shape this world,'' Abraham said.

Abraham understands how the attack on the mosque looks. The swastikas. The reference to the Crusades. Craig's father said he was horrified at his son's use of swastikas. Abraham argued that these were intended not as expressions of racism or white power, but merely as the most offensive images they could conjure -- a kind of measure of their manly capacity to shock.

Mr. Bensalah said the symbols had their desired effect precisely because they were racist and threatening. Simple insults would not have gotten people's attention. But swastikas did.

''A swastika is a small act of terrorism if you think about it,'' he said. ''At that point, yes, it's scary.''

For all the regret and penance that the act of vandalism caused Abraham, the decision to commit it took no time at all. The three friends had been drinking and talking about ISIS, he said. Craig was angry about American soldiers being killed, about children dying.

And then an impulse: ''Let's retaliate.''

They got into the white van, and Abraham drove to the mosque on South 28th Street. They went to the other mosque in town that night, too, and drew on it as well.

Abraham burns with regret now. At their ignorance, for lumping all Muslims together. ''That's like meeting one racist, and you say all white guys are like him,'' he said.

At his weakness, for not stopping it: ''I wish I could go back in time and say, 'Hey, dumbass, I'm the future you, and I'm telling you, don't do this.'''

But he'd done it. And now he was on his way to jail in the passenger seat of his mom's white van. Noah drove by the house so Abraham could say goodbye. His mother was sobbing in big, deep gulps. He had felt it before, the dead weight of her disappointment. It made him feel disgusting.

''She cried like a woman who had just got broken,'' he said. ''I think about that a lot. It's stuff like that that hurts you while you are in jail. You replay and replay. It's torture on your mind. Worse than any knife.''

'I Just Want to Say I'm Sorry'

If Abraham had $1,580 for a bail bond, he could have waited for his court date at home. But his family couldn't get the money together. So he waited in jail.

At the Sebastian County Adult Detention Center, a hulking building with window slits like mail slots, he became the third person in a two-man cell with drafty concrete floors and two metal beds sticking out of the wall.

Abraham was given a sheet and a thin blue sleeping pad, with a pillow area sewn into one end where the stuffing had been torn out. His skinny body was on high alert. He felt cold a lot. He barely slept the first week.

Jail reminded him of high school. The prison guards were like the popular kids, lording their power over everybody else. The days were long and boring. People were constantly sizing each other up. New inmates quickly adapted to a rigid social hierarchy.

Pretty much every group was represented. He made friends with a black man who was into Japanese cartoons and a Muslim who showed him the Quran. He had never seen one. The man told Abraham not to bother to look for the part where martyrdom brings 72 virgins. ''He said it wasn't there and he knew because he had looked for it himself,'' Abraham said, laughing.

There were white supremacists of several varieties. One took an interest in Abraham after learning that he had vandalized the mosque, even offered him a tattoo. Abraham told Noah later that he had said no.

It took a month and several upsetting tangles with a confusing appointment system for Kristin to arrange her first visit with Abraham in jail. When she finally saw his face behind the glass, she started to cry. He did, too. Recounting this scene later, he raised his two hands to his cheeks and said, ''Two rivers.''

The telephone for talking through the glass barely worked. They laughed about it. Abraham's mouth moved, but the sound came out delayed, or not at all, like an old kung fu movie. Kristin and Noah visited every Saturday after that.

Abraham had spent his entire life trying to become strong enough to protect his family, but it was not until jail, he said, that he realized that he was the one who had inflicted the most hurt. He felt a powerful urge to set things right.

The letter to the mosque, he said, was a first step.

''I was just so tired of doing the wrong thing,'' he said.

He was terrified of going to prison. But his fate was out of his hands. And, anyway, the truth was out: The mosque's security camera had captured the act.

Abraham did not know the mosque's address, so he mailed it to his mother, with a small note asking her to deliver it. The postmark was Feb. 22.

''Dear Masjid Al Salam Mosque,'' Abraham wrote. ''I know you guys probably don't want to hear from me at all but I really want to get this to y'all. I'm so sorry about having a hand in vandalising your mosque. It was wrong and y'all did not deserve to have that done to you. I hurt y'all and I am haunted by it. And even after all this you still forgave me. You are much better people than I.

''I don't know what's going to happen to me, and that is honestly really scary. But I just wouldn't want to keep going on without trying to make amends. I wish I could undo the pain I helped to cause. I used to walk by your mosque a lot and ask myself why I would do that. I don't even hate Muslims. Or anyone for that matter.

''All in all,'' he concluded, ''I just want to say I'm sorry.''

Noah drove the letter to the mosque on a Friday. He took off his shoes as a sign of respect and introduced himself. Dr. Nassri was moved. No one had expected to hear from the vandals. Certainly not like this.

Dr. Nassri called a meeting of senior members of the mosque. Hisham was there. So was Mr. Bensalah, the accountant from Morocco.

The sermon had just reminded them of their duty as Muslims to forgive. It didn't take them long to do it.

''If one of my kids did something stupid like that I would want them to be forgiven,'' Mr. Bensalah said.

Later, when Dr. Nassri met with a man from the prosecutor's office, he made clear that the mosque did not want to press charges and strongly opposed a felony charge for Abraham.

''We did not want this to destroy his life,'' Dr. Nassri said.

Urging Mercy

The long wooden benches in the gallery of Courtroom 201 were already packed on May 24, the day of Abraham's hearing. Nearly everyone was white. Most of the defendants were poor.

The morning unfolded in a relentless stream of misery over crimes like drug possession and writing bad checks.

Kristin and Noah walked in at 9 a.m. sharp. Noah, in his best jeans and plaid shirt, sat with his chin in his hands. Kristin kept nervously shifting in her seat. Hisham walked in, wearing jeans and an electric-lime shirt. He wedged himself in next to Kristin, but had no idea who she was.

Abraham's case had taken an unexpected turn.

Dr. Nassri had gone to meet the prosecutors again. They had bad news: Abraham would have to plead guilty to a felony, not a mere misdemeanor, or face a trial. He would avoid prison, but only if he remained on good behavior for three years. Any minor violation could land him behind bars for six years. The best outcome he could hope for would be to get a judge to seal his record -- in eight years.

Dr. Nassri was taken aback. ''I said, 'You guys are asking for more than we want,''' he said. ''They call us the victims, and the victims say, 'Hey, guys, loosen up!'''

But the prosecutors were unmoved. Daniel Shue, the head prosecuting attorney, said that actions had consequences and that all three men had participated. And this was not just a run-of-the-mill vandalism, it was an act of bigotry.

The mosque's camera had captured Craig in the act of writing, and his punishment was steepest. The prosecutor said that there was no clear proof that either of the other two had done any writing but that no one could know without a trial.

The law was straightforward: If the spray painting and other vandalism cost the mosque more than $1,000 to repair, the case was a felony. Anything equal or less than that was a misdemeanor. Dr. Nassri submitted paperwork showing the mosque had spent only $500 on cleanup. But the prosecutor's office sought its own estimate from a local restoration company, which claimed the damage would cost about $1,800 to clean up.

Abraham's public defender told him that they could attack that evidence at trial. But Abraham wanted to get out of jail.

Around 11:15 a.m., he shuffled into the courtroom through a side door in an orange jump suit and leg irons. Craig was with him. Ezra Pedraza, who had been out on bail, wore a plaid shirt and jeans.

The prosecutor noted that the victims ''asked for mercy and leniency.''

The judge looked out at the defendants. ''Mercy. Hmmm.''

He accepted their pleas. Then he lectured them.

''If the victims in this case had not approved of this, I would not have done it,'' he said. ''You would have gone to trial, and there is a good chance all three of you would have gone to prison. So you need to think twice before you do something, which is just stupid. What you did was just stupid.''

Kristin, losing patience, said under her breath: ''Thank you. Point taken.''

Hard-Won Second Chances

It is summer in Fort Smith. The sun is searing. On Hisham's car lot, small fruit trees and vegetables grow in dirt-filled kiddie swimming pools. He is already harvesting figs and hot peppers, as well as Syrian thyme and mint that he uses to flavor his visitors' tea.

Hisham believes the vandalism of his mosque was one of the best things to happen to the Muslims of Fort Smith. The crime allowed them to reveal themselves -- to say, ''We are your doctors, your accountants and your used-car salesmen.'' They now have a relationship with the synagogue in town. Several members, including Dr. Al-Shahrouri, the kidney specialist, have begun speaking to local audiences about Islam.

Hisham was reminded of a saying from the Quran.

''You might hate something that happens to you, but actually it's excellent for you,'' he said, sitting in his small, cluttered shop, surrounded by artifacts of his life: a revolving display of birthday key chains, a giant dried bean pod the size of an arm, an Elvis belt buckle and two plaques he got in the mail after he donated to a Sept. 11 fund. ''That's what happened to us: Something very bad. But very good result.''

But Hisham also doesn't like how hard it is to get a second chance in America. You can do a stupid thing and pay for it, but afterward no one will hire you. Hisham has helped two men in this situation. They do odd jobs at his car lot. He went to court with them when no one else would. He helped one buy a washing machine, and paid for the other to bury a relative.

''Someone messes up and it sticks with him all his life,'' Hisham said. ''Even if he tries to become a good man, the community say to him, 'You are a bad man!' They encourage him to be a bad man.''

For Abraham, jail became a dividing line between the mistakes of his past and some unknown future.

When Noah first saw his brother after he was released, Abraham was standing alone outside the jail, holding an envelope and a Bible. Noah parked the car and jumped out without shutting his door, sprinting across the street to embrace him.

Back at home, Abraham's family gathered around him in the driveway, laughing and talking. The night was warm, and the stars were out. Gabriel was ecstatic, hopping up and down.

''I'm overwhelmed,'' Abraham said, looking at the sky.

Kristin wanted to sing a song with her son: ''Find Your Wings,'' by the Christian singer Mark Harris. They sang, haltingly and softly, in harmony:

I pray that God would fill your heart with dreams.

And that faith gives you the courage to dare to do great things.

I'm here for you whatever this life brings.

So let my love give you roots. And help you find your wings.

''That's my boy,'' Kristin said, beaming at Abraham. ''That's my baby boy.''

But he was now a felon, and there were daily reminders of that. A police car regularly circled their block. He had community service to perform, and within a few days he was sorting donations at a Goodwill store.

He owed about $3,200 in fines and restitution, but landing a job would be harder now. Kristin found about 20 employers in Fort Smith that hired felons. Abraham wanted to fill out paper applications but was told to apply online. He did not have a computer, which meant he had to go to the library whenever he needed one.

His family's finances had not improved while he was away. The day he started at Goodwill, the water was cut off at the house and the phone was about to be disconnected.

He felt embarrassed to tell people what he had done, like the manager at Goodwill, who recognized Abraham from when he used to come in as a boy. But he would feel better afterward, as if confessing was helping him grow some stub of a new self.

It was a daily struggle. ''I wake up and look in the mirror and I just think, 'Who are you?''' Abraham said.

He wanted badly to visit the mosque, to say hello and thank the people there. Dr. Nassri had asked the prosecutor to allow Abraham to come, but was told no. Mr. Bensalah suggested meeting Abraham in a cafe, but the public defender advised against it.

After he got out of jail, Abraham posted a note on Facebook.

''Well, I'm home now,'' he wrote. ''I just want to say thank you to all those who have been supporting me and a big thanks to the guys at the mosque who have been supportive and helpful and I pray blessings over them.''

The next day, he saw a response from Wasim, Hisham's son.

''Bro move on with life we forgave you from the first time you apologized don't let that mistake bring you down,'' he had written. And then, Abraham's favorite line: ''I speak for the whole Muslim community of fort smith we love you and want you to be the best example in life we don't hold grudges against anybody!''

It was the nicest thing anyone had ever said to him.

Above left, a repentant Abraham Davis after his release from jail for his role in the spray-painting of Al Salam Mosque in Fort Smith, Ark., last year. Above right, a forgiving Hisham Yasin, a Palestinian immigrant and one of the founders of the mosque, below. (A1); A security camera, top, that captured the act of vandalism at Al Salam Mosque, which was defaced with spray paint. Above, Abraham Davis, right, and his brother Noah.; Hisham Yasin with letters sent to the mosque, most of them expressing sorrow and support. (A21); Top, Dr. Hania Al-Shahrouri and her daughter, Salma, who turned 13 in April and started wearing a hijab the next month. The gravestone of the Davis brothers' father, center, and the apartment complex in Fort Smith, Ark., where Abraham Davis's friend Craig Wigginton lives.; Kristin Collins's white minivan, which her son and two friends drove to two mosques last October. (A22); Top, the letter that Abraham Davis wrote to Al Salam Mosque. Center, Hisham Yasin tutoring children at the mosque. Above, a plaque noting the birth of the first white child in Fort Smith. (A23); Noah Davis, top right, greeted his brother Abraham upon his release from the Sebastian County jail. Above, Dr. Louay Nassri with his wife, Najla Madina. Dr. Nassri met with prosecutors, urging mercy.; A streamer-adorned Prius at A&H Auto Sales, the business founded by Hisham Yasin. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ETHAN TATE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A24) 

Document NYTF000020170827ed8r0006j



Arts and Leisure Desk; SECTAR
'Dance or Die' Is More Than a Message

By NINA SIEGAL 
1,378 words
27 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
13
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

AMSTERDAM -- Last summer in Syria, Ahmad Joudeh visited the demolished ruins of his family home in the Yarmouk refugee camp near Damascus to dance in the place where his relatives had been killed.

Behind him, separated only by a black curtain, was a group of rebel snipers who occasionally fired off a shot; in front, Syrian military personnel patrolled the terrain. A Dutch documentary filmmaker, Roozbeh Kaboly, was there too, capturing the moment.

''You hear their guns?'' Mr. Joudeh says in Mr. Kaboly's film. ''They told me they will shoot me in my leg just so that I will lose my life as a dancer.''

Mr. Joudeh, though, remains calm and shows the cameras a tattoo on the back of his neck, the spot where ISIS terrorists have chopped the heads off their victims: ''Dance or Die,'' it reads. ''This is my message,'' he says. ''Many people are dead here. My uncles are dead here; I will dance'' for their souls.

Mr. Kaboly's 18-minute documentary, also called ''Dance or Die,'' was a turning point for Mr. Joudeh. It was broadcast last August on ''Nieuwsuur,'' a Dutch program akin to ''60 Minutes.'' Ted Brandsen, the managing director of the Dutch National Ballet, saw it and was captivated.

''He had something in his determination; a complete focus,'' Mr. Brandsen said in a recent interview. ''I thought: 'There must be something we can do for this guy.''' The next day, Mr. Brandsen started a crowdfunding initiative to raise at least 25,000 euros, or nearly $30,000, to bring Mr. Joudeh to Amsterdam.

Within a few months, a visa, a residency permit, a program of study, housing and a plane ticket were all arranged. To Mr. Joudeh's astonishment, he was soon saying goodbye to his mother, brother and sister in Damascus and leaving his homeland behind.

Now, less than a year since arriving in Europe, Mr. Joudeh has become a creative spokesman for peace in Syria, using dance as his platform. In July he danced in front of the Eiffel Tower in Paris, in a collaboration with the singer Sanga. He performed before 14,000 people in the Ziggo Dome in Amsterdam, in a concert to raise money for refugees; and he has danced at refugee-related events and conferences in Italy, France, Spain and Norway.

Meanwhile, he made his debut with the Dutch National Ballet in Mr. Brandsen's production of ''Coppelia,'' and in September he will perform a minor role in ''Sleeping Beauty.''

His roles so far have been what Mr. Brandsen calls ''character parts,'' and he's not likely to become a star in the company. ''I was surprised by what he had been able to achieve with the patchiness of the training he had,'' Mr. Brandsen said. ''It's a bit late for him to be a classical [ballet dancer] but that doesn't mean he can't be an artist, a dancer.''

Mr. Joudeh, who spoke with me at a cafe here near the ballet and opera, first encountered ballet when he was 8. He was singing in a school performance and the next act was a group of girls dancing. ''I was moving with them from my seat,'' he recalled, ''and I went home I was trying to do the same movements. After that, I was dancing all the time, in the house, in the street, and if I heard any music anywhere.''

At 16, totally self-taught, he auditioned for the main Syrian ballet company, Enana Dance Theater in Damascus, and was accepted. There he was trained in ballet, gymnastics and modern dance, while also performing with the company, which relocated to Dubai in 2012. As he became more skilled he took on more solo roles, his teacher, Albina Belova, said, and he traveled extensively with the company in places including Qatar, Algeria, Tunisia, Jordan and Lebanon.

''Ahmad first of all had very good potential, and he had the passion to dance, and he always put all his effort to study,'' Ms. Belova said in a telephone interview from Dubai. ''Our dance company use to work like a big family and he used to call me like a mama, because it showed how much he learned from us.''

In 2014, he was invited to be a contestant on the Arab version of the television show ''So You Think You Can Dance.'' ''Bravo, bravo, bravo,'' a judge said after his performance. ''For a tall gentleman you're using all your body, and you're flying up in the air. Flying, looking for freedom.''

But as a rare male ballet dancer in Arab society, he was regularly vilified, even at home. His father subjected him to beatings so intense that they once broke his leg.

''It has nothing to do with religious beliefs,'' Mr. Joudeh said. ''Dance for men is just considered shameful. Dance is for girls, and for girls it's also not considered polite.''

His mother divorced his father, and Mr. Joudeh and a friend set up a dance school in Yarmouk Camp; his mother managed the studio and Mr. Joudeh said he was happy there. ''Before my house was destroyed, I had a great life,'' he said. ''I had my house, my studio with my friend, and we were teaching dance in the camp to hundreds of students.''

Mr. Kaboly found Mr. Joudeh later, when his only place to practice was on a Damascus rooftop; he was still teaching dance to orphans and to young people with Down syndrome at SOS Children's Villages, which help children who have lost family in the war.

''When people think of Syria, they think of men with beards and guns in their hands,'' Mr. Kaboly said in an interview. ''But that's not the Syria I saw as a reporter working there. I saw people who were trying to live their lives. I was looking to do a piece on the artists, athletes or people who were doing something different.''

He discovered Mr. Joudeh on a website and was attracted to his energy: ''He was almost flying.''

The invitation to leave Syria came at a good time for Mr. Joudeh, who had been expected to join the Syrian Army in September 2016 for a mandatory service of three years. ''I knew I would be killed because I'm not killing anybody,'' he said. ''If you want me to go to fight the real enemy, O.K., I go. But to fight my own people, I don't want to be involved in this, even if they will kill me.''

Still, leaving Syria was wrenching, he said, because he had to leave behind his mother, brother and sister -- and all his students. Since he's been in the Netherlands, he struggles with coming to terms with what he now has, and how limited he is in his ability to help others back at home. ''The only moments when I feel good,'' he said, are ''when my mind is busy with dancing. But when I'm in the house or biking or taking a shower, memories are always attacking my mind.''

He spends his free time with his roommates -- an Italian and a Brazilian -- who are also studying with the ballet and whom he considers ''like brothers.'' Back in Syria, his family has been attacked already a couple of times since he left -- their home ransacked once and his brother's car destroyed -- and he is doing all he can to try to bring them to safety.

Soon after he arrived in Amsterdam, Mr. Joudeh got a second tattoo: the word ''Free'' in English on his left wrist, next to a picture of a dove, a symbol of peace. But when asked if he feels free now, he shakes his head. ''You think, O.K., you reach your freedom but all your people are not free,'' he said. ''Then you are not free. I cannot got back and visit my family, and they cannot come here. Any time that I can see my mother I will feel free.''

The Syrian dancer Ahmad Joudeh in Amsterdam, where he now lives. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HERMAN WOUTERS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170827ed8r0005o



World; Asia Pacific
Graves Fill an Afghan Mosque’ Garden After a Terrorist Attack

By MUJIB MASHAL 
1,176 words
26 August 2017
22:20
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan —vernight, a small garden of pink and red roses at a Shiite mosque in Kabul was turned into a cemetery.

Before Friday, old men had often lingered in the garden, thumbing their prayer beads or making small talk before entering the worship hall. But on Saturday, some of those men were buried in the garden, some with their wives, all victims of a terrorist attack.

The exact death toll from the attack on the Imam Zaman mosque, which lasted nearly four hours, is unclear. The Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission put the number of dead at 40 and said 90 people were wounded. Congregation members said at least 40 people had been killed and possibly more than 50.

At least six attacks on Shiite places of worship in Afghanistan have left more than 80 dead this year. The Islamic State group has claimed responsibility for many of those attacks, including the one on Friday.

The elders at the Imam Zaman mosque, in northern Kabul, said the burial of the dead in the garden would help congregation members in the years to come remember the cost of a simple prayer.

“e wanted this to be their memorial also, so everyone coming for worship can pray for their souls,”aid Hajji Abdul Razaq Sakha, one of the elders of the mosque. “his is our place of prayer; this is our fortress. They can kill us, but we won’ leave.”

Details of the assault and the attackers remained unclear. Mosque elders, as well as some security officials, said four suicide bombers had entered after shooting the guard and had shot their way upstairs to the women’ section. Most of the men who survived the first round of gunfire rushed through the back doors or jumped from the windows. Dozens hid at the home of the mosque’ imam, in the corner of the compound, before they were rescued by an elite unit of police officers.

“ne of the suicide bombers blew himself up upstairs in the women section, and one by the entrance downstairs,”aid one of the worshipers who had fled.

He added: “he question is: What happened to the other two?”aybe they escaped, he said, and will “eturn another day.”

On Saturday, the mosque’ main hall smelled of smoke and blood, and its ceiling and chandelier had turned black. In a corner were partly burned religious texts. Outside, a pile of unclaimed shoes.

Upstairs, in the women’ section, the carpet was spattered with patches of blood. A single fan continued to spin. On the soot-covered wall between two arched windows was a message in white chalk: “y sister, congratulations on your martyrdom!”

Most of the victims were women or elderly men who could not make it out in time. Among the more than 20 victims buried in the mosque’ garden were a couple in their 70s, Hajji Ghulam Hassan Behsudi and his wife, Fatima Behsudi.

The Friday Prayer service was usually a family occasion for the Behsudis; as many as eight adults would attend. But on the day of the attack, the children and grandchildren stayed home and prepared a beef stew for after the prayer service. Before they left for the mosque, a couple of blocks away, Mr. Behsudi ate some grapes, and his wife had a slice of melon.

Mr. Behsudi, originally from Maidan Wardak Province, had moved to the neighborhood about 50 years ago, when the first of their eight children was just a year old. The family had a shop in Kabul’ main market, the Mandawi. He had a bad knee and often walked with a cane.

Mrs. Behsudi had a sore back, some trouble with her disk. She often told her three daughters-in-law how easy they had it. As a young bride in the village, she had to take care of the cows and help with the farm along with other chores, and husbands in those days were often more violent and abusive.

As soon as they heard about the attack, the couple’ children ran toward the mosque. One of the daughters, Tahera, 32, said she had begged the police to let her through the security cordon. They refused.

After the bodies of her parents had been retrieved to be prepared for burial, Tahera said her mother had three bullet wounds and bruises on her face. Her father had been shot four times.

“he bleeding would not stop,”he said. “o we wrapped them in plastic before putting them in the shroud.”

Around noon on Saturday, men formed three rows in the mosque’ courtyard for the funeral prayers.

The two graves were dug next to each other. After 50 years together, the couple would now be separated by a thin mud wall. Mr. Behsudi was first to be lowered into the earth.

One of his sons, Ghulam Nabi, climbed down into the grave for one last look at his father.

“o, father, go,”e said. “his is our last visit. You did a lot for us.”

His brother, Ghulam Hussain, climbed atop the mound of dirt beside the grave to carry out a ritual obligation.

“f my father owed out anyone anything, raise your voices now so we can take care of his debts,”e told the crowd.

Then, the body of Mrs. Behsudi was lowered into her grave. Both graves were covered with flat rocks, and the cracks were sealed with mud. Then men shoveled dirt over the bodies.

Within minutes, the graves were covered and marked by two headstones.

Around them, the burials continued. Bodies arrived for a final prayer and were then carried to the garden and their graves, past the few remaining roses along the edges. Politicians arrived to offer condolences, give speeches and pose for photographs.

The imam offering the final prayers gave a spirited speech, urging unity. He began with a poem, part of which said:

The young people are saying the elders are all gone

We, too, are going —ecause our friends are all gone.

Fatima Faizi and Jawad Sukhanyar contributed reporting.

* \b ISIS\b0  Claims Deadly Attack on Shiite Mosque in Afghanistan

* Afghan Mosque Suicide Bombing Kills at Least 20

* Gunmen Attack Crowded Shiite Shrine in Kabul

* Islamic State Again Strikes at Afghan Shiites, Killing at Least 30 in Kabul

Funerals took place Saturday for victims of an attack on a Shiite mosque in Kabul, Afghanistan. Dozens of people, including women and children, were killed. | Rahmat Gul/Associated Press | Afghans on Saturday took photographs of burned pages of the Quran inside the Shiite mosque that was attacked in Kabul. | Rahmat Gul/Associated Press | The shoes left behind by the victims of the attack on a Kabul mosque lay in a pile near the entrance on Saturday. | Rahmat Gul/Associated Press | Many of the victims of the attack on the mosque in Kabul were buried in the mosque’ garden on Saturday. | Rahmat Gul/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170826ed8q003h1



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Islamic State Claims Attack at Shiite Mosque in Afghanistan

By MUJIB MASHAL 
745 words
26 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan -- Suicide attackers stormed a crowded mosque in Kabul during Friday Prayer, officials said, killing at least 20 people and wounding dozens of others in the latest in a series of deadly attacks against Shiites in Afghanistan.

The Islamic State, which previously claimed deadly assaults against Shiite targets in the country, said its militants were behind the attack, according to the group's Amaq news agency.

Worshipers who had jumped out of windows and fled barefoot from the siege described scenes of panic and bloodshed after gunmen entered the compound in a residential area in the north of the city. The men stormed in after an explosion, believed to have been caused by grenades thrown at security guards at the entrance.

Eidi Muhammad Akbari, who fled to safety, said that hundreds of people had been stuck inside.

''Half of the mosque was full of worshipers -- women upstairs and men downstairs, hundreds of men and women,'' he said, pacing barefoot. ''They threw a grenade inside and then entered.''

Multiple heavy explosions were heard. As plumes of thick smoke rose above the mosque, witnesses said, the Afghan forces tore down a rear wall to rescue dozens of worshipers trapped inside.

''I personally helped evacuate 20 dead bodies, many of them women,'' said Sayed Hussain, who managed to get inside the mosque to look for his friends. ''They had killed people wherever they found them.''

Nearly four hours after it began, elite Afghan forces declared the siege was over.

''We are still transferring casualties to hospitals,'' said Mohammed Ismail Kawoosi, a spokesman for the Afghan Health Ministry.

He said that in addition to those killed, at least 40 others were wounded.

Najib Danish, a spokesman for the Interior Ministry, said three attackers were involved in the siege, which killed at least 10 civilians and three police officers. At least 30 civilians and police officers were wounded.

''The police evacuated 107 people trapped in the mosque,'' Mr. Danish said.

But survivors said the death toll might be much higher.

Mohammed Jawad Qurbani, who was trapped in the mosque for three hours before he was rescued by the police, said dozens of men and women tried to hide at the home of the mosque's imam in the corner of the compound.

''The attackers quickly went upstairs, where women were praying,'' Mr. Qurbani said.

Gunfire and explosions were heard as special forces, using drone cameras and accompanied by bomb-sniffing dogs, scrambled to find a way into the compound.

Their armored vehicles came under fire as they tried to go in the front entrance, one police officer said, and the forces sought to gain access through homes behind the mosque, even as residents tried to flee with their families.

A mother arrived at the security cordon, wailing and begging the police to let her proceed toward the mosque.

''My son is not answering the phone,'' she said. ''What do I do?''

The police apologized and said they could not allow her to pass because fighting was underway.

Deadly attacks against Shiite Muslims in Afghanistan have increased in recent months, and a local affiliate of the Islamic State has claimed responsibility for many of them. On Aug. 1, the group attacked a Shiite mosque in the western city of Herat during evening prayer, killing almost 40.

Human Rights Watch, in a statement, said the deliberate targeting of a group of unarmed civilians in a place of worship amounted to a war crime.

''This contemptible act against a religious minority, claimed by ISIS's Afghan affiliate, is a grim reminder that civilians bear the brunt of Afghanistan's war,'' said Patricia Gossman, senior Afghanistan researcher at Human Rights Watch.

The Taliban, which in the past have been behind other deadly attacks in the country, denied responsibility this time.

''We are not involved in today's attack on a mosque in the Khair Khana area of Kabul,'' a Taliban spokesman, Zabihullah Mujahid, said in a WhatsApp message.

He attributed the attack to unidentified groups ''that are trying to create discord within our nation.''

Follow Mujib Mashal on Twitter @MujMash.

Afghans inspected damage on Friday at a mosque, above, in Kabul after bombers killed at least 20 people there. At left, a woman was rushed to get treatment after the suicide attack, which sent worshipers jumping out windows and fleeing in panic. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY OMAR SOBHANI/REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020170826ed8q0003f



opinion
The Slaughter of Children in Yemen; Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
581 words
25 August 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The Saudi-led coalition waging a bombing campaign in Yemen has once again been named in a United Nations draft report as the major culprit in the deaths and injuries of children in that war-ravaged Arab state. The Saudis are already said to be privately campaigning to change the report and keep its coalition off the list of armies that kill and maim children. Last year they succeeded. That should not be allowed to happen again.

The civil war that has engulfed Yemen, one of the Arab world’ poorest countries, for almost three years has created one of the worst humanitarian crises on the globe. Almost three million Yemenis are internally displaced; the numbers of acutely malnourished children and people in dire need of food assistance are the highest in the world; health services have been devastated; and a cholera epidemic has killed nearly 2,000 people and infected more than half a million in just three months. Yet a blockade by the Saudi-led coalition since 2015 has reduced humanitarian aid to a trickle.

And there’ the bombing. Since the Saudi coalition entered the fray in March 2015 to push back Houthi rebels and restore the internationally recognized government, more than 7,600 people have been killed and 42,000 wounded, most of them in coalition airstrikes. Saudi Arabia insists its planes avoid civilian targets, but hospitals, schools and other civilian sites have been struck. On Wednesday, the United Nations reported that at least 30 civilians had been killed in Saudi bombing runs around Sana.

Last year, threatened with inclusion on the United Nations blacklist of forces that harm children, Saudi Arabia threatened to withhold financing from major humanitarian operations, and Ban Ki-moon, then secretary general, reluctantly struck the coalition off the list. But he made the episode public, effectively acknowledging that the coalition (which includes Bahrain, Egypt, Kuwait, Sudan and the United Arab Emirates) did belong on the list.

That should have put Saudi Arabia on notice. But leaked drafts of a report for 2016 by the special representative for children and armed conflict, Virginia Gamba, who was named by Mr. Ban’ successor, Antóio Guterres, said the coalition was responsible for more than half of child casualties and three-quarters of the attacks on schools and hospitals in Yemen last year. The rebels, Al Qaeda and ISIS, which are also embroiled in the conflict, were held responsible for the rest.

The civil war, which ostensibly pits the government of President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi against Houthi rebels, is a tangle of religious and tribal rivalries, in which no side is innocent of atrocities. Saudi Arabia’ main motive for joining the fighting was to prop up a Sunni government against what it saw as an Iran-backed assault by Shiite rebels.

But the war is at a stalemate, and the Saudi coalition —nd its American enablers, who provide military equipment, aerial refueling and targeting —imply cannot be allowed to continue killing civilians and destroying what little is left of Yemen. That is why it is imperative to publicly identify the unconscionable slaughter of innocents for what it is, and to hope that this will shame Saudi Arabia and its American backers to search for a humane end to Yemen’ hell.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document INHT000020170825ed8p0000r



world
Barcelona Attacks Add to Tension Between Catalonia and Spain

By RAPHAEL MINDER 
939 words
24 August 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BARCELONA, Spain —he attacks in and near Barcelona initially led rival Spanish and Catalan politicians to present an image of solidarity in the face of terrorism.

King Felipe VI and Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy attended solemn commemorations in Barcelona for victims. Mr. Rajoy even held a news conference with Carles Puigdemont, the Catalan leader, whom he had not met officially since April of last year.

But with the end of the hunt for the assailants this week, the tensions that had been masked by the facade of unity are now threatening to boil over, as the political clock ticks toward a Catalan independence referendum scheduled for Oct. 1. Mr. Rajoy has threatened to block that vote with the help of Spanish courts.

The attacks that killed 15 people last week “ccurred at the worst moment of the relationship between Catalan and Spanish politicians, and the only thing this has done is to add more tensions below the surface,”aid Ramon Perelló the head of Penísula, a Barcelona-based publisher.

The attacks have already helped expose the gaps between the Catalan regional and Spanish national governments.

Spain’ interior minister, Juan Ignacio Zoido, and his regional counterpart in Catalonia, Joaquim Forn, publicly disagreed this past weekend in their assessment of whether the terrorist cell had been dismantled.

Mr. Forn also stoked controversy by making a distinction between Catalan and other Spanish victims of the attacks, during an interview with local media.

Those political differences, it is becoming clearer, also have practical security implications that the attack plotters perhaps managed to exploit.

The plotters circumvented a security apparatus that, until last week, had helped Spain avoid attacks like the Madrid train bombings that killed 192 people in 2004.

Two decades ago, Madrid agreed to give Catalonia full control over policing under its own force, the Mossos d’squadra. Even before last week’ attacks, however, Catalan separatists were demanding more resources for the Mossos.

On Sunday, Mr. Puigdemont used a television interview to argue that Catalonia should have direct ties to the C.I.A. and other intelligence services, without information passing through Madrid.

“’ sure the Spanish secret services are in contact with the services of other countries,”e said. “hat’ clear is that the Mossos would love to have this direct relationship with the C.I.A. but it hasn’ happened.”

On Tuesday, however, an association representing Spain’ national and military police turned the argument around, claiming instead that the Catalan authorities had marginalized the contribution of Madrid, “ith only one goal in mind: to show an image outside our borders of a self-sufficient Catalan state.”

Adding to this controversy, the Catalan authorities have now acknowledged that last year a Belgian police officer requested information from a Catalan colleague about Abdelbaki Essati, an imam who is believed to have inspired last week’ attacks. The request, however, was made in “n absolutely informal manner,”r. Forn, the region’ interior minister, said Thursday at a news conference.

The next significant test will come on Saturday, when political leaders are urging citizens to join a march in Barcelona to denounce terrorism. Earlier this week, the Popular Unity Candidacy — far-left and anti-monarchy party known by its Catalan acronym, CUP —hreatened to boycott the march if King Felipe attends.

One of the party’ lawmakers, Mireia Boya, told a local radio station that the monarch was “ friend of Qatar and the Emirates”nd as such had contributed to the financing of Islamic terrorism. The party’ threat, however, drew a strong rebuke from Mr. Puigdemont.

The CUP is a small but pivotal force in the drive for Catalan independence. Its members have guaranteed that a coalition of separatists hold a majority of the seats in Catalonia’ regional parliament.

The party’ reaction to the attacks suggests they not only aggravated tensions between Madrid and Barcelona but created frictions among the separatists themselves.

After the attacks, Madrid-based newspapers ran editorials urging the Catalan separatist government to abandon its referendum plan. “n attack on this scale must serve as a wake-up call for Catalan political forces to return to reality,”l Paí wrote.

Such commentary, however, has incensed separatists. “pain’ politicians and media have a long tradition of using terrorism as a political tool, the clearest example being what happened in 2004,”aid Salvador Garcia-Ruiz, the chief executive of Ara, a Catalan newspaper that backs independence.

“e’e now seeing the start of the same kind of manipulation —nd I think it will only get worse”s the referendum deadline approaches, he said.

The 2004 bombing of commuter trains in Madrid —nly days before a national election —hanged the course of Spanish politics.

Voters then punished a conservative government for its rush to blame Basque separatists rather than jihadi militants for the train bombings, Spain’ deadliest terrorist attack.

“here’ clearly the temptation to score points in both Barcelona and Madrid, but everybody remembers there could be an even bigger price to pay if any action gets seen as using such horror only for political gain,”aid Josep Ramoneda, a political columnist. “t’ a very delicate situation for both sides.”

* How a Shadowy Imam Evaded Scrutiny and Forged the Barcelona Cell

* Barcelona Attack Suspects Had Ties to Imam Linked to \b ISIS\b0 

* Police See Wider Plot in Spain and Say Carnage Could Have Been Worse

* Spain, a Leader in Foiling Attacks, Falls Victim to One Anyway

* Suspect Detained After Threat Against Rotterdam Concert, Dutch Police Say

Document INHT000020170825ed8o00007



Op-Ed Contributor
Opinion
Why Is the Southern Poverty Law Center Targeting Liberals?

By AYAAN HIRSI ALI 
1,208 words
24 August 2017
16:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Since the violence in Charlottesville 10 days ago, when white supremacists left one young woman dead and 19 others injured, the Southern Poverty Law Center has hit the jackpot. The Alabama-based nonprofit is set to receive millions of dollars in donations from some of the nation’ deepest of pockets. Apple pledged $1 million. JP Morgan Chase & Co.: half a million. George and Amal Clooney even got in on the action, promising to donate another $1 million.

Like every other decent American, I was outraged that the president of the United States equivocated in condemning neo-Nazi activity in this country. Nazism —ot to mention white supremacy and racial bigotry —as no place in a civilized society.

But is donating money to the S.P.L.C. the best way to combat this poison? I think not. If Tim Cook and Jamie Dimon had done their due diligence, they would know that the S.P.L.C. is an organization that has lost its way, smearing people who are fighting for liberty and turning a blind eye to an ideology and political movement that has much in common with Nazism.

I am a black woman, a feminist and a former Muslim who has consistently opposed political violence. The price for expressing my beliefs has been high: I must travel with armed security at all times. My friend and collaborator Theo van Gogh was murdered in broad daylight.

Yet the S.P.L.C. has the audacity to label me an “xtremist,”ncluding my name in a “Field Guide to Anti-Muslim Extremists”hat it published on its website last October.

In that guide, the S.P.L.C. claims that I am a “ropagandist far outside the political mainstream”nd warns journalists to avoid my “amaging misinformation.”hese groundless smears are deeply offensive, as I have dedicated much of my adult life to calling out the true extremists: organizations such as Al Qaeda and ISIS. Yet you will look in vain for the S.P.L.C.’ “ield Guide to Muslim Extremists.”o such list exists.

That’ a shame, because Islamic extremism — movement that aims to impose a caliphate and Sharia law by violent means —s as toxic as white supremacy. In the past two decades, it has certainly been responsible for many more deaths.

Like neo-Nazis, Islamic extremists despise liberalism. They deny the equality of the sexes, justify wife-beating and, in some cases, even the enslavement of female unbelievers. The Islamic State and groups like it regularly murder gay people in the most heinous ways. Islamic extremists are also virulently anti-Semitic, like the Nazis before them. And like today’ American Nazis, they brandish swastikas, chant slurs and peddle conspiracy theories.

The terrible consequences of Islamic extremism are on display on a weekly basis around the world. In the days after Charlottesville, five men in Barcelona used a van and knives to kill 14 and injure scores of innocent people. Another Islamic extremist went on a stabbing rampage in Finland. In wealthy societies like the United States, most plots to kill in the name of Islamist supremacy are foiled. But poorer societies in the developing world lack the means to do that, which is why the majority of victims of the extremists are in countries like Afghanistan, Iraq, Nigeria, Pakistan and Syria.

It is not surprising that, when I point out such facts, I am viciously attacked and threatened by those who are dedicated to Islamic extremism. But it has always struck me as odd that so many supposed liberals in the West take their side rather than mine, as happened three years ago, when Brandeis University rescinded their offer to me of an honorary degree. I would have expected a civil-rights organization supposedly committed to justice to speak out against those who would oppress women, gays and people of other faiths. But the S.P.L.C. has nothing to say about Islamic extremists; only about their opponents.

Another voice the S.P.L.C. has tried to silence is that of Maajid Nawaz, who was included in the same field guide as me. (He is suing the organization for defamation.) Mr. Nawaz has written extensively about his past as an Islamic extremist in England and Egypt, just as I’e written about my time in the Muslim Brotherhood as a teenager. For the past decade, he has run Quilliam, an organization dedicated to countering Islamic extremism in Britain and elsewhere, notably in Pakistan.

I met Mr. Nawaz in 2010 at a debate in New York City, where the subject was the nature of Islam. Our passionate disagreement was on full display: Mr. Nawaz is a secular Muslim, whereas I am not a believer any longer. Yet we both agreed the path to a successful reformation of Islam lies in more debate, more scrutiny and more critical thinking. It is exactly these activities that our opponents, now including the S.P.L.C., describe as extremism.

Cui bono? That question is nearly always the right one to ask of organizations like the S.P.L.C. Who really benefits from their activities? Repeatedly, and for more than a decade, journalists at publications ranging from Harper’ to Politico to The Nation to The Weekly Standard have pointed out that the center’ founders seem more interested in profiting off the anxieties and white guilt of Northern liberals than in upholding the civil rights of poor Southerners, or anyone else. There’ a less cynical explanation, though, which is that liberals are deeply and increasingly uncomfortable with calling out Islamic extremism for fear of being smeared as “slamophobic,”r worse.

Regardless, the S.P.L.C.’ decision to target those who speak up for the civil rights of Muslims is a travesty.

Muslims today cannot freely debate the role of their religion in most Muslim-majority countries, where the charges of heresy or apostasy can mean a death sentence or a lynch mob. Here in the West, too, free discussion of Islam is getting harder not least because Islamic organizations like the Council on American-Islamic Relations pounce on any criticism of Islam, branding it “ate speech,”he modern word for heresy. Unwittingly or not, the S.P.L.C. is abetting Islamic extremists by branding critical thinkers like Mr. Nawaz and me “xtremists.”

Taking a stand against the neo-Nazi display we saw in Charlottesville is an impulse that should be cheered —nd Apple, JP Morgan and the Hollywood A-list can and should do more to counter political violence and intolerance in all its forms. But they need to find more trustworthy and deserving partners to work with than the S.P.L.C.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Ayaan Hirsi Ali (@ayaan) is a research fellow at the Hoover Institution and founder of the AHA Foundation.

Maajid Nawaz, who’ written about his past as an Islamic extremist and uses his experience to argue against extremism, speaks in England last year. | John Phillips/Getty Images for The Business of Fashion 

Document NYTFEED020170824ed8o003s5



STATE OF THE ART
Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
Tech Fights Online Radicalization

By FARHAD MANJOO 
1,416 words
24 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Law enforcement officials, technology companies and lawmakers have long tried to limit what they call the ''radicalization'' of young people over the internet.

The term has often been used to describe a specific kind of radicalization -- that of young Muslim men who are inspired to take violent action by the online messages of Islamist groups like the Islamic State. But as it turns out, it isn't just violent jihadists who benefit from the internet's power to radicalize young people from afar.

White supremacists are just as adept at it. Where the pre-internet Ku Klux Klan grew primarily from personal connections and word of mouth, today's white supremacist groups have figured out a way to expertly use the internet to recruit and coordinate among a huge pool of potential racists. That became clear two weeks ago with the riots in Charlottesville, Va., which became a kind of watershed event for internet-addled racists.

''It was very important for them to coordinate and become visible in public space,'' said Joan Donovan, a scholar of media manipulation and right-wing extremism at Data & Society, an online research institute. ''This was an attempt to say, 'Let's come out; let's meet each other. Let's build camaraderie, and let's show people who we are.'''

Ms. Donovan and others who study how the internet shapes extremism said that even though Islamists and white nationalists have different views and motivations, there are broad similarities in how the two operate online -- including how they spread their message, recruit and organize offline actions. The similarities suggest a kind of blueprint for a response -- efforts that may work for limiting the reach of jihadists may also work for white supremacists, and vice versa.

In fact, that's the battle plan. Several research groups in the United States and Europe now see the white supremacist and jihadi threats as two faces of the same coin. They're working on methods to fight both, together -- and slowly, they have come up with ideas for limiting how these groups recruit new members to their cause.

Their ideas are grounded in a few truths about how extremist groups operate online, and how potential recruits respond. After speaking to many researchers, I compiled this rough guide for combating online radicalization.

Recognize the internet as an extremist breeding ground.

The first step in combating online extremism is kind of obvious: It is to recognize the extremists as a threat.

For the Islamic State, that began to happen in the last few years. After a string of attacks in Europe and the United States by people who had been indoctrinated in the swamp of online extremism, politicians demanded action. In response, Google, Facebook, Microsoft and other online giants began identifying extremist content and systematically removing it from their services, and have since escalated their efforts.

When it comes to fighting white supremacists, though, much of the tech industry has long been on the sidelines. This laxity has helped create a monster. In many ways, researchers said, white supremacists are even more sophisticated than jihadists in their use of the internet.

The earliest white nationalist sites date back to the founding era of the web. For instance, Stormfront.org, a pioneering hate site, was started as a bulletin board in 1990. White supremacist groups have also been proficient at spreading their messages using the memes, language and style that pervade internet subcultures. Beyond setting up sites of their own, they have more recently managed to spread their ideology to online groups that were once largely apolitical, like gaming and sci-fi groups.

And they've grown huge. ''The white nationalist scene online in America is phenomenally larger than the jihadists' audience, which tends to operate under the radar,'' said Vidhya Ramalingam, the co-founder of Moonshot CVE, a London-based start-up that works with internet companies to combat violent extremism. ''It's just a stunning difference between the audience size.''

After the horror of Charlottesville, internet companies began banning and blocking content posted by right-wing extremist groups. So far their efforts have been hasty and reactive, but Ms. Ramalingam sees it as at the start of a wider effort.

''It's really an unprecedented moment where social media and tech companies are recognizing that their platforms have become spaces where these groups can grow, and have been often unpoliced,'' she said. ''They're really kind of waking up to this and taking some action.''

Engage directly with potential recruits.

If tech companies are finally taking action to prevent radicalization, is it the right kind of action? Extremism researchers said that blocking certain content may work to temporarily disrupt groups, but may eventually drive them further underground, far from the reach of potential saviors.

A more lasting plan involves directly intervening in the process of radicalization. Consider The Redirect Method, an anti-extremism project created by Jigsaw, a think tank founded by Google. The plan began with intensive field research. After interviews with many former jihadists, white supremacists and other violent extremists, Jigsaw discovered several important personality traits that may abet radicalization.

One factor is a skepticism of mainstream media. Whether on the far right or ISIS, people who are susceptible to extremist ideologies tend to dismiss outlets like The New York Times or the BBC, and they often go in search of alternative theories online.

Another key issue is timing. There's a brief window between initial interest in an extremist ideology and a decision to join the cause -- and after recruits make that decision, they are often beyond the reach of outsiders. For instance, Jigsaw found that when jihadists began planning their trips to Syria to join ISIS, they had fallen too far down the rabbit hole and dismissed any new information presented to them.

Jigsaw put these findings to use in an innovative way. It curated a series of videos showing what life is truly like under the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq. The videos, which weren't filmed by news outlets, offered a credible counterpoint to the fantasies peddled by the group -- they show people queuing up for bread, fighters brutally punishing civilians, and women and children being mistreated.

[Video: Experiencing the Caliphate Watch on YouTube.]

Then, to make sure potential recruits saw the videos at the right time in their recruitment process, Jigsaw used one of Google's most effective technologies: ad targeting. In the same way that a pair of shoes you looked up last week follows you around the internet, Jigsaw's counterterrorism videos were pushed to likely recruits.

Jigsaw can't say for sure if the project worked, but it found that people spent lots of time watching the videos, which suggested they were of great interest, and perhaps dissuaded some from extremism.

Moonshot CVE, which worked with Jigsaw on the Redirect project, put together several similar efforts to engage with both jihadists and white supremacist groups. It has embedded undercover social workers in extremist forums who discreetly message potential recruits to dissuade them. And lately it's been using targeted ads to offer mental health counseling to those who might be radicalized.

''We've seen that it's really effective to go beyond ideology,'' Ms. Ramalingam said. ''When you offer them some information about their lives, they're disproportionately likely to interact with it.''

What happens online isn't all that matters in the process of radicalization. The offline world obviously matters too. Dylann Roof -- the white supremacist who murdered nine people at a historically African-American church in Charleston, S.C., in 2015 -- was radicalized online. But as a new profile in GQ Magazine makes clear, there was much more to his crime than the internet, including his mental state and a racist upbringing.

Still, just about every hate crime and terrorist attack, these days, was planned or in some way coordinated online. Ridding the world of all of the factors that drive young men to commit heinous acts isn't possible. But disrupting the online radicalization machine? With enough work, that may just be possible.

Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter:@fmanjoo

Clashes on Aug. 12 in Charlottesville, Va., between white nationalists and counterprotesters. White supremacist groups have found how to expertly use the internet to recruit and coordinate new members. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EDU BAYER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B6) DRAWING (DRAWING BY DOUG CHAYKA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170824ed8o0005p



world
How a Shadowy Imam Evaded Scrutiny and Forged the Barcelona Cell

By ALISSA J. RUBIN, PATRICK KINGSLEY and PALKO KARASZ 
1,901 words
23 August 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

RIPOLL, Spain —e sometimes wore jeans and dressed like a “ipster,”nd had only a short beard. He was unfailingly courteous and studiously discreet. And it seems that he trained the young men he lured into his terrorist cell to behave in much the same way, carrying on double lives that betrayed little of their real intentions.

Abdelbaki Essati, the shadowy imam who the authorities believe was at the center of last week’ terrorist attacks in and near Barcelona, Spain, appears to have been a master of deception. His associations with jihadists reached back more than a decade, but he managed to evade the scrutiny of authorities and the suspicion of many in Ripoll, the small town in northern Catalonia where he showed up last year to offer his services.

Mr. Essati’ technique, according to terrorism experts, was taken right from the playbook of the Al Qaeda jihadi recruiters with whom he had first come into contact at least 11 years ago. It now appears that he used those methods to carefully select and groom young recruits, but for the Islamic State.

“e was really nice, charming, really polite, but he was too polite, too correct,”aid Wafa Marsi, 30, who grew up with the older members of the cell the imam forged in the town.

“sually you can get a sense of a person by their look, their smile, but you couldn’ with him,”aid Ms. Marsi, who also described his appearance. “nd that is why I did not trust him.”

Mr. Essati died on Aug. 16, when the explosives he was manufacturing with the help of some of his young recruits blew up in their safe house in Alcanar, south of Barcelona. Court records show that the police later retrieved a book belonging to the imam from the rubble with the inscription, “oldier of the Islamic State in the Land of Andalucia.”

But even after his death, Mr. Essati’ spell over the young men remained so powerful that the plot he put in motion went forward the next day without a bomb, ultimately killing  15 people.

How Mr. Essati slipped through the checks meant to protect the public from would-be terrorists speaks to the lack of communication between Spanish national and Catalan regional law enforcement and the judiciary.

But it also shows the skill of an experienced terrorist recruiter, one who appears to have been trained in keeping a low profile so that no one would think to look into his background.

If they had, they would have found only that he had been convicted once of drug trafficking. That is an important reason Mr. Essati was able to fly under the radar of Spain’ counterterrorism authorities; he had no charges or convictions for terrorism-related offenses.

Yet Mr. Essati had been known to the Spanish judicial and counterterrorism authorities for at least 10 years, according to Fernando Reinares, the director of the Program on Global Terrorism at the Elcano Royal Institute in Madrid, which keeps an extensive database of Spanish jihadists based on court records and other official sources.

“bdelbaki Essati had some kind of contacts, dating back a decade ago, with facilitators of the Madrid train bombing network based in Catalonia and, subsequently, while in prison, with a member of that same terrorist network,”r. Reinares said.

The Madrid train bombings killed more than 190 people and wounded hundreds more.

In the aftermath of last week’ attacks, regional and national law enforcement authorities and politicians are sniping at each other for failing to cooperate more closely. Their relationship was already strained because of Catalonia’ effort to win independence from Spain.

Catalan law enforcement authorities have long complained that they are not allowed to work on their own with foreign intelligence organizations such as the C.I.A.

Another problem appears to be that information gleaned by counterterrorism intelligence operatives that does not result in charges or convictions is not systematically made available to local law enforcement.

Records of behavior in prison —ncreasingly understood as an important factor in radicalization —lso appear not to be widely shared.

While there is an Islamic Council of Catalonia that vets imams, it was not asked about this imam, its coordinator, Jamal Elattouaki, said.

The mayor of Ripoll, Jordi Munell, said that the local police should have gotten more warning about the dangers presented by Mr. Essati.

“he information that someone had did not arrive where it should have,”e said, adding that the Spanish government had not passed it on to the Catalan authorities.

Meanwhile, Spanish police officers denounced Catalan officials for “arginalizing in a painful way”he contribution of Spain’ national and military authorities during the investigation and manhunt.

Mr. Essati was born in Morocco in around 1970 in a small village in the Chaouen region near the northern city of Tangiers. Little is known about his early life. He told the mosque in Ripoll where he worked until the end of June that he was married and had nine sons.

He did not mention that he had acquaintances who had been convicted of terrorism-related offenses or that he had served time in prison on drug charges.

In 2006 his name surfaced in a case against a group of men accused of recruiting mujahedeen to fight in Iraq. At least one of those men had also helped conspirators involved in the 2004 Madrid train bombings to escape.

Mr. Essati’ documents or copies of them were found at the home of one of the accused recruiters, Mohamed Mrabet Fahsi, who claimed he had the papers because of his work at a local mosque. The court ultimately dismissed the case for lack of evidence.

Mr. Essati shows up next in the public record, this time in court himself, responding to charges of drug trafficking committed in 2010, according to the Spanish judicial authorities.

He was sentenced to four years in prison. There, he became friendly with Rachid Aglif, known as “l Conejo”the Rabbit), who was serving 18 years for his involvement in the Madrid bombings.

An order for Mr. Essati’ expulsion from Spain upon release from prison was overturned by a judge in 2015, who said that he had shown “mployment and an effort to integrate.”e was freed and he dropped from view.

He re-emerged in early 2016 in Belgium, home to the Islamic State cell that carried out attacks in Paris and Brussels around that time.

There is no information suggesting that Mr. Essati had contact with the group, but Belgian authorities say they are currently looking deeper in to Mr. Essati’ background and movements.

Hans Bonte, the mayor of Vilvoorde, a Belgian town on the outskirts of Brussels from which many young Muslims have gone to fight in Syria, said Mr. Essati “efinitely was in Vilvoorde from January to March last year.”

The local Muslim community, under pressure because of suspicions that it harbored terrorist fugitives, flagged his presence to Belgian authorities, who asked the security services to gather intelligence on Mr. Essati in cooperation with the Spanish authorities, Mr. Bonte said.

The inquiry showed no known ties to terrorism, he said. However, at least one mosque where Mr. Essati applied for work as an imam rejected him after he failed to produce a routine certificate of good conduct.

The mayor of Vilvoorde told the Belgian news media on Wednesday that the imam probably made at least two more visits to Belgium as well.

Mr. Essati had a history of traveling to European places known for jihadist communities. Those included Winterthur in Switzerland, near Zurich, according to a European counterterrorism expert.

Locals in Ripoll said that Younes Abouyaacoub, the young terrorist recruit who was killed by police on Monday, had also traveled to Zurich in recent months. It is not clear why.

The Paris prosecutor, Françis Molins, told reporters on Wednesday that two or three members of the Barcelona cell had also visited the Paris region on Aug. 11 and 12, stopping at a branch of Fnac, a retail chain that sells electronics.

“o one can think, as we speak, that this lightning visit to France was just to buy a camera at Fnac,”e said.

American intelligence analysts believe Mr. Essati was well connected with members of the Islamic State’ external operations wing, but said they needed more time to determine if it had played any role in the Barcelona attacks.

Last year, soon after his foray to Vilvoorde, Mr. Essati returned to Spain, showing up in the small mountain town of Ripoll, where the local mosques were searching for an imam.

His courtship of the young men began quickly.

Most of those he targeted, by all accounts, were “ormal”oung adults. They had jobs, were well assimilated, and spoke Catalan and Spanish. Some were born in Spain.

But Mr. Essati, it seems, had the training and the instinct to find the ones who might be most open to joining his conspiracy.

The grooming loosely followed the recruitment strategy first outlined by Al Qaeda operatives, according to Daniel Koehler, a fellow at George Washington University’ program on extremism.

The handbook advises focusing on young men between 18 and 21 because they are “ure”nd less likely to betray the group.

Mr. Essati also recruited brothers —here were four sets among the 12 —llowing him to use family ties and peer pressure to reinforce their loyalty, Mr. Koehler noted.

“hese one-on-one recruiters are unbelievably strong on appealing to positive values: on honor, on justice, freedom, pride, positive emotionally based values,”e said.

“f the kids have any feelings about injustice, the recruiter will talk day in and day out about the injustice being done to women and children in Iraq and Syria.”

“he recruiter bestows on them this identity as a spiritual warrior,”r. Koehler added.

The young men who gathered around Mr. Essati were so committed that they managed to imitate his dual life and low profile right up to the end.

Their families may have seen changes in their children, but they never thought —r perhaps never wanted to think —hat there was anything nefarious behind it.

“heir mothers were proud,”aid Ms. Marsi, who knows many of the young attackers’others.

“he boys weren’ smoking, they weren’ drinking. One was studying to be an engineer. They were taking their life seriously.”

Seven of the 12 who joined the cell are now dead, and the rest turned themselves in to the police or were captured.

Follow Alissa J. Rubin @Alissanyt, Patrick Kingsley @patrickkingsley and Palko Karasz @karaszpalko on Twitter.Alissa J. Rubin reported from Ripoll, and Patrick Kingsley and Palko Karasz from Barcelona, Spain. Reporting was contributed by Raphael Minder and Germá Aranda from Barcelona; Milan Schreuer from Paris; Eric Schmitt from Washington; and Rukmini Callimachi from Erbil, Iraq.

PHOTOS: A man praying in the mosque in Ripoll, Spain, where Abdelbaki Essati worked as an imam. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAMUEL ARANDA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Abdelbaki Essati (A10)

* Barcelona Attack Suspects Had Ties to Imam Linked to \b ISIS\b0 

* Spain, a Leader in Foiling Attacks, Falls Victim to One Anyway

* Police See Wider Plot in Spain and Say Carnage Could Have Been Worse

Document INHT000020170824ed8n00002



EDITORIAL
Editorial Desk; SECTA
No End in Sight for Afghanistan

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
849 words
23 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
18
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

If there is a compelling case to be made for deepening the United States military involvement in Afghanistan, where the 16-year-old war has already lasted longer than any other in American history, President Trump did not make it in his speech Monday night.

Rather than the comprehensive strategy that is called for, his plan amounted to a jumble of ideas that lacked detail and coherence and were often contradictory. Having spent years criticizing America's involvement in Afghanistan, he now appears inclined toward an open-ended commitment, but with no real ways to measure success and no hint of a timetable for withdrawal.

New troops will be required, he suggested, but he did not say how many (there are 8,400 there now). Nor did he explain, much less guarantee, how a few thousand more troops could succeed when the more than 100,000 troops deployed during the Obama administration did not.

The president said that his ''original instinct was to pull out'' -- which would have been consistent with his steady criticism as a private citizen of America's commitment -- but that he had been persuaded by the generals who dominate his national security team that a ''hasty withdrawal would create a vacuum for terrorists, including ISIS and Al Qaeda.'' That, he said, would be unacceptable.

With this speech, Mr. Trump has taken ownership of the war, which until now he has essentially fobbed off on the Pentagon. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, told two months ago by Mr. Trump that he could deploy another roughly 4,000 troops to Afghanistan, sensibly declined to do that, at least until the president announced his strategy. Now Mr. Trump has set forth a plan, although it's hard to dignify as strategy an address in which he said, ''We will not talk about numbers of troops or our plans for further military activities.'' He seems not to understand that presidents owe it to voters to be transparent.

What we are left with is a set of intentions, which are what? Nothing less than ''victory,'' he said, because ''in the end, we will win.'' But what constitutes victory, and will Americans fight on foreign soil until every terrorist is dead? ''Attacking our enemies, obliterating ISIS, crushing Al Qaeda, preventing the Taliban from taking over Afghanistan, and stopping mass terror attacks against America before they emerge,'' he proclaimed, which seemed a million miles away from his earlier doubts about foreign entanglements. (There was no mention of collateral civilian casualties, which have recently gone up and angered local populations.)

The accounting so far shows that American forces have degraded Al Qaeda. But the Taliban is an indigenous group, and during Barack Obama's presidency top generals and officials agreed that the Taliban could not be defeated militarily, and must be brought into a political reconciliation process. Mr. Trump gave short shrift to that approach, saying that a successful military effort was a necessary precondition to political reconciliation.

At the end of his presidency, Mr. Obama began withdrawing troops on a fixed timetable, then stopped the pullout at 8,400 troops because the Afghans wanted the Americans around to train their own forces during a Taliban resurgence. The prospect of a deadline was supposed to pressure the Afghans to get serious about corruption and political infighting. Mr. Trump argued that deadlines allowed the Taliban to wait it out and that he would judge the success of the mission according to ''conditions on the ground.'' So much for engaging the Taliban in talks, or the government in Kabul in reform.

Any successful strategy must consider the regional context and, to some extent, Mr. Trump did that. He took a tough tone on Pakistan, which has long played a double game, taking billions of dollars in aid from Washington while giving safe haven to the Taliban and other militants; the president hinted that some aid could be withheld. Mr. Trump might have further angered Pakistan by urging India to provide more economic aid to Afghanistan; Pakistan is already unsettled by India's $1 billion investment in Afghanistan and will be unhappier still if that is increased.

Not mentioned were Russia, China and Iran, all of which have an interest in Afghanistan and should be enlisted to help promote regional stability. Mr. Trump insisted he would bring diplomatic, economic and military levers to bear on Afghanistan, but his words ring hollow given how he has decimated the State Department with spending cuts and by leaving unfilled important positions, including, remarkably, that of ambassador to Afghanistan.

A case can surely be made for maintaining American troops at current levels to keep the government from being overrun by the Taliban and to offset Pakistan, Iran and Russia as they seek to enlarge their influence. But as to the future? Mr. Trump and his administration need to provide many more answers.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY EIKO OJALA) 

Document NYTF000020170823ed8n00067



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Urges Iraqi Kurds To Put Off Referendum

By MICHAEL R. GORDON 
775 words
23 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq -- Defense Secretary Jim Mattis asked the president of Iraq's Kurdish autonomous region on Tuesday to postpone a referendum next month on Kurdish independence.

Mr. Mattis's meeting with President Massoud Barzani was part of a broader push by American officials to head off what they fear may be a new period of political instability as Iraq continues its battle against the Islamic State.

''Our point right now is to stay focused like a laser beam on the defeat of ISIS and to let nothing distract us,'' Mr. Mattis told reporters, using an acronym for the Islamic State, shortly before flying to Erbil, the capital of the autonomous region.

Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson made a similar appeal for the Kurds to postpone the referendum, which is scheduled for Sept. 25, in a telephone call earlier this month with Mr. Barzani. So did Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the head of the United States Central Command, who visited Iraq last week.

But Kurdish officials said that Mr. Barzani did not pull back from the referendum in his meeting with Mr. Mattis even as he has kept the door open for further talks with Iraqi officials in Baghdad and with the United States.

''We intend to proceed with the referendum on Sept. 25 to allow our people to determine their own future,'' Masrour Barzani, a top Kurdish security official and the son of Massoud Barzani, said on Tuesday night. ''This remains the only solution; forced coexistence in Iraq isn't working.''

Many Kurds have long dreamed of independence, though their region is burdened by serious economic problems, and the Kurdish dream of having their own state is opposed by neighbors like Turkey and Iran, which also have large Kurdish populations. The vote, Kurdish officials also emphasize, would not lead to an immediate break with Baghdad but rather a long process of negotiating an amicable divorce.

Halgurd Hikmat, the top spokesman for the Kurds' Ministry of Pesh Merga, as the Kurdish fighters are known, dismissed concerns that the referendum would hamper the campaign against the Islamic State, arguing that it might even give Kurds more of a reason to fight.

''It is not going to have any impact,'' he told reporters traveling with Mr. Mattis. ''We are confident in our ability to fight ISIS regardless of that taking place.''

Critics, however, say the referendum is ill advised for a region that has economic troubles. They also say it could lead to conflicts over territory, distract attention from the battle against the Islamic State and pose a new political problem for Iraq's prime minister, Haider al-Abadi. American officials have forged a good working relationship with Mr. Abadi, who is trying to secure another term as prime minister in parliamentary elections expected next year.

''It is not just the United States that does not think this referendum should be held,'' Brett H. McGurk, President Trump's envoy to the coalition that is fighting the Islamic State, said on Monday. ''Every member of our coalition believes that now is not the time to hold this referendum.''

Mr. Mattis arrived in Erbil after talks with Mr. Abadi in Baghdad during which he expressed support for Iraq's territorial integrity, according to a statement issued by the prime minister's office.

He was joined in his meetings in Erbil by Mr. McGurk; Douglas A. Silliman, the American ambassador to Iraq; and Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, commander of the American-led campaign against the Islamic State. After the meeting, Mr. Mattis flew to Amman, Jordan, while Mr. McGurk and Mr. Silliman stayed behind to continue late-night talks with Kurdish officials.

In recent comments, Mr. Barzani said his government was open to an ''alternative'' to a referendum. Some Western officials believe that signals the Kurds are looking for some sort of face-saving way to avoid the vote, which Western analysts assert is not supported by all Kurdish factions.

But some Kurdish officials say the only alternative that might be acceptable is a formal guarantee that the international community will respect the results of a future referendum or an assurance that Kurdish aspirations will eventually be recognized.

But Masrour Barzani said the purpose of talks with officials in Baghdad would be to work out terms of the Kurds' separation.

''The U.S. should get behind the process by sponsoring Erbil-Baghdad talks,'' he said. ''As an honest broker, it can give both parties the political space necessary to reach a peaceful settlement on a question that has lingered throughout the last century.''

Document NYTF000020170823ed8n0004s



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
From Kabul to Baghdad, My Bird's-Eye View

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
2,330 words
23 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
19
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- I just spent eight days traveling with the Air Force to all of its key forward bases in Afghanistan, Iraq, Kuwait, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. So President Trump's speech on Monday night was very timely for me. It was also unnerving.

It was so full of bombast and cliché, so larded with phrases like ''we will break their will,'' so lacking in details and, most of all, so lacking in humility in confronting a problem and a region that has vexed better men for ages that I still don't know where he's going -- only that he is going there very definitively.

I totally agreed with the president's remarks that our men and women serving in the Middle East ''deserve to return to a country that is not at war with itself at home.'' But the rank hypocrisy of this man -- who has done so much to divide us in recent months to satisfy only his ''base'' -- using our troops as a prop to extol the virtues of national unity made me sick to my stomach.

It also made me recall a lunch I had last week in the mess hall at Bagram Airfield, near Kabul, with Chief Master Sgt. Cory Olson from the 455th Air Expeditionary Wing. Olson explained that working in Afghanistan he was really disconnected from all the political turmoil in America.

And then he told me this story: ''I was talking to this civilian contractor the other day who just came back from a couple of weeks' home leave in Dallas. And this guy told me he was really relieved to get back to 'reality' in Kabul -- because the politics back home was so crazy.''

You know that American politics has jumped the rails when a U.S. contractor is relieved to get back from America to his little base in Afghanistan.

Anyway, enough of that. Since I can't explain Trump's Middle East, let me explain what I saw here -- three things in particular: I saw a new way of mounting warfare by the United States in Iraq. I saw in this new warfare a strategy that offers at least a glimmer of hope for Iraq, if and when ISIS is defeated. But, though only a glimpse, I saw in Afghanistan an eroding stalemate -- with all the same issues that have undermined stability there for years: government corruption, distrust among Afghans and perfidious interventions by Pakistan and Iran.

The best way for me to explain what's new in Iraq is with a scene I watched unfold on Saturday. We were at the joint strike cell in Erbil, in Iraqi Kurdistan. This is where multiple Air Force television feeds come in live from drones, U-2s, satellites and U.S. and coalition fighter jets. The officers there are coordinating with Iraqi Army combat forces on the ground and their U.S. military advisers embedded just behind the battlefront to hit ISIS targets as the Iraqi Army begins its push west.

Having retaken Mosul, the Iraqi Army is driving ISIS into the Euphrates River Valley, where it looks like it will make a last stand. This was the second day of the Iraqis' thrust west and they were already meeting resistance in a small town on the road to ISIS-controlled Tal Afar. Several U.S. eyes in the sky were trained on a single-story, flat-roof building, about 30 feet wide, sandwiched between two larger buildings. Iraqi soldiers crawling toward this building were receiving lots of small-arms fire from inside, stalling their advance about 500 feet away.

Their U.S. advisers were sending all this information to the strike cell in real time. Meanwhile in the strike cell, team members sitting in front of computer screens were calculating exactly how much firepower was required to kill the ISIS fighters and not hurt any civilians who might be nearby. They did a quick tally of the remaining weapons on the American fighter aircraft in the area -- seeing which had what smart bombs left.

Seconds later a call of ''weapon away, 30 seconds'' rang out as an F-15E released a 500-pound GPS-guided smart bomb. The screen rebroadcasting the F-15E's targeting pod showed the bomb going straight down through the roof.

''We have splash,'' said one of the controllers in a monotone as a huge plume of smoke engulfed the video screen. Quickly, the smoke cleared and the 30-foot-wide building was smoldering rubble -- but the two buildings to the sides were totally intact, so any civilians inside should be unhurt.

The officer in charge told me that a few weeks earlier, during the campaign to retake Mosul, two Iraqi soldiers were wounded and hiding from an ISIS unit inside a building 15 yards away. Using laser targeting, the U.S. team fired a rocket whose size, direction and shape were chosen to take down only the ISIS building and make its walls fall in the opposite direction of the two pinned-down Iraqis. The rocket worked as intended and they were rescued.

This is war in Iraq today in a nutshell.

For years we've measured our involvement in Middle East wars by one pair of indexes -- boots on the ground and killed in action. Because of that, most Americans are now paying scant attention to Iraq, where our boots on the ground have shrunk to a few thousand and where there have been just 17 U.S. military deaths since we re-engaged in Iraq to defeat ISIS in 2014.

But the real story is wings in the air. We are involved in a gigantic military enterprise in Iraq. But it's with massive conventional air power married to unconventional special forces, who are advising the Iraqi Army that is actually doing the ground fighting. This is making our presence in Iraq much more sustainable for us and for the Iraqis.

Ironically, it might never have happened had President Barack Obama not withdrawn our combat troops from Iraq in 2011 because Iraqis couldn't agree on a legal formula for their staying.

After that, the then-Shiite-led Iraqi government began abusing Sunnis, and ISIS emerged in response. That forced Iraqis to rethink their relationship with us. A U.S. Air Force special operations officer told me of returning to Iraq in early 2014 and meeting with the Iraqi Counterterrorism Service -- the only truly professional, nonsectarian fighting unit then left in the country. The U.S. officer had come to ask the CTS what material aid the U.S. could offer in the fight against ISIS, and the CTS commander responded that he didn't need aid. ''We want you,'' he said.

And so Obama began slowly reintroducing U.S. Special Forces back into Iraq and, for the first time, sending some into Syria, all in a totally new context. When George W. Bush invaded Iraq in 2003 to topple Saddam Hussein, we destroyed the government from the top down. We toppled Saddam's statue. And we were advised largely by Iraqi exiles of dubious legitimacy in local eyes.

It became our war, producing iconic pictures of U.S. soldiers kicking down doors and pointing guns at cowering women.

Even though ISIS emerged after we left, we have now returned at the invitation of Iraqis from the bottom up, not exiles -- making our presence much more legitimate and sustainable for any long fight. Iraqi Sunnis, Shiites and Kurds were forced to unify, at least minimally, to defeat ISIS, opening new possibilities.

This is Iraq's war of liberation. They own it.

I met Marine Col. Seth Folsom, who commands a forward special operations air base, Al-Asad, in the western Iraqi desert. It was 120 degrees outside, but he had a bounce in his step.

''I was here in 2003 and in 2008,'' he told me. In those days, if he had a convoy going through a town it would speed 100 miles an hour not to get shot at or blown up, pushing Iraqi cars out of the way, creating resentments. ''Now we are driving with the Iraqis. It's a paradigm shift. It doesn't even seem like the same country to me. Now I am saying to my Iraqi counterparts, 'What do you want to do?'''

So we are fighting a very different war in Iraq, which Trump has amped up. But you can't grasp its true dimensions unless you go to the overall U.S. regional air headquarters in Qatar and watch on giant screens a 24/7 choreography that boggles the mind: B-52s, U-2s, F-16s, F-22s, F-35s, F-15s, A-10s, C-17s, V-22s, U-28s, C-130s, JStars, AWACs, satellites and unmanned Reapers and Predators -- all fueled aloft by a fleet of KC-10 and KC-135 flying gas stations -- that have conducted 23,934 strikes on ISIS targets in Iraq and Syria, using 84,585 precision-guided bombs, since we came back in 2014.

There is much still to worry about. At the joint operations headquarters in Baghdad, U.S. officers plan on computer screens and the Iraqi planners on wall-size maps with markers and blue arrows representing troops that they move around. It can drive American planners crazy when speed is of the essence.

More worrying: American advisers at the joint operations headquarters told me that many of their Iraqi counterparts take their uniforms off before they go home at night. Not everyone respects them for working with the Americans, particularly in the hard-line Shiite areas. Some have even had to change houses.

And yet, they still show up, and their men still fought house-to-house to recapture Mosul, taking huge casualties. At the height of the battle for Mosul, the U.S. Air Force field hospital at Al-Asad Air Base treated many Iraqi soldiers. The U.S. officer who heads the hospital told us that when the first Iraqi wounded soldier arrived, and he desperately needed blood, the U.S. commander asked for six volunteers. Some 50 American military personnel showed up to donate.

''It is one thing for us to be respectful of the Iraqis and another to respect the Iraqis,'' the Air Force chief of staff, Gen. Dave Goldfein, remarked to me. ''Today there is mutual respect. We admire their tenacity.''

All of that said, I am still wary. There is no slam-dunk here. While ISIS is on the run, lasting victory in Iraq depends entirely on whether Iraqis can come together -- not just to fight a shared enemy but to build a shared government -- the morning after ISIS is defeated.

Alas, there is no ''power-sharing'' bomb that we can drop on the Iraqi Parliament that will make Sunnis, Shiites and Kurds trust one another enough to live together as equal citizens. And there is no ''culture-buster'' bomb that we can drop that will burrow deep into Iraqi/Arab culture and stop them from always letting their past bury their future and instead start letting their future bury their past.

Culture always trumps strategy and only they can change their political culture. As the overall U.S. commander in Iraq, Lt. Gen. Stephen Townsend, put it to me: After ISIS is defeated, Iraqis need to produce a government ''for all Iraqis.'' It cannot be a government where ''Sunnis feel disenfranchised.'' We better have in place a strategy for coaching Iraqis on power-sharing as much as we did on dynamic targeting. Otherwise, the morning after ISIS 1.0 is defeated we'll see ISIS 2.0.

The war in Afghanistan is different. The air power component is there but U.S. Special Forces are still doing too much fighting and dying. And Trump talked on Monday night like they will now do more. And we don't have the legitimacy you now feel in Iraq.

Personal security for our Afghan allies is still minimal. I stood on the tarmac at Bagram Airfield and listened as a U.S.-trained Afghan pilot explained that the last thing he does before climbing into the cockpit is call home to be sure his kids have not been abducted by the Taliban, who know that he works with the U.S. and have threatened him repeatedly.

Again, the fact that this pilot is still ready to fly with the U.S. shows real courage. He wants something different for his country, and he's not alone. But is he in the majority? Clearly he's got neighbors who don't think that we, or the Afghan government we're supporting, are legitimate. Culture trumps strategy.

This is going to take ages to fix, and if you fix Afghanistan, well, you fix Afghanistan. So what. If you fix Iraq with a real power-sharing accord you create a model that can radiate out across the Arab world, because Iraq is a microcosm of the Arab world, with Sunnis, Shiites, Kurds, Turkmen, Christians and many others.

I slept well in the U.S. Embassy green zone in Baghdad, which is protected outside by Iraqis. Two nights earlier we slept at the Bagram base near Kabul and were repeatedly awakened by a blaring loudspeaker saying ''take cover,'' because another rocket was coming in.

For the moment -- and I stress moment -- we have a sustainable military strategy to defeat ISIS in Iraq. But a sustainable political outcome depends on Iraqis rising to the occasion. I do not see that in Afghanistan and I did not hear it in Trump's speech. I fear our choices there are unchanged: lose early, lose late, lose big or lose small.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Frank Bruni is off today.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY OWEN FREEMAN) 

Document NYTF000020170823ed8n0004l



NEWS ANALYSIS
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Even Defining Victory in Afghanistan Is Hard

By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVIS and MATTHEW ROSENBERG; Gardiner Harris contributed reporting from Washington, Michael R. Gordon from Erbil, Iraq, and Helene Cooper from Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. 
1,260 words
23 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Trump's declaration that ''we will win'' in Afghanistan came with bellicose language about taking ''fast and powerful'' retribution against militants and a promise to succeed where other presidents have failed to resolve the nearly 16-year-old conflict.

Left unclear by the Trump administration was the answer to a question that has stumped Washington, including the two previous commanders in chief, since the United States became involved in the war there: What does winning look like in Afghanistan?

For Mr. Trump, winning looks a lot like a very long war.

''From now on, victory will have a clear definition,'' Mr. Trump said on Monday during his prime-time televised address on his strategy for Afghanistan. ''Attacking our enemies, obliterating ISIS, crushing Al Qaeda, preventing the Taliban from taking over Afghanistan, and stopping mass terror attacks against America before they emerge.''

But hours before Mr. Trump spoke, the president's top advisers offered a far different view of success, arguing that the ultimate solution to the conflict in Afghanistan was a settlement between the Afghan government and the Taliban, who would theoretically be beaten down by the Americans and forced to the negotiating table.

Mr. Tillerson endorsed that approach on Tuesday, arguing that the president had laid out a strategy ''intended to put pressure on the Taliban.''

The idea, Mr. Tillerson said during a rare appearance in the State Department briefing room, was ''to have the Taliban understand, you will not win a battlefield victory -- we may not win one, but neither will you -- so at some point, we have to come to the negotiating table and find a way to bring this to an end.''

Among military commanders and others who have studied the war in Afghanistan, the definition of success is even broader: winning back territory from the Taliban, building up the Afghan armed forces and rooting out endemic corruption in the government there. Mr. Trump mentioned all in his address.

The multiple definitions of success are hardly new, and were in fact the central ideas behind the surge of forces in Afghanistan that the Obama administration launched in 2010. None of the ideas worked, even when there were 100,000 American troops in Afghanistan. The number of American troops in the country now stands at 8,400, and Trump administration officials say the president is likely to add as many as 4,000 more.

The Taliban in the meantime have continued to gain territory. Insurgents overran a remote district in northern Afghanistan on Monday, the sixth government-held area to fall to the Taliban in the past month.

Efforts to open up peace talks have repeatedly faltered with the Taliban, the Afghan government and American diplomats. It has been two years since the last meaningful attempt at negotiations fell apart.

Neither the president nor his aides have specified the conditions that would have to be met for American forces to leave. But officials have said Mr. Trump would recognize winning in Afghanistan when he saw it, and that in turn would determine the extent of the United States commitment and staying power in Afghanistan.

''Essentially, without committing to troop levels or timelines, President Trump has said our strategy is to outlast the Taliban and other terrorist groups, and to only leave Afghanistan once the Afghan government and its armed forces can maintain control of the country,'' said Senator Chris Coons, Democrat of Delaware, a member of the Foreign Relations Committee.

Most of the coalition troops are focused on training and advising the Afghan military, which has struggled with corruption and morale problems and whose soldiers are now being killed at an alarming rate (31 a day, according to official data). A smaller number of Americans, most of them special forces, are primarily hunting the remnants of Al Qaeda and a branch of the Islamic State that has made inroads in recent years.

Jim Mattis, the secretary of defense, said Tuesday that he had yet to determine the number of additional troops to send to Afghanistan, but deployments are expected quickly. Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the head of United States Central Command, said Tuesday that additional trainers, advisers and Special Operations troops would start arriving in Afghanistan in the next ''days or weeks'' to take advantage of the last two months of the fighting season.

For President George W. Bush, who sent American troops to Afghanistan in 2001, victory was supposed to be liberating the Afghans from the Taliban and ensuring that the country could not be used as a base for terrorists to launch attacks against the United States. But he quickly realized that achieving that goal would mean nation-building -- an endeavor explicitly rejected by Mr. Trump -- because Afghanistan had no functioning state and had to be rebuilt.

Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, Mr. Trump's national security adviser, played a central role in President Barack Obama's effort in Afghanistan as the leader of one of the American task forces that sought to root out the rampant corruption that had taken hold in the Afghan government. During his time in Kabul, General McMaster would frequently make the point that ''criminal patronage networks'' -- that is, predatory government officials working together to enrich themselves -- were one of the two greatest threats to Afghanistan (Taliban sanctuaries in Pakistan being the other).

Yet dismantling the networks proved far easier said than done. The corruption went all the way to the top of the government, and was tacitly encouraged by some parts of the United States government, even as others parts tried to combat it.

As a result, neither General McMaster's task force nor other American anti-corruption efforts enjoyed any meaningful success, and the problem has only intensified. It has now spread deep into the ranks of the Afghan military, whose leaders have enriched themselves, leaving soldiers exposed and demoralized on the battlefield.

''The only way Afghanistan will stabilize is if it has a government the Afghan people want,'' said John Dempsey, a former senior State Department official who worked on Afghanistan and Pakistan.

John Nagl, a retired Army officer and counterinsurgency expert who fought in both wars in Iraq, said that in turning away from his impulse to withdraw American troops from Afghanistan, Mr. Trump was in essence committing to a lengthy and costly effort to stabilize the country, rein in the Taliban and other militants and ensure that Pakistan's nuclear weapons did not fall into the hands of terrorists -- goals that could take a generation to achieve.

''It's going to take a long time -- we're halfway there -- and it's not a very satisfying end state,'' Mr. Nagl said, noting that success would probably involve American casualties and maintaining United States military bases in Afghanistan for decades to come. ''We should have learned by now that wars have long tails and unexpected consequences.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Julie Hirschfeld Davis on Twitter at @juliehdavis, and Matthew Rosenberg at @AllMattNYT.

President Trump delivered his televised address on Afghanistan before a military audience at Fort Myer, in Virginia, on Monday evening. ''We will win,'' he said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AL DRAGO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson discussed goals in Afghanistan on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI/AFP -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170823ed8n00044



World; Asia Pacific
Full Transcript and Video: Trump’ Speech on Afghanistan

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
3,129 words
22 August 2017
03:54
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

President Trump addressed the nation on Monday from Fort Myer military base in Arlington, Va., to lay out his military plans for Afghanistan.

Following is the full transcript of those remarks, as released by the Federal News Service, with permission from Bloomberg Government www.bgov.com.

For further coverage of his remarks, read more »

___________

PRESIDENT TRUMP: Thank you very much. Thank you. Please be seated.

Vice President Pence, Secretary of State Tillerson, members of the cabinet, General Dunford, Deputy Secretary Shanahan, and Colonel Duggan, most especially, thank you to the men and women of Fort Myer and every member of the United States military, at home and abroad.

We send our thoughts and prayers to the families of our brave sailors who were injured and lost after a tragic collision at sea, as well as to those conducting the search-and-recovery efforts.

I am here tonight to lay out our path forward in Afghanistan and South Asia.

But before I provide the details of our new strategy, I want to say a few words to the service members here with us tonight, to those watching from their posts and to all Americans listening at home.

Since the founding of our republic, our country has produced a special class of heroes whose selflessness, courage and resolve is unmatched in human history. American patriots from every generation have given their last breath on the battlefield for our nation and for our freedom.

Through their lives, and though their lives were cut short, in their deeds they achieved total immortality. By following the heroic example of those who fought to preserve our republic, we can find the inspiration our country needs to unify, to heal, and to remain one nation, under God.

The men and women of our military operate as one team, with one shared mission and one shared sense of purpose. They transcend every line of race, ethnicity, creed and color to serve together and sacrifice together in absolutely perfect cohesion. That is because all service members are brothers and sisters. They’e all part of the same family. It’ called the American family. They take the same oath, fight for the same flag and live according to the same law. They’e bound together by common purpose, mutual trust and selfless devotion to our nation and to each other.

The soldier understands what we as a nation too often forget, that a wound inflicted upon a single member of our community is a wound inflicted upon us all. When one part of America hurts, we all hurt. And when one citizen suffers an injustice, we all suffer together. Loyalty to our nation demands loyalty to one another. Love for America requires love for all of its people.

When we open our hearts to patriotism, there is no room for prejudice, no place for bigotry and no tolerance for hate. The young men and women we send to fight our wars abroad deserve to return to a country that is not at war with itself at home. We cannot remain a force for peace in the world if we are not at peace with each other.

As we send our bravest to defeat our enemies overseas —nd we will always win —et us find the courage to heal our divisions within. Let us make a simple promise to the men and women we ask to fight in our name, that when they return home from battle, they will find a country that has renewed the sacred bonds of love and loyalty that unite us together as one.

Thanks to the vigilance and skill of the American military, and of our many allies throughout the world, horrors on the scale of Sept. 11 —nd nobody can ever forget that —ave not been repeated on our shores.

And we must acknowledge the reality I’ here to talk about tonight, that nearly 16 years after the Sept. 11 attacks, after the extraordinary sacrifice of blood and treasure, the American people are weary of war without victory. Nowhere is this more evident than with the war in Afghanistan, the longest war in American history, 17 years.

I share the American people’ frustration. I also share their frustration over a foreign policy that has spent too much time, energy, money —nd most importantly, lives —rying to rebuild countries in our own image instead of pursuing our security interests above all other considerations.

That is why shortly after my inauguration, I directed Secretary of Defense Mattis and my national security team to undertake a comprehensive review of all strategic options in Afghanistan and South Asia. My original instinct was to pull out. And historically, I like following my instincts.

But all my life I’e heard that decisions are much different when you sit behind the desk in the Oval Office, in other words, when you’e president of the United States. So I studied Afghanistan in great detail and from every conceivable angle. After many meetings, over many months, we held our final meeting last Friday at Camp David with my cabinet and generals to complete our strategy.

I arrived at three fundamental conclusion about America’ core interests in Afghanistan. First, our nation must seek an honorable and enduring outcome worthy of the tremendous sacrifices that have been made, especially the sacrifices of lives. The men and women who serve our nation in combat deserve a plan for victory. They deserve the tools they need and the trust they have earned to fight and to win.

Second, the consequences of a rapid exit are both predictable and unacceptable. 9/11, the worst terrorist attack in our history, was planned and directed from Afghanistan because that country was ruled by a government that gave comfort and shelter to terrorists.

A hasty withdrawal would create a vacuum for terrorists, including ISIS and Al Qaeda, would instantly fill just as happened before Sept. 11. And as we know, in 2011, America hastily and mistakenly withdrew from Iraq. As a result, our hard-won gains slipped back into the hands of terrorist enemies. Our soldiers watched as cities they had fought for and bled to liberate, and won, were occupied by a terrorist group called ISIS. The vacuum we created by leaving too soon gave safe haven for ISIS to spread, to grow, recruit and launch attacks. We cannot repeat in Afghanistan the mistake our leaders made in Iraq.

Third, and finally, I concluded that the security threats we face in Afghanistan and the broader region are immense. Today, 20 U.S.-designated foreign terrorist organizations are active in Afghanistan and Pakistan, the highest concentration in any region anywhere in the world.

For its part, Pakistan often gives safe haven to agents of chaos, violence and terror. The threat is worse because Pakistan and India are two nuclear-armed states whose tense relations threaten to spiral into conflict. And that could happen.

No one denies that we have inherited a challenging and troubling situation in Afghanistan and South Asia. But we do not have the luxury of going back in time and making different or better decisions. When I became president, I was given a bad and very complex hand. But I fully knew what I was getting into, big and intricate problems.

But one way or another, these problems will be solved. I’ a problem solver. And in the end, we will win.

We must address the reality of the world as it exists right now, and the threats we face and the confronting of all of the problems of today, and extremely predictable consequences of a hasty withdrawal. We need look no further than last week’ vile, vicious attack in Barcelona to understand that terror groups will stop at nothing to commit the mass murder of innocent men, women and children. You saw it for yourself. Horrible.

As I outlined in my speech in Saudi Arabia three months ago, America and our partners are committed to stripping terrorists of their territory, cutting off their funding and exposing the false allure of their evil ideology. Terrorists who slaughter innocent people will find no glory in this life or the next. They are nothing but thugs and criminals and predators and —hat’ right —osers.

Working alongside our allies, we will break their will, dry up their recruitment, keep them from crossing our borders and, yes, we will defeat them, and we will defeat them handily.

In Afghanistan and Pakistan, America’ interests are clear. We must stop the resurgence of safe havens that enable terrorists to threaten America. And we must prevent nuclear weapons and materials from coming into the hands of terrorists and being used against us, or anywhere in the world, for that matter.

But to prosecute this war, we will learn from history. As a result of our comprehensive review, American strategy in Afghanistan and South Asia will change dramatically in the following ways.

A core pillar of our new strategy is a shift from a time-based approach to one based on conditions. I’e said it many times how counterproductive it is for the United States to announce in advance the dates we intend to begin or end military options.

We will not talk about numbers of troops or our plans for further military activities. Conditions on the ground, not arbitrary timetables, will guide our strategy from now on. America’ enemies must never know our plans or believe they can wait us out.

I will not say when we are going to attack, but attack we will.

Another fundamental pillar of our new strategy is the integration of all instruments of American power —iplomatic, economic, and military —oward a successful outcome. Someday, after an effective military effort, perhaps it will be possible to have a political settlement that includes elements of the Taliban in Afghanistan. But nobody knows if or when that will ever happen.

America will continue its support for the Afghan government and the Afghan military as they confront the Taliban in the field. Ultimately, it is up to the people of Afghanistan to take ownership of their future, to govern their society and to achieve an everlasting peace. We are a partner and a friend, but we will not dictate to the Afghan people how to live or how to govern their own complex society. We are not nation-building again. We are killing terrorists.

The next pillar of our new strategy is to change the approach in how to deal with Pakistan. We can no longer be silent about Pakistan’ safe havens for terrorist organizations, the Taliban and other groups that pose a threat to the region and beyond.

Pakistan has much to gain from partnering with our effort in Afghanistan. It has much to lose by continuing to harbor criminals and terrorists. In the past, Pakistan has been a valued partner. Our militaries have worked together against common enemies. The Pakistani people have suffered greatly from terrorism and extremism. We recognize those contributions and those sacrifices.

But Pakistan has also sheltered the same organizations that try every single day to kill our people. We have been paying Pakistan billions and billions of dollars at the same time they are housing the very terrorists that we are fighting.

But that will have to change. And that will change immediately. No partnership can survive a country’ harboring of militants and terrorists who target U.S. service members and officials. It is time for Pakistan to demonstrate its commitment to civilization, order and to peace.

Another critical part of the South Asia strategy for America is to further develop its strategic partnership with India, the world’ largest democracy and a key security and economic partner of the United States. We appreciate India’ important contributions to stability in Afghanistan, but India makes billions of dollars in trade with the United States, and we want them to help us more with Afghanistan, especially in the area of economic assistance and development. We are committed to pursuing our shared objectives for peace and security in South Asia and the broader Indo-Pacific region.

Finally, my administration will ensure that you, the brave defenders of the American people, will have the necessary tools and rules of engagement to make this strategy work, and work effectively, and work quickly.

I have already lifted restrictions the previous administration placed on our war fighters that prevented the secretary of defense and our commanders in the field from fully and swiftly waging battle against the enemy.

Micromanagement from Washington, D.C., does not win battles. They’e won in the field, drawing upon the judgment and expertise of wartime commanders, and front-line soldiers, acting in real time with real authority, and with a clear mission to defeat the enemy.

That’ why we will also expand authority for American armed forces to target the terrorists and criminal networks that sow violence and chaos throughout Afghanistan. These killers need to know they have nowhere to hide, that no place is beyond the reach of American might and American arms. Retribution will be fast and powerful, as we lift restrictions and expand authorities in the field. We’e already seeing dramatic results in the campaign to defeat ISIS, including the liberation of Mosul in Iraq.

Since my inauguration, we have achieved record-breaking success in that regard. We will also maximize sanctions and other financial and law enforcement actions against these networks to eliminate their ability to export terror. When America commits its warriors to battle, we must ensure they have every weapon to apply swift, decisive and overwhelming force.

Our troops will fight to win. We will fight to win. From now on, victory will have a clear definition. Attacking our enemies, obliterating ISIS, crushing Al Qaeda, preventing the Taliban from taking over Afghanistan and stopping mass terror attacks against America before they emerge.

We will ask our NATO allies and global partners to support our new strategy, with additional troop and funding increases in line with our own. We are confident they will.

Since taking office, I have made clear that our allies and partners must contribute much more money to our collective defense. And they have done so.

In this struggle, the heaviest burden will continue to be borne by the good people of Afghanistan and their courageous armed forces. As the prime minister of Afghanistan has promised, we are going to participate in economic development to help defray the cost of this war to us.

Afghanistan is fighting to defend and secure their country against the same enemies who threaten us. The stronger the Afghan security forces become, the less we will have to do. Afghans will secure and build their own nation and define their own future. We want them to succeed.

But we will no longer use American military might to construct democracies in faraway lands or try to rebuild other countries in our own image. Those days are now over. Instead, we will work with allies and partners to protect our shared interests.

We are not asking others to change their way of life, but to pursue common goals that allow our children to live better and safer lives. This principled realism will guide our decisions moving forward. Military power alone will not bring peace to Afghanistan or stop the terrorist threat arising in that country. But strategically applied force aims to create the conditions for a political process to achieve a lasting peace.

America will work with the Afghan government as long as we see determination and progress. However, our commitment is not unlimited, and our support is not a blank check. The government of Afghanistan must carry their share of the military, political, and economic burden.

The American people expect to see real reforms, real progress and real results. Our patience is not unlimited. We will keep our eyes open. In abiding by the oath I took on Jan. 20, I will remain steadfast in protecting American lives and American interests.

In this effort, we will make common cause with any nation that chooses to stand and fight alongside us against this global threat. Terrorists take heed: America will never let up until you are dealt a lasting defeat.

Under my administration, many billions of dollars more is being spent on our military, and this includes vast amounts being spent on our nuclear arsenal and missile defense. In every generation, we have faced down evil, and we have always prevailed. We prevailed because we know who we are and what we are fighting for.

Not far from where we are gathered tonight, hundreds of thousands of America’ greatest patriots lay in eternal rest at Arlington National Cemetery. There’ more courage, sacrifice and love in those hallowed grounds than at any other spot on the face of the Earth.

Many of those who have fought and died in Afghanistan enlisted in the months after Sept. 11, 2001. They volunteered for a simple reason: They loved America, and they were determined to protect her.

Now we must secure the cause for which they gave their lives. We must unite to defend America from its enemies abroad. We must restore the bonds of loyalty among our citizens at home. And we must achieve an honorable and enduring outcome worthy of the enormous price that so many have paid.

Our actions, and in months to come, all of them will honor the sacrifice of every fallen hero, every family who lost a loved one, and every wounded warrior who shed their blood in defense of our great nation.

With our resolve, we will ensure that your service and that your families will bring about the defeat of our enemies and the arrival of peace. We will push onward to victory with power in our hearts, courage in our souls, and everlasting pride in each and every one of you.

Thank you. May God bless our military, and may God bless the United States of America. Thank you very much. Thank you.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* Angry Trump Grilled His Generals About Troop Increase, Then Gave In

* Trump Outlines New Afghanistan War Strategy With Few Details

* As Trump Rolls Out War Plan, Taliban Are Gaining

President Trump has settled on a new plan to carry on the nearly 16-year-old conflict in Afghanistan. | By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS | Before he became a candidate for president, Donald J. Trump was clear about Afghanistan. But during his campaign, he switched views. | By CHRIS CIRILLO and MARK SCHEFFLER 

Document NYTFEED020170822ed8m000rt



World; Europe
2 Barcelona Suspects Are Charged With Terrorism Offenses

By RAPHAEL MINDER 
908 words
22 August 2017
21:25
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

BARCELONA, Spain — Madrid judge charged two of four suspects in last week’ attacks in Spain with terrorism offenses on Tuesday, after a day of questioning that seemed to confirm that the group had initially planned a more ambitious strike.

The judge, however, ordered the release of one suspect and ordered the fourth to be detained for 72 hours for further questioning.

The four suspects —he only survivors of a terrorism cell that killed 15 people in and near Barcelona —ere transferred overnight to Madrid, where they appeared before Fernando Andreu, the judge from Spain’ national court in charge of the case.

Judge Andreu questioned each one in turn on Tuesday, starting with Mohamed Houli Chemlal, 21, who appeared in court in hospital garb. He had been admitted for treatment after being wounded in an explosion at a house that the terrorism cell had used as a bomb factory. The explosion apparently derailed their initial plans for a bombing in Barcelona.

In his decision, Judge Andreu charged Mr. Chemlal and another suspect, Driss Oukabir, with belonging to a terrorist organization, terrorism-related murder and possession of explosives. The judge extended the detention and investigation of Sahal el Karib, who ran an internet cafe, and released Mohammed Aalla but required him to report weekly to the authorities and remain in Spain while the investigation continues.

Tuesday’ court sessions were held behind closed doors. But court officials told the Spanish news media that at least one of the suspects had confirmed that the cell had planned a larger attack that included detonating a bomb at landmark monuments and churches in Barcelona.

The court appearances came a day after the police killed Younes Abouyaaqoub, the last unaccounted-for member of the terrorism cell, in the countryside west of Barcelona.

Mr. Abouyaaqoub, 22, was believed to have driven the van that killed 13 people last Thursday on Las Ramblas, the famous Barcelona promenade. Mr. Abouyaaqoub then stabbed a man to death during his getaway. Another person was killed in a separate attack in Cambrils, a seaside resort.

Although the terrorism cell has been dismantled, the Moroccan police have arrested at least three people in connection with the attacks. One is a cousin of two members of the cell, and another is a salesman of butane gas who worked in Spain.

The bomb-making house contained over 100 butane gas cylinders, and its accidental explosion last Wednesday night is believed to have precipitated the vehicle attacks. The gas salesman arrested on Tuesday is Hicham Ennadih, 44, according to El Españl, a Spanish online newspaper.

Investigators are still trying to establish the ties to other extremists of an imam who died in the house explosion and is suspected of having inspired last week’ attacks.

Investigators are also looking into the whereabouts of the assailants before the attacks, including why some of them had traveled to Paris this month.

On Tuesday, Géard Collomb, France’ interior minister, told the French television channel BFMTV that some members of the cell had visited Paris and that their Audi had been detected speeding in the Paris region.

“he group came to work in Paris, but it was a quick in-and-out trip,”e said.

The car was then used in last week’ attack in Cambrils, which ended when the police killed the five occupants of the car.

In his decision, Judge Andreu said that Mr. Aalla could not be kept in prison because the evidence against him was not “ufficiently solid.”r. Aalla was the official owner of the Audi car that was used in the attack in Cambrils, but the judge said that the investigation suggested that the main user of the car was Mr. Aalla’ brother, Youssef, who died in the house explosion.

The information contained in the judge’ ruling also appears to confirm the involvement of the Islamic State. In the ruins of the bomb-making house, a green book was found, with a piece of paper that refers to “he soldiers of the Islamic State in the land of Andalus,”hich was the medieval name used by the Moors for their conquered territory in the Iberian Peninsula. The ruling also said that several plane tickets were found for Brussels, issued in the name of the imam, Abdelbaki Essati.

The judge’ ruling also provided further details about how the assailants planned their attacks, including the fact that part of the group bought an ax and four knives in a store in the hours between the first assault in Barcelona and the attack in Cambrils.

Correction: August 22, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this story misstated the number of suspects charged in the Barcelona terror attack. Two were charged with terrorism offenses, not four.

* Van Driver in Barcelona Attack Is Killed by Police

* Barcelona Attack Suspects Had Ties to Imam Linked to \b ISIS\b0 

* Spain, a Leader in Foiling Attacks, Falls Victim to One Anyway

* Police See Wider Plot in Spain and Say Carnage Could Have Been Worse

A memorial to the attack victims in Barcelona. | Manu Fernandez/Associated Press | The four suspects charged with terrorism offenses in a Madrid court on Tuesday included, from left, Mohamed Houli Chemlal, Driss Oukabir, Sahal el Karib and Mohammed Aalla. | Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170822ed8m0050l



opinion
Kurds’isky Dream of Independence; Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
639 words
22 August 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

After yearning for independence for generations, Kurds in Iraq are scheduled to take a major step in that direction with a nonbinding referendum set for Sept. 25. The vote, expected to endorse a separate state, would be a mistake, increasing turmoil in a part of the world roiled by the fight against the Islamic State and further threatening Iraq’ territorial integrity. Postponement makes better sense.

In many ways, independence is a logical next step for the five million Iraqi Kurds, who carved out their semiautonomous enclave after the 1991 gulf war. Now that their military forces have played a pivotal role in helping to defeat the Islamic State, the Kurds think they are entitled to this long-promised referendum.

Kurdistan has evolved into a relatively peaceful region. It was lucky enough to have oil and gas resources that opened up trade with Turkey and Iran and brought needed revenue. After the 2003 American invasion, Washington worked with the Iraqis to draw up a constitution that ensured Kurdistan’ semiautonomous status.

There are also serious problems. Two families, the Barzanis and the Talabanis, control politics; corruption is widespread. Because of political infighting, Kurdistan’ parliament has not met since October 2015; the region’ president, Masoud Barzani, remains in office four years after his term ended. Declining oil prices and disputes with Iraq’ central government have left the Kurdistan government in debt. Kurdish authorities are accused of discriminating against minorities. Could Kurdistan make it as an independent state if Iraq and neighboring states stayed hostile to the idea?

The Kurds have sought an independent state since at least the end of World War I. While the Constitution guarantees them a role in the federal government as well as regional autonomy, the Kurds don’ believe the Shiite majority has given them a fair shake. But the referendum would heighten tensions, make it harder to stabilize Iraq and divert attention as the United States, Iraq and their partners work to defeat ISIS and rebuild Iraqi communities.

Some Kurds have dreamed of merging the whole community —0 million people across Turkey, Iraq, Syria and Iran —nto a single entity. That’ not feasible now and worries leaders in Turkey and Iran who see a greater Kurdistan as a territorial threat. Turkey’ deputy prime minister recently warned that the Iraq vote would “ontribute to instability.”raq’ prime minister said the vote would be “llegal”ecause it conflicts with Kurdistan’ constitutional commitments as part of Iraq’ federal government. One sore point is that the boundaries in the referendum include Kirkuk, an oil-rich area the Kurds control and want to incorporate.

The Americans and Europeans have urged the Kurds to postpone the vote until after next year’ Iraqi elections. Mr. Barzani responded by assuring critics the vote would not lead immediately to independence but rather a prolonged negotiation with Baghdad over a split. At this point, postponement is the better option. A Kurdish breakaway is risky; without sufficient preparation, it would further marginalize Iraq’ Sunni minority, already disenfranchised by the Shiite majority and prey to Sunni extremists like ISIS.

On Sunday, a Kurdish official told Reuters the Kurds may delay the vote in return for concessions from Baghdad.

Self-determination is an understandable goal. But just voting for independence is no guarantee that whatever state emerges will govern fairly or well. It does the Kurdish people little good if their leaders do not make a strong effort to first ensure that Kurdistan’ democratic institutions are functioning, the economy is strong and they have support from Iraq and other countries before striking out alone.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document INHT000020170822ed8m0000e



World; Asia Pacific
Trump Outlines New Afghanistan War Strategy With Few Details

By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVIS and MARK LANDLER 
1,896 words
22 August 2017
03:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —resident Trump put forward on Monday a long-awaited strategy for resolving the nearly 16-year-old conflict in Afghanistan, but he declined to specify either the number of troops that would be committed, or the conditions by which he would judge the success of their mission there.

In a nationally televised prime-time speech to troops at Fort Myer, Va., Mr. Trump said there would be no “lank check”or the American engagement in Afghanistan. But in announcing his plan, Mr. Trump deepened American involvement in a military mission that has bedeviled his predecessors and that he once called futile.

“y original instinct was to pull out, and historically I like following my instincts,”r. Trump said. “ut all my life, I’e heard that decisions are much different when you sit behind the desk in the Oval Office.”

After what he described as a lengthy and exhaustive deliberation culminating in a meeting with his war cabinet at Camp David, Mr. Trump said that he had been convinced that “ hasty withdrawal would create a vacuum for terrorists, including \b ISIS\b0  and Al Qaeda.”

Speaking to a military audience at a base outside Washington, Mr. Trump declared, “n the end, we will win.”

But he did not define what victory would look like, nor did he explain how his path would be different from what he labeled the failed strategies of previous presidents.

Mr. Trump campaigned for the White House promising to extricate the United States from foreign conflicts, and many of the steps that he announced Monday have been proposed by previous administrations.

He portrayed the strategy as a stark break with the Obama administration, arguing that while his predecessor set artificial timetables for American involvement in Afghanistan, his strategy would be a comprehensive, conditions-based regional approach that would aim for a political solution there.

Part of the plan is to deploy more American troops to Afghanistan to continue to train Afghan forces there, with the goal of convincing the Taliban —hich has recently gained substantial ground in the war —hat they could not win on the battlefield.

Mr. Trump said that the United States would put significant new pressure on Pakistan to crack down on the terrorist sanctuaries that line its border with Afghanistan. His comments could open a turbulent new chapter in relations with Pakistan, which has veered since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks from being an ally in the fight against terrorism to a haven in which Osama bin Laden hid out until he was killed in 2011.

By refusing to place a number on troops or to specify benchmarks for success, Mr. Trump was in essence shielding himself against potential backlash from his political base and from the American public, which has grown weary of the war.

The president heaped contempt on his predecessor’ strategy, promising that he would avoid President Barack Obama’ mistakes.

But in substance, Mr. Trump’ strategy was not all that different from Mr. Obama’, relying on a mix of conventional military force and diplomatic pressure on Pakistan. One administration official conceded that there was to be no major change in the mix of American forces operating in Afghanistan, and that the priorities would remain training Afghan forces and conducting counterterrorism operations.

In some ways, Mr. Trump’ emphasis on a stripped-down counterterrorism mission was reminiscent of the approach advocated by former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and ultimately rejected by Mr. Obama.

“e are not nation-building again,”r. Trump said. “e are killing terrorists.”

Whatever the echoes, Mr. Trump projected a far more bellicose tone than Mr. Obama. He promised that he would loosen restrictions on American soldiers to enable them to hunt down terrorists, which he labeled “hugs and criminals and predators, and —hat’ right —osers.”

“he killers need to know they have nowhere to hide, that no place is beyond the reach of American might and American arms,”he president said. “etribution will be fast and powerful.”

The setting for Mr. Trump’ speech — flag-bedecked stage —as calculated to cloak the president in the mantle of a commander in chief. But Mr. Trump read stiffly from a teleprompter and his words lacked the rhetorical flourishes of other wartime presidents.

Mr. Trump promised to launch an intensive diplomatic and economic initiative, but he does so from a position of acute weakness at the State Department, which has yet to place an ambassador in Kabul, Afghanistan’ capital, and scrapped the office of the special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan.

Mr. Trump’ reference to a strategic partnership with India also has implications for Pakistan, which has a deeply antagonistic relationship with its neighbor.

An estimated 8,400 American troops are currently stationed in Afghanistan, most assigned to an approximately 13,000-strong international force that is training and advising the Afghan military. About 2,000 American troops are tasked with carrying out counterterrorism missions along with Afghan forces against groups like the Islamic State’ Afghan affiliate, the Islamic State in Khorasan.

Mr. Trump’ aides, previewing the speech, said it would include new steps to pressure neighboring Pakistan to shut down the sanctuaries there for the Taliban and other militants, a goal Republican and Democratic administrations have pursued for years with little success.

They also said that continued American military involvement and economic assistance in Afghanistan would be contingent on steps by the country’ leaders in Kabul to rein in rampant corruption —nother Western aspiration that has repeatedly been dashed in the country, parts of which have been largely lawless for decades.

The strategy comes with steep risks for Mr. Trump, potentially increasing American troops without yielding many military gains in a conflict that has proved intractable. Still, United States military and intelligence officials have argued that doing nothing in Afghanistan, where the Taliban are increasingly gaining ground, is not an option.

In February, Gen. John W. Nicholson, the commander of the American-led international force in Afghanistan, told Congress that the United States and its NATO allies were facing a “talemate.”

There were potential political perils for Mr. Trump, as well. At least two Republicans who challenged Mr. Trump last year for the presidential nomination issued statements hours before his speech to oppose extending the war in Afghanistan in any way.

“ixteen years and the lives of over 2,000 American heroes are more than enough of a price to have paid to eradicate a terrorist sanctuary,”ov. John Kasich, Republican of Ohio, who has positioned himself as a possible primary race candidate in four years, said in a statement. “merica cannot afford to make an open-ended commitment of further lives and treasure to the improbable proposition of building a cohesive nation in Afghanistan.”

Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, flatly opposed a troop increase. “he mission in Afghanistan has lost its purpose, and I think it is a terrible idea to send any more troops into that war,”e said in a statement.

But Speaker Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin said he was pleased with the strategy and the process by which Mr. Trump arrived at it.

“e cannot allow another safe haven for terrorists to materialize again,”r. Ryan told CNN in a town hall-style meeting in Racine, Wis. Adopting a phrase from Mr. Trump’ speech, he said he thought he heard a new Trump doctrine of “rincipled realism.”

The Afghanistan strategy was a consequential moment after a tumultuous week for Mr. Trump, whose response to racially charged violence in Charlottesville, Va., raised questions about his ability to shoulder the responsibilities of a president. Having missed an opportunity to calm the tensions after that unrest, he faced the challenging task of marshaling public support for a potentially bloody military mission.

Mr. Trump used the beginning of his speech to offer a glancing message of unity and national healing that he was criticized for failing to communicate after the Charlottesville violence.

“e cannot remain a force for peace in the world if we are not at peace with each other,”r. Trump said.

Mr. Trump had said little about Afghanistan, either since taking office or during his presidential bid, although his “merica First”ampaign message envisioned a turn away from foreign military intervention and a refocusing on addressing challenges at home.

As a private citizen, he was actively hostile to American involvement in Afghanistan, dwelling on the high cost of the lengthy conflict and suggesting there was no way for the United States to succeed. In a 2012 post on Twitter, Mr. Trump questioned why American forces continued to train Afghans, writing, “fghanistan is a complete waste. Time to come home!”

The president’ ambivalence about the mission in Afghanistan was on display in June, when he outsourced to the Pentagon the task of announcing that he had granted Defense Secretary Jim Mattis authority to send 3,900 troops to the war, but said nothing about it himself. On Monday, by contrast, Mr. Trump announced his new strategy with great fanfare, choosing a military backdrop and the attention-grabbing format of a presidential address to sketch out for the first time how he saw the mission.

In announcing his plan, Mr. Trump became the third consecutive American president to be confounded by the conflict in Afghanistan, now the longest military operation in the history of the United States.

Mr. Obama, who campaigned for president pledging to end the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, eventually agreed to send tens of thousands more troops to carry out an ambitious and expensive counterinsurgency mission that involved trying to win over Afghans by building roads, bridges, schools and a well-functioning government.

Mr. Trump’ decision was a victory of sorts for Mr. Mattis and Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, the national security adviser, who had argued of dire consequences if the United States did not act quickly to stabilize Afghanistan. The Pentagon had long pointed to the return of extremists in Iraq shortly after the American military withdrew forces after that eight-year war, and warned that any advances in Afghanistan could similarly be lost without a stable troop presence.

Some Afghanistan experts praised the decision to do away with “rbitrary”ithdrawal deadlines. But others were critical of the idea that a political settlement could come after the Taliban and other militants had been beaten back on the battlefield — notion that military commanders have insisted would work in the past.

“t didn’ work then,”aid John Dempsey, a former senior State Department official who worked on Afghanistan and Pakistan. “nd it especially won’ work now.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Matthew Rosenberg contributed reporting.

* Trump’ Strategy May Help in Afghanistan, but Few Expect ‘utright Victory’

* Ryan Condemns Trump’ ‘oth Sides’emark but Tries to Move On

* Angry Trump Grilled His Generals About Troop Increase, Then Gave In

President Trump has settled on a new plan to carry on the nearly 16-year-old conflict in Afghanistan. | By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS | Before he became a candidate for president, Donald J. Trump was clear about Afghanistan. But during his campaign, he switched views. | By CHRIS CIRILLO and MARK SCHEFFLER 

Document NYTFEED020170822ed8m000ji



Contests
The Learning Network
Summer Reading Contest Winner, Week 8 | On ‘ars Suck Up Data About You. Where Does It All Go?’

By THE LEARNING NETWORK 
996 words
22 August 2017
13:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Thank you to the 1223 teenagers who participated in the eighth week of our 10-week Summer Reading Contest, and congratulations to John Fernandez Philippides, our winner, as well as to our many runners-up and honorable mentions.

Scroll down to take a look at the variety of topics —rom North Korea and ocean-polluting plastic to affirmative action and shelter dogs —hat caught the eyes of our participants.

And remember: Our 2017 contest ends on Aug. 25.

Winner

John Fernandez Philippides, from Boston, Mass., chose “Cars Suck Up Data About You. Where Does It All Go?”nd wrote:

Born in 2000, I have rarely worried about the risks of the digital age. But this article about the information that cars collect about us spurred a dramatic shift in my opinion about privacy and data-tracking. For a long time, I didn’ care what information companies and the government knew about me. I couldn’ believe that my mom required us to keep our new Amazon Echo turned off and far from where we talked. When I complained about her unfounded paranoia, she revealed that her reasons for moving Alexa were more complex than I thought.

My mother’ family lived in Argentina during part of the “irty War,” period starting in 1976 when the government abducted and killed thousands of Argentine citizens. Her father suspected that the government was spying on his family. When a group of soldiers entered their apartment and tore through his family’ belongings without their consent, they fled to the United States. I learned that the fear of surveillance is more deeply instilled in my mother than it ever could be in me, and my apathy began to erode.

Last week, as I read how auto companies sell information about our driving habits and daily routines, sometimes without our consent, I wondered whether my family would have survived if the Argentine government had access to that kind of data and technology.

Now, unless I need her, Alexa remains turned off in my study.

Runners-Up

Lauren Coppins on “The Secret Life of Pain”

Caitlin Gainey on “The Immense, Eternal Footprint Humanity Leaves on Earth: Plastics”

Sally Meseret on “After an Interlude of Outrage, a Lobster's Star Turn Ends”

Nicholas Romano on “Outcry Over EpiPen Prices Hasn’ Made Them Lower”

Julia S on “After an Interlude of Outrage, a Lobster’ Star Turn Ends”

Jack Stein on “What Can North Korea Reach With Its Missiles?”

Honorable Mentions

Sara Altschuler on “Gene Editing Spurs Hope for Transplanting Pig Organs Into Humans”

John Andreana on “Colin Kaepernick and Concussions Continue to Pose Problems for N.F.L.”

Emily Axelsen on “Why Kids Can’ Write”

Layan Busafar on “Taylor Swift Says Man Groped Her in ‘evious and Sneaky Act’”

Madeline Carleton on “‘ ‘amilton’ip-Hop, by Students”

Matthew Choi on “Minnesota Governor Calls Mosque Attack a ‘riminal Act of Terrorism’”

Edie Conekin-Tooze on “Citing Free Speech, A.C.L.U. Sues Washington Metro Over Rejected Ads”

Luke Denver on “Colin Kaepernick and Concussions Continue to Pose Problems for N.F.L.”

Itziar de Pedro on “Venice, Invaded by Tourists, Risks Becoming ‘isneyland on the Sea’”

Kayleigh Early on “YouTube Falls Hard for ‘n a Heartbeat,’ Boy-Meets-Boy Story”

Sydney Gallo on “Should I Help My Patients Die?”

Trevor Gauronski on “Is This Dog Dangerous? Shelters Struggle With Live-or-Die Tests”

Gavin Giuliani on “Behind Berkeley’ Semester of Hate”

GoBlue18Hannah on “How to Be Mindful Walking in the Rain”

GoBlue18Liam on “Colin Kaepernick and Concussions Continue to Pose Problems for N.F.L.”

Leah Gooding (WHS) on “Learning to Learn: You, Too, Can Rewire Your Brain”

Kimberly Hou on “They’l Shoot Horses, Won’ They?”

Emily R. HuskieHonors11 on “Developmentally Disabled, and Going to College”

Loren Kennedy on “Fighting for Basic Rights in Morocco”

Irina Lee on “Allies in Combat, Now Unwanted”

Younghoon Lee on “North Korean Defector, ‘reated Like Dirt’n South, Fights to Return”

Asher Lipman on “Why Kids Can’ Write”

Maeve Merzena on “The Meaning of ‘espacito’n the Age of Trump”

MichaelW on “What a Fraternity Hazing Death Revealed About the Painful Search for an Asian-American Identity”

Kaeli Montague on “How We Make Black Girls Grow Up Too Fast”

Stephen Mooney on “SpaceX Is Now One of the World’ Most Valuable Privately Held Companies”

Kristina Pendelberry on “Review: At Vail, Female Choreographers Feed the Mighty River of Dance”

Ethan Pintar on “Trump and Senators Seek to Slash Legal Immigration”

Jay Poland on “Trump Says Transgender People Will Not Be Allowed in the Military”

Aneta Sieminski on “How to Prepare Preschoolers for an Automated Economy”

Andrew Siyoon Ham on “Four Castaways Make a Family”

Ethan Reiser on “Iran Bans Two Soccer Stars for Playing Against Israelis”

Sana Shareef on “Justice Dept. to Take On Affirmative Action in College Admissions”

Shruthi Shekar on “Iraq’ Hardball Tactics to Root Out \b ISIS\b0 ”

Alexa Stewart on “Ras Baraka: Immigrants Living in Fear”

Beth Straight on “A Solution to Hackers? More Hackers”

Katelyn Swope on “Venice, Invaded by Tourists, Risks Becoming ‘isneyland on the Sea’”

Dominic T-C on “Admit This Ex-Con to the Connecticut Bar”

Sophia Thomas on “Dunkirk, the War and the Amnesia of the Empire”

Tina on “The Universe Doesn’ Care About Your ‘urpose’”

Celia Young on “Campus Political Fights Come Home for the Summer”

Kevin Zhang on “Opioid Users Are Filling Jails. Why Don’ Jails Treat Them?”

Selina Zhang on “Punch With Pakistani Girls at a Karachi Boxing Club”

Zack Zhao on “China’ Internet Censors Play a Tougher Game of Cat and Mouse”

Automakers, local governments, retailers, insurers and tech companies are looking to leverage the data that cars generate. Related Article | Andrew Cullen for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170822ed8m0030e



Washington; SECT
Full Transcript and Video: Trump's Speech on Afghanistan

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
3,041 words
22 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

President Trump addressed the nation on Monday from Fort Myer military base in Arlington, Va., to lay out his military plans for Afghanistan.

Following is the full transcript of those remarks, as released by the Federal News Service.

For further coverage of his remarks, read more »

___________

PRESIDENT TRUMP: Thank you very much. Thank you. Please be seated.

Vice President Pence, Secretary of State Tillerson, members of the cabinet, General Dunford, Deputy Secretary Shanahan, and Colonel Duggan, most especially, thank you to the men and women of Fort Myer and every member of the United States military, at home and abroad.

We send our thoughts and prayers to the families of our brave sailors who were injured and lost after a tragic collision at sea, as well as to those conducting the search-and-recovery efforts.

I am here tonight to lay out our path forward in Afghanistan and South Asia.

But before I provide the details of our new strategy, I want to say a few words to the service members here with us tonight, to those watching from their posts and to all Americans listening at home.

Since the founding of our republic, our country has produced a special class of heroes whose selflessness, courage and resolve is unmatched in human history. American patriots from every generation have given their last breath on the battlefield for our nation and for our freedom.

Through their lives, and though their lives were cut short, in their deeds they achieved total immortality. By following the heroic example of those who fought to preserve our republic, we can find the inspiration our country needs to unify, to heal, and to remain one nation, under God.

The men and women of our military operate as one team, with one shared mission and one shared sense of purpose. They transcend every line of race, ethnicity, creed and color to serve together and sacrifice together in absolutely perfect cohesion. That is because all service members are brothers and sisters. They're all part of the same family. It's called the American family. They take the same oath, fight for the same flag and live according to the same law. They're bound together by common purpose, mutual trust and selfless devotion to our nation and to each other.

The soldier understands what we as a nation too often forget, that a wound inflicted upon a single member of our community is a wound inflicted upon us all. When one part of America hurts, we all hurt. And when one citizen suffers an injustice, we all suffer together. Loyalty to our nation demands loyalty to one another. Love for America requires love for all of its people.

When we open our hearts to patriotism, there is no room for prejudice, no place for bigotry and no tolerance for hate. The young men and women we send to fight our wars abroad deserve to return to a country that is not at war with itself at home. We cannot remain a force for peace in the world if we are not at peace with each other.

As we send our bravest to defeat our enemies overseas -- and we will always win -- let us find the courage to heal our divisions within. Let us make a simple promise to the men and women we ask to fight in our name, that when they return home from battle, they will find a country that has renewed the sacred bonds of love and loyalty that unite us together as one.

Thanks to the vigilance and skill of the American military, and of our many allies throughout the world, horrors on the scale of Sept. 11 -- and nobody can ever forget that -- have not been repeated on our shores.

And we must acknowledge the reality I'm here to talk about tonight, that nearly 16 years after the Sept. 11 attacks, after the extraordinary sacrifice of blood and treasure, the American people are weary of war without victory. Nowhere is this more evident than with the war in Afghanistan, the longest war in American history, 17 years.

I share the American people's frustration. I also share their frustration over a foreign policy that has spent too much time, energy, money -- and most importantly, lives -- trying to rebuild countries in our own image instead of pursuing our security interests above all other considerations.

That is why shortly after my inauguration, I directed Secretary of Defense Mattis and my national security team to undertake a comprehensive review of all strategic options in Afghanistan and South Asia. My original instinct was to pull out. And historically, I like following my instincts.

But all my life I've heard that decisions are much different when you sit behind the desk in the Oval Office, in other words, when you're president of the United States. So I studied Afghanistan in great detail and from every conceivable angle. After many meetings, over many months, we held our final meeting last Friday at Camp David with my cabinet and generals to complete our strategy.

I arrived at three fundamental conclusion about America's core interests in Afghanistan. First, our nation must seek an honorable and enduring outcome worthy of the tremendous sacrifices that have been made, especially the sacrifices of lives. The men and women who serve our nation in combat deserve a plan for victory. They deserve the tools they need and the trust they have earned to fight and to win.

Second, the consequences of a rapid exit are both predictable and unacceptable. 9/11, the worst terrorist attack in our history, was planned and directed from Afghanistan because that country was ruled by a government that gave comfort and shelter to terrorists.

A hasty withdrawal would create a vacuum for terrorists, including ISIS and Al Qaeda, would instantly fill just as happened before Sept. 11. And as we know, in 2011, America hastily and mistakenly withdrew from Iraq. As a result, our hard-won gains slipped back into the hands of terrorist enemies. Our soldiers watched as cities they had fought for and bled to liberate, and won, were occupied by a terrorist group called ISIS. The vacuum we created by leaving too soon gave safe haven for ISIS to spread, to grow, recruit and launch attacks. We cannot repeat in Afghanistan the mistake our leaders made in Iraq.

Third, and finally, I concluded that the security threats we face in Afghanistan and the broader region are immense. Today, 20 U.S.-designated foreign terrorist organizations are active in Afghanistan and Pakistan, the highest concentration in any region anywhere in the world.

For its part, Pakistan often gives safe haven to agents of chaos, violence and terror. The threat is worse because Pakistan and India are two nuclear-armed states whose tense relations threaten to spiral into conflict. And that could happen.

No one denies that we have inherited a challenging and troubling situation in Afghanistan and South Asia. But we do not have the luxury of going back in time and making different or better decisions. When I became president, I was given a bad and very complex hand. But I fully knew what I was getting into, big and intricate problems.

But one way or another, these problems will be solved. I'm a problem solver. And in the end, we will win.

We must address the reality of the world as it exists right now, and the threats we face and the confronting of all of the problems of today, and extremely predictable consequences of a hasty withdrawal. We need look no further than last week's vile, vicious attack in Barcelona to understand that terror groups will stop at nothing to commit the mass murder of innocent men, women and children. You saw it for yourself. Horrible.

As I outlined in my speech in Saudi Arabia three months ago, America and our partners are committed to stripping terrorists of their territory, cutting off their funding and exposing the false allure of their evil ideology. Terrorists who slaughter innocent people will find no glory in this life or the next. They are nothing but thugs and criminals and predators and -- that's right -- losers.

Working alongside our allies, we will break their will, dry up their recruitment, keep them from crossing our borders and, yes, we will defeat them, and we will defeat them handily.

In Afghanistan and Pakistan, America's interests are clear. We must stop the resurgence of safe havens that enable terrorists to threaten America. And we must prevent nuclear weapons and materials from coming into the hands of terrorists and being used against us, or anywhere in the world, for that matter.

But to prosecute this war, we will learn from history. As a result of our comprehensive review, American strategy in Afghanistan and South Asia will change dramatically in the following ways.

A core pillar of our new strategy is a shift from a time-based approach to one based on conditions. I've said it many times how counterproductive it is for the United States to announce in advance the dates we intend to begin or end military options.

We will not talk about numbers of troops or our plans for further military activities. Conditions on the ground, not arbitrary timetables, will guide our strategy from now on. America's enemies must never know our plans or believe they can wait us out.

I will not say when we are going to attack, but attack we will.

Another fundamental pillar of our new strategy is the integration of all instruments of American power -- diplomatic, economic, and military -- toward a successful outcome. Someday, after an effective military effort, perhaps it will be possible to have a political settlement that includes elements of the Taliban in Afghanistan. But nobody knows if or when that will ever happen.

America will continue its support for the Afghan government and the Afghan military as they confront the Taliban in the field. Ultimately, it is up to the people of Afghanistan to take ownership of their future, to govern their society and to achieve an everlasting peace. We are a partner and a friend, but we will not dictate to the Afghan people how to live or how to govern their own complex society. We are not nation-building again. We are killing terrorists.

The next pillar of our new strategy is to change the approach in how to deal with Pakistan. We can no longer be silent about Pakistan's safe havens for terrorist organizations, the Taliban and other groups that pose a threat to the region and beyond.

Pakistan has much to gain from partnering with our effort in Afghanistan. It has much to lose by continuing to harbor criminals and terrorists. In the past, Pakistan has been a valued partner. Our militaries have worked together against common enemies. The Pakistani people have suffered greatly from terrorism and extremism. We recognize those contributions and those sacrifices.

But Pakistan has also sheltered the same organizations that try every single day to kill our people. We have been paying Pakistan billions and billions of dollars at the same time they are housing the very terrorists that we are fighting.

But that will have to change. And that will change immediately. No partnership can survive a country's harboring of militants and terrorists who target U.S. service members and officials. It is time for Pakistan to demonstrate its commitment to civilization, order and to peace.

Another critical part of the South Asia strategy for America is to further develop its strategic partnership with India, the world's largest democracy and a key security and economic partner of the United States. We appreciate India's important contributions to stability in Afghanistan, but India makes billions of dollars in trade with the United States, and we want them to help us more with Afghanistan, especially in the area of economic assistance and development. We are committed to pursuing our shared objectives for peace and security in South Asia and the broader Indo-Pacific region.

Finally, my administration will ensure that you, the brave defenders of the American people, will have the necessary tools and rules of engagement to make this strategy work, and work effectively, and work quickly.

I have already lifted restrictions the previous administration placed on our war fighters that prevented the secretary of defense and our commanders in the field from fully and swiftly waging battle against the enemy.

Micromanagement from Washington, D.C., does not win battles. They're won in the field, drawing upon the judgment and expertise of wartime commanders, and front-line soldiers, acting in real time with real authority, and with a clear mission to defeat the enemy.

That's why we will also expand authority for American armed forces to target the terrorists and criminal networks that sow violence and chaos throughout Afghanistan. These killers need to know they have nowhere to hide, that no place is beyond the reach of American might and American arms. Retribution will be fast and powerful, as we lift restrictions and expand authorities in the field. We're already seeing dramatic results in the campaign to defeat ISIS, including the liberation of Mosul in Iraq.

Since my inauguration, we have achieved record-breaking success in that regard. We will also maximize sanctions and other financial and law enforcement actions against these networks to eliminate their ability to export terror. When America commits its warriors to battle, we must ensure they have every weapon to apply swift, decisive and overwhelming force.

Our troops will fight to win. We will fight to win. From now on, victory will have a clear definition. Attacking our enemies, obliterating ISIS, crushing Al Qaeda, preventing the Taliban from taking over Afghanistan and stopping mass terror attacks against America before they emerge.

We will ask our NATO allies and global partners to support our new strategy, with additional troop and funding increases in line with our own. We are confident they will.

Since taking office, I have made clear that our allies and partners must contribute much more money to our collective defense. And they have done so.

In this struggle, the heaviest burden will continue to be borne by the good people of Afghanistan and their courageous armed forces. As the prime minister of Afghanistan has promised, we are going to participate in economic development to help defray the cost of this war to us.

Afghanistan is fighting to defend and secure their country against the same enemies who threaten us. The stronger the Afghan security forces become, the less we will have to do. Afghans will secure and build their own nation and define their own future. We want them to succeed.

But we will no longer use American military might to construct democracies in faraway lands or try to rebuild other countries in our own image. Those days are now over. Instead, we will work with allies and partners to protect our shared interests.

We are not asking others to change their way of life, but to pursue common goals that allow our children to live better and safer lives. This principled realism will guide our decisions moving forward. Military power alone will not bring peace to Afghanistan or stop the terrorist threat arising in that country. But strategically applied force aims to create the conditions for a political process to achieve a lasting peace.

America will work with the Afghan government as long as we see determination and progress. However, our commitment is not unlimited, and our support is not a blank check. The government of Afghanistan must carry their share of the military, political, and economic burden.

The American people expect to see real reforms, real progress and real results. Our patience is not unlimited. We will keep our eyes open. In abiding by the oath I took on Jan. 20, I will remain steadfast in protecting American lives and American interests.

In this effort, we will make common cause with any nation that chooses to stand and fight alongside us against this global threat. Terrorists take heed: America will never let up until you are dealt a lasting defeat.

Under my administration, many billions of dollars more is being spent on our military, and this includes vast amounts being spent on our nuclear arsenal and missile defense. In every generation, we have faced down evil, and we have always prevailed. We prevailed because we know who we are and what we are fighting for.

Not far from where we are gathered tonight, hundreds of thousands of America's greatest patriots lay in eternal rest at Arlington National Cemetery. There's more courage, sacrifice and love in those hallowed grounds than at any other spot on the face of the Earth.

Many of those who have fought and died in Afghanistan enlisted in the months after Sept. 11, 2001. They volunteered for a simple reason: They loved America, and they were determined to protect her.

Now we must secure the cause for which they gave their lives. We must unite to defend America from its enemies abroad. We must restore the bonds of loyalty among our citizens at home. And we must achieve an honorable and enduring outcome worthy of the enormous price that so many have paid.

Our actions, and in months to come, all of them will honor the sacrifice of every fallen hero, every family who lost a loved one, and every wounded warrior who shed their blood in defense of our great nation.

With our resolve, we will ensure that your service and that your families will bring about the defeat of our enemies and the arrival of peace. We will push onward to victory with power in our hearts, courage in our souls, and everlasting pride in each and every one of you.

Thank you. May God bless our military, and may God bless the United States of America. Thank you very much. Thank you.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170822ed8m0004o



World; Europe
Van Driver in Barcelona Attack Is Killed by Police

By PATRICK KINGSLEY and RAPHAEL MINDER 
1,078 words
21 August 2017
17:01
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

SUBIRATS, Spain —he woman who spotted him on Monday afternoon said the young man was wearing unusually bulky clothes for a hot summer day. On a second look, she told the police when she phoned in the tip, she had “o doubt”e was the fugitive suspected of driving the van in last week’ terrorist attack in Barcelona.

Two police officers in the area closed in and cornered the suspect, Younes Abouyaaqoub, 22, along a road that winds its way up through this wine region west of the city.

As soon as they did, he opened his jacket to reveal what looked like a suicide belt —hich turned out to be fake —nd shouted, “llah is great.”he officers shot him dead.

Mr. Abouyaaqoub’ killing in the Catalan countryside put an end to a four-day, Europeanwide search for the only unaccounted member of a 12-person terrorist cell that carried out the deadly attacks in Barcelona and a seaside resort last week, killing 15 people and injuring dozens more.

The attacks were Spain’ deadliest terrorist assault since 2004, when terrorists bombed commuter trains in Madrid, killing 191 people.

Mr. Abouyaaqoub is suspected of being behind the wheel of the van that mowed down a crowd on Las Ramblas, Barcelona’ central boulevard, on Thursday. He escaped on foot through the city’ most famous food market, stole a car in the city’ university district, killed the owner with a knife and put the body in the back seat.

He then forced his way through a police checkpoint to reach the outskirts of Barcelona, where he abandoned the car with its owner’ body inside.

Maj. Josep Lluí Trapero, the police chief in the Catalonia region, described at a news conference on Monday how Mr. Abouyaaqoub had been finally tracked down and killed.

Major Trapero said the investigation was continuing, including the search for possible links between last week’ assailants and other extremists overseas. But, he said, the police were not looking for a specific accomplice who might have helped Mr. Abouyaaqoub avoid a police dragnet over the last four days.

“e have accounted for 12 people in total, who are the ones we have always mentioned,”ajor Trapero said. “t’ quite probable that he moved alone around this area.”

Still, villagers suggested that Mr. Abouyaaqoub might have been using the village near the site where he was killed as a hide-out in the months before the attacks.

When the police released Mr. Abouyaaqoub’ picture on Friday, “ thought he looks familiar, I mean his face,”aid Roger Quenal, an 18-year-old student. “ think I saw him two months ago here.”

Mr. Quenal’ father, Edward, also thought he had seen Mr. Abouyaaqoub in the neighborhood before the attacks.

Even as the manhunt ended on Monday, several questions remained unanswered, in particular the role of an imam who is believed to have inspired the attacks last week.

The police confirmed on Monday that the imam, Abdelbaki Essati, was one of the two people who died when a house in a small seaside town south of Barcelona that the group had used as a bomb factory blew up.

The imam preached in the town of Ripoll, home to many of the members of the terrorist cell. Investigators believe the planning for the plot might have begun not long after Mr. Essati’ arrival, a year ago, at the second of two mosques where he worked in Ripoll.

The authorities raised the death toll from the attacks to 15 on Monday: 13 killed in the van attack in Barcelona, a 14th person who died hours later in a related attack in the town of Cambrils and the driver of the car that Mr. Abouyaaqoub used to make his escape.

Two of the 15 were children, including a 7-year-old boy who had Australian and British citizenship. Six victims were Spanish, including one who also held an Argentine passport. Three were Italian, two were Portuguese, one was Belgian, one was American and one was Canadian, the authorities said.

Fifty of the injured victims remained in hospitals on Monday, down from the 126 who were taken to a hospital immediately after the attacks. Twelve were in critical condition.

Earlier on Monday, Major Trapero, the Catalan police chief, said the investigation had gained an international dimension, implying that other countries’olice and intelligence agencies were now involved, but he did not provide details.

He also would not comment on reports that the imam had longstanding ties to extremists and had spent time overseas, including in Belgium early last year, shortly before terrorists attacked the airport and subway in Brussels. The imam spent time in prison in Spain on drug-related charges, but had no record of terrorism-related activities.

Major Trapero defended the level of police surveillance before the attacks. The country has avoided major acts of jihadist terrorism since the Madrid assault, even as the Islamic State and other extremists struck other cities across Europe.

Major Trapero said that it would be “laying dirty”o accuse the police of lapses and that the police had never received information that would have justified acting against members of the cell.

Asked why nobody had raised the alarm in Alcanar, the town south of Barcelona where terrorists stored over 100 gas cylinders in their bomb-making house, Major Trapero said, “e have to be cautious not to criminalize the ones who didn’ see or act.”

Follow Patrick Kingsley @PatrickKingsley and Raphael Minder @RaphaelMinder on Twitter.Patrick Kingsley reported from Subirats, and Raphael Minder from Barcelona, Spain. Germá Aranda and Samuel Aranda contributed reporting from Subirats.

* Barcelona Attack Suspects Had Ties to Imam Linked to \b ISIS\b0 

* As Spain Mourns, Hunt Intensifies for Van Driver in Barcelona Attack

* Spain Looking for Moroccan Man in Barcelona Attack Investigation

* Police See Wider Plot in Spain and Say Carnage Could Have Been Worse

* In Terror Attacks in Spain, a Global Community of Victims

* As Vehicle Attacks Rise, an Ordinary Object Becomes an Instrument of Fear

* Van Hits Pedestrians in Deadly Barcelona Terror Attack

Specialists in deactivation of explosive artifacts on the site where the Moroccan suspect Younes Abouyaaqoub was shot on Monday, in Subirats. | Lluis Gene/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Younes Abouyaaqoub | Spanish Interior Ministry, via Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170821ed8l003xp



The Breakdown
World; Australia
Australia Plans More Barriers in Public Spaces After Attacks in Spain

By ISABELLA KWAI 
854 words
21 August 2017
11:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

SYDNEY, Australia — few days after the vehicle attacks in Spain that killed 14 people, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia has unveiled a counterterrorism strategy to protect crowded public spaces.

The plan calls for more barriers in busy pedestrian areas to prevent vehicles from entering. The barriers could include posts, steps and even works of art, Mr. Turnbull said on Sunday. Businesses will also be asked to address security risks by working with the police.

“e will never be cowed, nor will we bow to terrorism,”e added. “ut what we must do, of course, is take every step we can to protect Australians from the threat of terrorism and terrorist attacks.”

His announcement came just days after two deadly vehicle attacks in Spain. In the first, a van mowed down pedestrians on Las Ramblas, Barcelona’ main promenade, on Thursday. Among those killed was a 7-year-old Australian boy. Hours later there was car attack in the seaside town of Cambrils.

Mr. Turnbull said officials began work on the plan last year after a terrorist in Nice, France, drove through crowds on the city’ seaside promenade, killing 86 people. The plan is being rolled out now.

The news media also reported on Monday on a proposal that would allow security personnel at Australia’ airports to ask people in terminals for identification documents. The proposal came after the authorities said they foiled a plot to detonate a device on a plane leaving Sydney Airport.

We spoke to Isaac Kfir, director of the national security program and head of counterterrorism policy at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, about the plan to protect public areas.

What does the plan involve?

The strategy identifies how to “ake crowded places as resilient as possible to terrorist attacks while preserving our use and enjoyment of these places,”ccording to the text of the plan, which means it is essentially a guide for business owners on how to help prevent attacks or mitigate harm should one happen.

The plan includes “nformation to help owners and operators better understand terrorist weapons and tactics,”hich can include explosive devices, chemical weapons and vehicles, Mr. Turnbull said in a statement.

You can read the plan here.

Why was it announced now?

The release is most likely tied to the attack in Barcelona, Dr. Kfir said.

“here is a tendency for policy makers to be reactive,”e said. “hey have to show after a horrific attack, look, this is what we are doing to keep these communities and our society safe.”

The government said the threat level for a terrorist attack in Australia was “robable.”

Will this help prevent an attack?

It is difficult to say because the threat is evolving, Dr. Kfir said. Extra security barriers might deter attacks, but the main benefit is to reassure the public, he said.

“ou want people to feel comfortable and confident when they go about their daily business,”e said, adding that this is particularly important in Australia, where people spend a lot of time outdoors.

Is there a downside?

It could get pricey. Businesses will be responsible for conducting security reviews, and the government will pay for barriers in public areas.

“ome of the mechanisms are incredibly expensive, and cities have to introduce budgets for them. This was a huge challenge for the city of Nice,”r. Kfir said.

Installing barriers could also hinder emergency response vehicles from gaining access to certain areas. In such cases, Mr. Kfir said, a cost-benefit analysis should be done to weigh whether extra security was worthwhile.

The introduction of more security will inevitably require more patience from the public, too.

“e always need a debate about how much security we want because with more security there’ going to be more intrusion in our lives,”e said.

London, for example, has the most closed-circuit surveillance cameras in the world, and those cameras helped trace the attackers behind bomb explosions on subway trains and a red double-decker bus in 2005. In New York, the introduction of similar technology, including facial recognition software, has drawn pushback from privacy advocacy groups.

What are other countries doing?

Britain is discussing the possibility of additional checks for people who rent vans. France’ interior minister, Géard Collomb, has proposed  cordoning off public areas to combat terrorism. Britain and France have also called for the removal of extremist propaganda on social media in a joint campaign.

Germany has announced plans to centralize its counterterrorism systems and deport rejected asylum seekers.

Follow Isabella Kwai on Twitter@bellakwai. Got an idea or suggestion for how to improve The Breakdown? Email nytaustralia@nytimes.com. Want to catch up? Read previous editions of The Breakdown.

* \b ISIS\b0  Says It’ Behind Hostage Siege and Killing in Australia

* Australia Details ‘ophisticated’lot by \b ISIS\b0  to Take Down Plane

* Arrest of \b ISIS\b0  Suspect in Rural Town Puts Australia on Edge

Police officers blocking a street in Sydney, Australia, during a counterterrorism raid last month. | David Gray/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170821ed8l0028l



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Suspects in Barcelona Attack Had Ties to Imam Linked to  ISIS 

By ALISSA J. RUBIN, PATRICK KINGSLEY and PALKO KARASZ; Alissa J. Rubin reported from Barcelona, Spain, Patrick Kingsley from Ripoll and Ribes de Freser, and Palko Karasz from Alcanar. Germá Aranda contributed reporting from Ripoll. 
1,879 words
21 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BARCELONA, Spain -- Until Thursday, just hours before the Barcelona attack, many of the young men seemed to be living completely normal lives. One had slept late, his mother said. Another had worked as a waiter serving wine in a mountaintop restaurant days before. Several were eating kebabs, looking relaxed.

By Friday morning, seven were dead, an eighth was critically wounded, and one was on the run. Three others were detained by the police. They had grown up together, and among them were four sets of brothers. Most of them were not even 25 years old.

All 12 are now suspected by investigators of having played a part in the attacks that killed 14 and wounded more than 80. Most of the victims died after being run over on Las Ramblas, the main pedestrian boulevard in Barcelona, blighting Spain's recent image as a place relatively untouched by terrorism and rattling nerves across Europe.

''These guys were normal, they said 'hello, goodbye,' they all worked, they had cars, they had parents,'' said Habiba al Loquiat, a resident of Ripoll, the small town where many of them lived, and where Ms. Loquiat attended a gathering on Saturday of Moroccans in solidarity with the victims. ''They didn't live in misery. Everything was normal in the last months and one day I see on TV, it's over.''

''The community doesn't have problems,'' she said. ''Why did they do these things?''

There is much that investigators have yet to learn, but based on interviews with the men's friends, neighbors, religious figures and the police, the answer appears to lie at least in part with a shadowy figure linked to the Islamic State, Abdelbaki Essati, who is believed to have been killed on Wednesday, a day before the attack, when explosives that the group was manufacturing accidentally detonated.

Mr. Essati, who was in his 40s and who is reported to have had links to Islamist extremists going back at least a decade, somehow brought the young men under his influence after establishing himself as an imam in their mountain town of Ripoll, even though few of the young men had a history of regularly attending mosque.

In an eerie resemblance to recent attacks in Paris and Brussels, Mr. Essati appears to have targeted groups of brothers, perhaps because family ties make it harder for individuals to leave the group, even if they want to go to the police.

Of the four sets of brothers involved in the attacks in Catalonia, one family may even have had three brothers active in the cell, investigators believe. In the Paris and Brussels attacks, there were at least two sets of brothers involved.

Unlike in those cases, however, there has been little discussion so far of internet radicalization in this attack. Instead, there appears to have been a concerted effort through personal contact -- although internet resources seem to also have been used eventually -- to radicalize the young men.

Investigators and terrorism experts believe that the planning for the plot may have begun not long after Mr. Essati's arrival a year ago at the second of two mosques where he worked in Ripoll. They now say that at least some of the suspected participants traveled abroad before the attack either to Morocco or elsewhere in Europe, as did Mr. Essati.

The young men all knew one another -- to varying degrees -- and most had attended the same middle school and high school.

As was the case in previous attacks linked to the Islamic State, the conspirators in this plot covered their tracks by meeting in different places and using a low-profile location as a bomb-making center.

Setting up as squatters in a vacant house in Alcanar, a working-class holiday town about 186 miles away, they created a makeshift explosives factory. In plain sight of neighbors who suspected no wrongdoing, they gradually collected more than 100 cylinders of butane gas, the police said, in an effort to intensify the damage that would be done by the car bomb they were making.

It was to be detonated using triacetone triperoxide -- a volatile and unstable substance, known as TATP, that was also used in the Paris and Brussels attacks. The accidental explosion on Wednesday suggests that assembling the bomb was beyond their skills.

After the group's safe house blew up -- killing its leader and two others -- those who were still alive appear to have had no clear backup plan.

First they carried out the plot to run a vehicle into crowds on Las Ramblas, but after that they seemed adrift. Five of them piled into one car and late on the night of the Barcelona attack tangled with the police in Cambrils, a seaside town, as they tried to run over more people. All were killed by the police in a shootout.

Unlike the attackers in Paris and Brussels or in Nice or London, these young men were from well integrated Spanish-Moroccan families. None had previous links to terrorism or were on watch lists, the police said, and most either had jobs or were still in school. Only a couple of them appeared to have had minor brushes with the law -- for marijuana use.

''When there is an attack like this, we then always focus on certain districts or banlieues,'' Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, told a news conference on Sunday. That was pointless here, he protested.

''We have about 200,000 Moroccans in Catalonia who contribute to the normality of this country, who pray, work and take part in our collective life, and as such it is very unfair to try to present a community that has an important proportion of Muslims as a hot spot of radicalization.''

Few of the young men appear to have been drawn to religion. Several partied and readily smoked joints, according to friends. The one set of brothers whom friends describe as more involved religiously were the Abouyaaqoubs.

A close childhood friend of Houssaine Abouyaaqoub, 19, described him as becoming more religious in the last year, but he also went to the gym regularly, taught rock climbing and, like a couple of the others, spoke fluent Catalan.

''Younes, his brother, was always more religious,'' said the friend, who asked not to be identified because he was afraid to have his name published in the current climate. ''Houssaine would go often to that mosque, but not every day or every week. But in the last months he went more often than before.''

Another friend described Houssaine as changing abruptly, and suddenly starting to talk only about ''religion, religion, religion.''

The change, he said, came after Houssaine went on a trip with the imam to Tarragona, for about two weeks, a month ago.

''It happened very fast,'' he said.

Another suspect, Mohammed Aalla, 27, worked as a waiter in a mountaintop restaurant in the hamlet of Ventola, where he served wine and alcohol along with the other waiters, his employer said.

The police believe he was involved along with his brothers, Said, 18, and Youssef, 22.

The youngest participant was Moussa Oukabir, 17, who went to the mosque only a couple of times, said the head of the association that runs the local mosque where Mr. Essati most recently served as imam. A slender boy with shy expressions in photographs, Moussa impressed others with what one neighbor said was ''perfect Catalan.''

Friends and neighbors said that Moussa liked to swim, ride his bike and hang out near the river that runs through the town.

His sisters boasted to their employer at Les Graelles, a local restaurant, that he had received high marks in school. ''The little brother was a 10 kid, a great kid,'' said Rosa, the restaurant's manager.

Yet about two months before the attack, friends said, Moussa Oukabir bought a plane ticket to Morocco from a local phone and internet store that also sells cheap flights. It is not clear when he went or how long he stayed.

His brother, Driss, 27 or 28, had some scrapes with the law for selling marijuana.

He walked into the police station in Ripoll after his identity documents were used to rent the white Fiat van that ran over people on Las Ramblas and the papers were discovered inside. Driss Oukabir said that the documents had been stolen and that he had come in to report the theft.

He remains in detention. There is no suggestion that he was the driver of the vehicle, but questions remain about whether he knew that his documents would be used in a terrorist attack.

Upstairs from the Oukabir family lived the Hychami family, including Mohammed, 24, and Omar, 21. Mohammed worked in the nearby Conforsa factory, which manufactures machine parts. He told his mother, Halima Hychami, that he had vacation from July 20 until Aug. 27.

The last time she spoke to her elder son was early last week, when she was visiting her family in Morocco.

''Mohammed called me -- I was coming back on Wednesday -- and he said, 'Mom, everything is ready. Who do you want to have pick you up at the airport, me or Omar?'

''I said, 'If Omar comes, when will I see you?' And he said, 'Saturday or Sunday.'

''That was the last time we talked,'' said Ms. Hychami, who wore a long black abaya, a silent statement of mourning as she spoke to a few reporters in the main square in front of Ripoll's town hall.

It turned out to be Omar who came to pick her up at the airport.

About 12 hours later, both of her sons were shot dead by the police in Cambrils after the Audi they were driving, which belonged to a suspect who is now detained, tried to break through a police checkpoint and drove into tourists, killing one person and wounding a half dozen others.

The emotional scars on the young men's families and communities are not counted in the toll of victims, but have nonetheless left their mark.

''I wish this had never happened and that our only memory of our children was the innocence in their eyes,'' said Hafa Mars, an educator who worked with many of the young men when they were children and who attended the demonstration in Ripoll in support of the victims on Saturday.

''I wish we didn't have to remember them the way we do,'' she said. ''We don't know whether to cry for them or what to do, because they have killed 14 people.''

Residents of Ripoll, Spain, mourned and showed solidarity with victims in Barcelona. (A1); Relatives, above, of the men who carried out the attacks in Barcelona and Cambrils last week gathered with other Muslims in the main square of Ripoll, Spain, on Saturday in support of the victims. The name of one of the suspects, left, on a wall in a mosque in Ripoll. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SAMUEL ARANDA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A10) 

Document NYTF000020170821ed8l0003q



World; Asia Pacific
Afghan Forces Are Praised, Despite Still Relying Heavily on U.S. Help

By HELENE COOPER 
950 words
21 August 2017
00:55
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

CAMP MOREHEAD, Afghanistan —n an hourlong ceremony in a valley a few miles southeast of Kabul on Sunday, more than 300 members of the Afghan National Army Special Operations Command stood at attention at Camp Morehead, a training base, as a succession of officials, American and Afghan, told them how successful they had been at fighting the Taliban .

And with the total number of special operation forces soon to reach 30,000, a full corps, their enemies would flee in the face of them, the commandos were assured.

President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan, in strident tones at odds with his usual mild demeanor, told the gathered troops that they had saved the sovereignty of the country when the Taliban threatened.

“he Taliban have never won against the commandos and the Ktah Khas,”dded Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr ., the commander of the Afghanistan war effort, referring to a unit of the Afghan special operations forces. “hey never will.”

But all the confidence and congratulations disguised a larger truth at the heart of why the Taliban have managed to take back so much territory in Afghanistan.

The country’ current number of 21,000 special operations troops, while set to grow soon, account for only 7 percent of the Afghan National Defense and Security Forces. But they do from 70 percent to 80 percent of the actual fighting.

The bulk of the Afghan military and police forces are still well below the readiness and ability levels that American and NATO war planners hoped they would have reached when they began training the country’ security forces in 2002.

As President Trump prepares to announce his Afghanistan strategy , American and Afghan military officials appear to believe the plan will resemble what the Pentagon would like to see: authorization of 3,900 more American troops who would be used to continue to help train, advise and assist the hugely challenged Afghan security forces.

That number, American and NATO officials said, would likely be supplemented by a few hundred additional advisers and trainers from NATO and other countries that have contributed to the American-led war effort here.

If Mr. Trump does not grant the Pentagon’ request for a more robust American troop level, there is concern that the Afghan forces may not be able to even maintain the current stalemate, causing the country’ security situation to backslide further, and that Kabul, the capital, could come under more high-visibility attacks.

Even if the extra numbers do come through, military officials acknowledged that Afghanistan’ security forces were nowhere close to being able to defend the country on their own or to keep it from returning to its former status as a launching pad for terrorist attacks abroad.

A resurgent Taliban , which by American estimates controls more than 40 percent of the population centers of Helmand Province in the south, continues to bedevil the beleaguered Afghan security forces, while the Islamic State has taken root in Nangarhar Province in the east.

Despite the challenges, Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the head of United States Central Command, and other senior officers presented an upbeat assessment of the war effort in a series of briefings with reporters during a visit to Afghanistan to meet with the country’ military and political leaders.

The Taliban had not managed to take any provincial capitals or to hold any important cities in this year’ fighting season, they said.

“he enemy is not doing very well,”aid Maj. Gen. James B. Linder, the American Special Operations commander in Afghanistan. “he reality on the ground,”e added, “s quite different”rom what the Taliban ’ claims may suggest.

In an attack last month at the Iraqi Embassy  in Kabul, only two civilians were killed, military officials said, noting that the attack could have been much worse were it not for the fast response of the Afghan police special operations forces.

What was played down in discussions with reporters was how much help from the United States military the Afghan special forces require, with many operations closely advised and even led, in effect, by their American partners.

The uncertainty brought about by Mr. Trump’ delay in announcing a new Afghanistan strategy has not helped the situation on the ground, either, and a number of Afghan security officials expressed sharp opposition to one proposal that Mr. Trump has been considering: outsourcing the mission of training, advising and assisting Afghan troops to private contractors.

That would be “unning away from responsibilities, from the promises that were made to the civilians in the region,”aid Sgt. Maj. Rehle Hussaini, an Afghan military official attending a meeting on Saturday at Bagram Air Base, the main American military base in the country.

One concern was that private contractors might be more eager to extend the fighting in Afghanistan as a moneymaking venture than trying to end it.

But none of those misgivings were evident at the Camp Morehead ceremony on Sunday.

The array of smartly dressed special forces, including a handful of women, cheered and clapped as one general after another praised them as Afghanistan’ finest and bravest.

When Afghan commandos “ppear on the battlefield,”eneral Nicholson told them, “he enemy has no choice but to run, or die.”

Rod Nordland contributed reporting from Kabul, Afghanistan.

* Revived After Mosul, Iraqi Forces Prepare to Battle \b ISIS\b0  in Tal Afar 

* Pentagon Hopes to Declassify Hidden Threat in Mosul: ‘ud’.S. Bombs 

Afghan commandos on Sunday at Camp Morehead, a training base southeast of Kabul, at a ceremony celebrating their efforts. | Helene Cooper/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170820ed8k00439



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Best Sellers: Hardcover Fiction: Sunday, August 20th 2017

488 words
20 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

About the Best Sellers:

These lists are an expanded version of those appearing in the August 20, 2017 print edition of the Book Review, reflecting sales for the week ending August 5, 2017. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above it. A dagger (†ndicates that some retailers report receiving bulk orders. For an explanation of our methodology, visit http://www.nytimes.com/best-sellers.

  Weeks


                              est Sellers: Hardcover Fiction

This Last On
Week Week List
  
1    1    3


THE LATE SHOW, by Michael Connelly. (Little, Brown) René Ballard, a young detective with the L.A.P.D., investigates crimes against two women

2 2 9


CAMINO ISLAND, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A search for stolen rare manuscripts leads to a Florida island.

3 3 2


THE LYING GAME, by Ruth Ware. (Scout) Four school friends reunite as their long-held secret threatens to emerge.

4 5 4


HOUSE OF SPIES, by Daniel Silva. (Harper) Gabriel Allon, the Israeli art restorer and spy, now the head of Israel’ secret intelligence service, pursues an ISIS mastermind.

5 4 2


PARADISE VALLEY, by C J. Box. (Minotaur) A North Dakota investigator pursues a trucker who preys on prostitutes.

6 6 14


INTO THE WATER, by Paula Hawkins. (Riverhead) In this psychological thriller by the author of “he Girl on the Train,”omen are found drowned in a river in an English town.

7 8 37


A GENTLEMAN IN MOSCOW, by Amor Towles. (Viking) A Russian count undergoes 30 years of house arrest.

8  1


MRS. FLETCHER, by Tom Perrotta. (Scribner) A divorced woman has a sexual awakening in the digital age.

9  1


CRIME SCENE, by Jonathan Kellerman and Jesse Kellerman. (Ballantine) Clay Edison, a deputy coroner and former star athlete, investigates a possible murder.

10 9 6


MURDER GAMES, by James Patterson and Howard Roughan. (Little, Brown ) An expert on serial murder becomes involved in the hunt for a New York City killer.

11 10 8


THE IDENTICALS, by Elin Hilderbrand. (Little, Brown) Complications in the lives of identical twins who were raised separately on Nantucket and Martha’ Vineyard.

12  1


DRAGONSWORN, by Sherrilyn Kenyon. (St. Martin's) The granddaughter of a Greek god must stop him from destroying her people by getting a weapon that is in the possession of a dragon.

13 14 3


BEFORE WE WERE YOURS, by Lisa Wingate. (Ballantine) A prominent South Carolina lawyer, researching her grandmother’ past, learns about a Tennessee orphanage that kidnapped children and placed them for adoption with wealthy people.

14  1


DEVIL'S CUT, by J. R. Ward. (Ballantine) The final book in the Bourbon Kings series.

15  5


THE DUCHESS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte) A 19th-century British duke's daughter, disinherited by her half brothers, flees to Paris to make a new life.

Document NYTF000020170821ed8k0002z



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Best Sellers: Combined Print & E-Book Fiction: Sunday, August 20th 2017

519 words
20 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

About the Best Sellers:

These lists are an expanded version of those appearing in the August 20, 2017 print edition of the Book Review, reflecting sales for the week ending August 5, 2017. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above it. A dagger (†ndicates that some retailers report receiving bulk orders. For an explanation of our methodology, visit http://www.nytimes.com/best-sellers.

  Weeks


                              est Sellers: Combined Print & E-Book Fiction

This Last On
Week Week List
  
1         1


THE MEDICAL EXAMINER, by James Patterson with Maxine Paetro. (BookShots) The lover of a cheating millionairess is murdered and she is left for dead. Part of the Women's Murder Club series.

2 1 3


THE LATE SHOW, by Michael Connelly. (Little, Brown) René Ballard, a young detective with the L.A.P.D., investigates crimes against two women.

3 2 20


THE WHISTLER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A whistleblower alerts a Florida investigator to judicial corruption involving the Mob and Indian casinos.

4 4 9


CAMINO ISLAND, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A search for stolen rare manuscripts leads to a Florida island.

5  3


THE GUNSLINGER, by Stephen King. (Pocket Books) The first volume of the Dark Tower series, originally published in 1989.

6 8 28


THE WOMAN IN CABIN 10, by Ruth Ware. (Scout) A travel writer on a cruise is certain she has heard a body thrown overboard, but no one believes her.

7 6 2


READY PLAYER ONE, by Ernest Cline. (Broadway) It’ 2044, life on a resource-depleted Earth has grown increasingly grim, and the key to a vast fortune is hidden in a virtual-reality world.

8 5 4


HOUSE OF SPIES, by Daniel Silva. (Harper) Gabriel Allon, the Israeli art restorer and spy, now the head of Israel’ secret intelligence service, pursues an ISIS mastermind.

9 9 2


THE LYING GAME, by Ruth Ware. (Scout) Four school friends come together as their long-held secret threatens to emerge.

10 12 30


MILK AND HONEY, by Rupi Kaur. (Andrews McMeel) Poetic approaches to surviving adversity and loss.

11  1


CRIME SCENE, by Jonathan Kellerman and Jesse Kellerman. (Ballantine) Clay Edison, a deputy coroner and former star athlete, investigates a possible murder.

12  18


LILAC GIRLS, by Martha Hall Kelly. (Ballantine) A story of three women’ lives during and after World War II.

13 13 20


THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood. (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt) Men and women in a dystopian future. The basis of the Hulu series; originally published in 1985.

14  1


BEFORE WE WERE YOURS, by Lisa Wingate. (Ballantine) A prominent South Carolina lawyer, researching her grandmother’ past, learns about a Tennessee orphanage that kidnapped children and placed them for adoption with wealthy people. Based on a real-life scandal.

15  4


ECHOES IN DEATH, by J. D. Robb. (St. Martin's) Lt. Eve Dallas of the N.Y.P.D. investigates a fatal home invasion. By Nora Roberts, writing pseudonymously.

Document NYTF000020170821ed8k0002y



BITS
Business/Financial Desk; SECT
Farhad's and Mike's Week in Tech: Apple's Big Media Bet and More Uber Drama

By FARHAD MANJOO and MIKE ISAAC 
1,373 words
20 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week's news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.

Farhad: Hello, Mike! How are things with you? I'm in New York this week, and from what I've heard, you are too. But I haven't seen you around the office, so ... working hard as usual?

Mike: I spent much of Thursday working from the hotel room up the street, mostly because every time I come here I spend most of the time talking to our lovely New York-based colleagues and not getting any actual work done. Plus, I went to like three museums. To, uh, look at tech stuff.

What about you? Are you Mr. Office Dweller now?

Farhad: Oh, I'm just messing with you. I've been to the office a total of three hours this week. Look, if they want me in more, they should make us clock in on one of those punch card machines.

O.K., before we get to tech news, we have an announcement to make: The Bits Newsletter -- that is, this thing you're reading -- is changing! Instead of a daily roundup of news, Bits subscribers will now get just our weekly chat. It will come in every Friday morning instead of on Saturdays. Congratulations to us!

Mike: I'm already getting a lot of, um, fan mail about the change. Which reminds me; I hope ''lame jester'' and ''inane banter'' are cool, new slang phrases the kids use to compliment people.

Farhad: Anyway, let's get to tech news. Three big stories this week: Apple is becoming a media company. Uber is becoming a basket case. And just about every tech company took up the fight against neo-Nazis.

Mike: That's a lot to unpack. Can we start with the easy one?

Farhad: Let's start with Apple. The tech giant has been inching into the content business recently. It owns ''Carpool Karaoke'' (you have to watch the Adele episode), and of course there's ''Planet of the Apps,'' about which the less said the better.

Mike: I think, as a general rule, I am against TV shows that incorporate puns into the title.

Farhad: But as The Wall Street Journal reported this week, Apple has much bigger plans. It is considering investing as much as $1 billion into new content over the next year, letting it make or acquire as many as 10 TV shows.

As The Journal noted, Apple is starting way behind Netflix and Amazon, which have huge stables of original movies and TV shows they've been producing for some time. Sure, Amazon has ''Transparent'' and ''Moonlight,'' but will it have ''Planet of the Apps 2: Social Media Marketing''?

Mike: How about ''Planet of the Apps 2: The Appening''? Or maybe ''2 App 2 Furious''?

Seriously, though, I hope Apple hires some good content executives from places like Netflix and Amazon. Bring in Ted Sarandos, chief content officer from Netflix, who seems to have a good eye for spotting at least some hit shows. Or someone from high up at HBO. Or heck, just buy Netflix outright! Isn't Apple sitting on a zillion dollars in cash somewhere?

Anyway, I think Apple needs a real breakout hit, just like Facebook and its big video push. I'm not sure they have the eye for talent that Netflix does, though.

Farhad: O.K., let's move on to Uber. The last few weeks in the saga of the troubled ride-hailing company have been marked by lawsuits and boardroom intrigue, but I have to admit -- I'm totally lost. Can you bring us up to speed on the most interesting new stuff?

Mike: Where to begin? At the beginning of the week, we broke the news that Uber's board was mulling a few competing outside investments to cash out existing investors, a process that has yet to be resolved.

Then, one of Uber's largest shareholders sent an open letter to all of Uber's employees. The shareholder is Benchmark, which last week sued Travis Kalanick, Uber's former C.E.O., to get him off the board. The letter included an intimation that there was more damning information that could leak if Kalanick didn't back down from a fight.

But Kalanick isn't slinking away. He filed a response to Benchmark's lawsuit Thursday evening. The drama is showing no signs of slowing down.

In sum, it's like watching a slow-motion car wreck, where no one seems to have escaped unscathed.

Farhad: O.K., finally, let's talk about neo-Nazis. After the racist protests and car-ramming in Charlottesville, Va., last week, a number of internet companies took action against white supremacist organizations. The domain-name company GoDaddy kicked off The Daily Stormer, a white supremacist site, which then tried to get a domain from Google -- which also promptly kicked the site to the curb. Then Cloudflare, a company that protects against network attacks, also canceled The Daily Stormer's account.

There were lots of others: Facebook deleted an event page for the Charlottesville rally and even prevented people from sharing a Daily Stormer article. Crowdfunding sites blocked neo-Nazi fund-raising efforts, an Uber driver kicked some white supremacists out of his car, Airbnb blocked people it suspected of renting rooms to hold white supremacist parties, and the dating site OKCupid deleted one racist's dating profile.

Some went even beyond that. Apple's C.E.O., Tim Cook, wrote a heartfelt letter to employees denouncing racism and President Trump's response to the racist uprising, and he pledged a $1 million donation to two anti-hate groups.

There was some hand-wringing over all this, however. The Electronic Frontier Foundation, a digital civil rights organization, argued that the tech companies' push to ban white supremacists set a dangerous precedent for free speech online. ''Any tactic used now to silence neo-Nazis will soon be used against others, including people whose opinions we agree with,'' it said.

I understand this worry; the slippery-slope problem here is real and worth watching. But I don't share the alarm, because I suspect this slope isn't all that slippery.

To me, it seems like white supremacists constitute a pretty bright line: If your site's entire purpose is to spew racial hatred, no respectable company is going to do business with you. The tech giants have had a similar policy toward Islamist terrorist groups like ISIS for years now, and those efforts have not really chilled free expression online. The same thing could work well for Nazis.

What do you think?

Mike: I'm fine with Nazis getting banned from these networks. I understand the free speech argument, but it's hard to support when the rhetoric also includes the elimination of races other than whites. Go look at the Vice News video on Charlottesville for some perspective.

Let me go meta for a second: How nuts is it that now we're seeing citizens turn to corporate leaders to voice their concerns against the administration? It used to be folks said, ''Write a letter to Congress to spur change.'' Now it seems to be, ''Write a comment on Mark Zuckerberg's Facebook page to urge him to ban Nazis.''

Isn't that odd? Or is that the end result of capitalism in its current form? That we've identified the corporations we interact with every day as the power centers that can help people fight back against injustice?

Maybe that's not such a new phenomenon. But it's just peculiar to me to turn to, say, Tim Cook, instead of dialing up your local representative.

Farhad: Maybe it's time to get away.

Mike: I have a plan for that. This weekend, I'll sit back, relax and open some more newsletter fan mail.

Follow Farhad Manjoo on Twitter @fmanjoo and Mike Isaac @MikeIsaac

Document NYTF000020170820ed8k0009d



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Officials Hunting for a Moroccan Man in the Barcelona Attack Investigation

By RAPHAEL MINDER and RUKMINI CALLIMACHI; Raphael Minder reported from Barcelona, Spain, and Rukmini Callimachi from Erbil, Iraq. Reporting was contributed by Palko Karasz from Alcanar, Spain; Felipe Villamor from Manila; Benoî Morenne from Paris; and Michael Wolgelenter from London. 
1,429 words
20 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BARCELONA, Spain -- The Spanish authorities said on Saturday that they were hunting for a 22-year-old Moroccan-born man who they now suspect was the driver of the van that plowed through central Barcelona this past week, in the country's worst terrorist attack in more than a decade.

The police have been dismantling the terrorist cell of at least 12 people that carried out the attack in Barcelona and another in a town to the southwest, Cambrils. The two assaults left at least 14 dead -- all but one in Barcelona -- and injured scores, with the victims coming from 34 countries.

A counterterrorism source who has been briefed on the investigation, but who spoke on the condition of anonymity to share information learned in confidence, said that investigators believed the plot had been in the works for almost a year.

The suspects appear to have sought to build a bomb that would be placed inside a vehicle, and to have turned to the small seaside town of Alcanar to assemble it, the source said.

The police found the remains of two people in the rubble of a house in Alcanar that had been used as a bomb factory, after a blast leveled the structure late Wednesday. They also found traces of the Islamic State's signature explosive, TATP, which is relatively cheap but highly volatile because it explodes at low temperatures.

Javier Marti Meix, a deputy inspector who is leading the investigation there for the Mossos d'Esquadra, the Catalan police, said that it was possible that others could be buried in the rubble, which is in one of the poorer parts of Alcanar.

The suspects were living in the house illegally, he said, and other homes in the area have been occupied by squatters. The house had been repossessed by Banco Popular in a foreclosure, he said.

The counterterrorism expert said the police had recovered around 100 gas canisters from the property, a number that he found bewilderingly high. Neighbors said they had seen young people going in and out of the property, as well as cars with gas canisters, since December.

The authorities in Alcanar carried out controlled explosions Saturday morning -- ''If you hear detonations DO NOT be alarmed,'' the Catalan police said on Twitter -- because of concerns that there might still be more explosives and gas canisters in the rubble.

So far, seven people believed to be part of the cell have been killed, and four have been arrested. But with at least one more suspect still unaccounted for, Spaniards remained on edge, even though the authorities said on Saturday that the cell had been broken up and that there was no imminent threat of another attack.

The Spanish and Catalan authorities decided on Saturday to maintain the terrorist threat level at 4 (on a scale of 5), but said that security would be reinforced. The Islamic State militant group, which quickly claimed responsibility for the attack in Barcelona on Thursday, said that it had been behind the deadly events in Cambrils, as well.

While officials agreed on the threat level, there appeared to be some disagreement about the status of the investigation. Spain's interior minister, Juan Ignacio Zoido, announced that the terrorist cell had been dismantled, but his regional Catalan counterpart, Joaquim Forn, told reporters later on Saturday that ''we can't say the investigation is finished until we locate or detain all those who we think form part of this terror cell.''

The cell, Mr. Forn added, cannot be described as ''absolutely dismantled.''

The focus of the manhunt on Saturday was Younes Abouyaaqoub, who is believed to have fled on foot after weaving a van through Las Ramblas, a central pedestrian area of Barcelona.

There was no indication that Mr. Abouyaaqoub or the other young men, ages 17 to 34, who were believed to be part of the cell had any connection to extremist or terrorism-related activities.

The counterterrorism expert said that investigators were looking into the possibility that the suspects had lived double lives, noting that some of their Facebook pages demonstrated an interest in clubbing, girls, selfies and hair gel.

Mr. Abouyaaqoub became the focus after the police explored the possibility that the driver of the Barcelona van may have been Moussa Oukabir, a 17-year-old from Morocco who died early Friday in a shootout with the police in Cambrils.

Instead, the police are now investigating whether Mr. Abouyaaqoub fled the van after it came to a halt near a Joan Miróosaic on Las Ramblas, hijacked another car, killed its driver and forced his way through a police checkpoint.

The police later found the body of a Spanish man who had been stabbed to death in an abandoned Ford Focus about three kilometers, or less than two miles, from the city center, and they believe there was a connection with the attacks in Barcelona and Cambrils.

At the same time, Josep Lluí Trapero, a senior Catalan police chief, told the local news media on Friday that it was too early to rule out the possibility that Mr. Abouyaaqoub was among the two men killed in the Alcanar explosion Wednesday night.

The attack in Barcelona was the worst in Spain since 2004, when a series of bombs ripped through commuter trains in Madrid, killing 192. The authorities suspect that the terrorist cell had been planning an even more deadly assault, but that it had to scale back plans after that explosion.

Mr. Abouyaaqoub was living in Ripoll, the Catalan town that was also home to two of the five men -- Mr. Oukabir and Mohamed Hychami -- who were shot and killed by the police in Cambrils.

On Friday, investigators raided an apartment in Ripoll that was the home of Abdelbaki Essati, the imam at a local mosque.

Ali Yassini, who leads the Islamic association that runs the mosque where Mr. Essati served as imam, was surprised to learn that Mr. Essati might be connected to the suspects in the attacks.

''During the time the imam was with us, Moussa came maybe once or twice and the other guys about the same,'' he said. ''And we never, ever saw the boys with the imam outside the mosque. We didn't realize there was any relationship between them.''

Mr. Oukabir's older brother Driss is among the four people who have been detained, although his role in the plot is unclear. He was taken into custody when he walked into a police station and said that his identity documents had been stolen.

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, claimed responsibility on Saturday for the attack in Cambrils, saying it had ''killed and wounded more than 120 citizens of the Crusader coalition'' in the two assaults.

The statement was disseminated on the group's official Nashir channel, and it included erroneous material, most likely taken from news reports that were later corrected, stating that the perpetrators had used small arms to attack a bar near Las Ramblas.

Separately, the authorities continued with the grim task of identifying the victims of the attacks and notifying their families. In a statement on Saturday, the Catalan authorities said that a total of 108 people had been wounded in the two attacks -- 100 in Barcelona -- and that 12 people were in critical condition.

The Philippine Foreign Ministry said in a statement on Saturday that it had offered its assistance to a 43-year-old woman who was seriously injured and whose 7-year-old son has been missing since the attack. (The Catalan police said later in the day that all of the dead and wounded had been found.)

The woman, who has not been publicly identified, is married to a British citizen and lives and works in Australia. She had traveled to Barcelona with her son for the wedding of a cousin from the Philippines, according to the statement.

An Irish man of Philippine descent and his 5-year-old son were also wounded in the attack, the statement said, adding that surgery on the boy's leg had been successful.

People gathered at Las Ramblas in Barcelona, Spain, to honor the victims of the terrorist attacks. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAMUEL ARANDA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Younes Abouyaaqoub 

Document NYTF000020170820ed8k0005q



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Attack in Spain Fits Larger Plot

By ALISSA J. RUBIN, PATRICK KINGSLEY and PALKO KARASZ; Alissa J. Rubin and Patrick Kingsley reported from Barcelona, and Palko Karasz from Alcanar, Spain. Reporting was contributed by Silvia Taulé, Germá Aranda, Raphael Minder and Yaiza Saiz from Barcelona; Rukmini Callimachi from Erbil, Iraq; Benoî Morenne from Paris; Melissa Eddy from Berlin; and Michael Wolgelenter, Declan Walsh, Stephen Castle, Anne-Sophie Bolon, Claire Barthelemy, Thomas Furse and Mark Walsh from London. 
1,827 words
19 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BARCELONA, Spain -- When an earthshaking explosion on Wednesday blew apart a house outside Alcanar, a town surrounded by olive groves and holiday homes overlooking the Mediterranean, the police first blamed it on a gas leak.

''Nothing ever happens here,'' Mayor Alfons Monserrat said.

The Spanish police now believe that tiny Alcanar may have been the incubator for a conspiracy far more ambitious than even the van attacks in Catalonia that killed 14 people and injured more than 80. All but one of the casualties occurred Thursday afternoon on the Ramblas, Barcelona's colorful central thoroughfare. It was Spain's worst terrorist attack in more than a decade, and the Islamic State has claimed responsibility.

The Alcanar blast, they suspect, was a mistake by the plotters, who had intended to make a powerful bomb, place it in a van and detonate it in the crowded center of Barcelona. That plan disintegrated along with at least 12 butane gas canisters that were discovered in the ruins of the house in Alcanar on Wednesday night.

Four men have been detained in the case, and three more who have been identified remain at large, according to Maj. Josep Lluis Trapero, a senior police official in Spain's Catalonia region. Investigators are still trying to determine the full extent of the network. Five of the suspects are dead, at least three of them appearing to be so young that they could not have grown beards. They were killed by the police during a second attack, in the seaside holiday town of Cambrils early Friday.

While some of the other recent European terrorist attacks have been opportunistic hit and runs by individuals acting on their own, this was a comparatively complicated plot that the police say involved at least two cells working in several different locations across Catalonia.

The story also unfolded in Ripoll, hometown of one of the young men who was killed in Cambrils. His brother was arrested after his identity documents were found to have been used to rent the van used to carry out the attack on Las Ramblas. At least one other person from Ripoll has been detained.

There were few indications that the two brothers, Driss Oukabir, 28, and Moussa Oukabir, 17, had come under the influence of radical Islam. Ripoll is a mountain town northwest of Barcelona of about 10,000 people, and Moussa and Driss Oukabir, both of Moroccan descent, lived there with their mother.

Among neighbors, friends, former employers and the local mosque, no one saw any outward sign of budding extremism. The elder brother, Driss, spoke perfect Catalan as well as Spanish and was not religious, according to a childhood friend, Raimon Sáchez, 27. He was known as a small-time marijuana dealer, but nothing more.

''We went to school together; after that everyone went his own direction, but when we saw each other, we would say hello, smoke a joint together,'' Mr. Sáchez said. ''He was in my home when he was a child -- how can a person change that much?''

Moussa was well liked by everyone. He also spoke perfect Catalan, said a neighbor. His sisters, Hafida and Hanane, described him to their former employer at Les Graelles, a local restaurant, as polite, ''having really good marks in school'' and eager to study. ''He didn't go to parties,'' said the restaurant's manager, Rosa, who said she was afraid to give her last name.

There was no sign that the family was particularly religious, she added. Neither sister wore a head scarf except when they were coming from the mosque and never when they were working.

The family lived in a nondescript apartment building near the southern edge of town that serves as social housing for lower-income people.

There were three Spanish-Moroccan families in the building, and Moussa, the youngest of the Oukabir children, was good friends with them as well as other children who lived there, neighbors said. A 15-year-old Catalan boy in the building said that he used to go swimming with Moussa and played with him by the river that runs through town, and that they rode their bikes together.

''Moussa never spoke about religion,'' said the boy's mother, Marche, who lived in the apartment directly next door. ''He was a good kid, just like you or me.''

She said that Moussa and Driss's parents had recently separated, but that she was shocked when masked police officers burst into the building at 7 a.m. on Friday and broke into the Oukabir apartment. She did not know if they had found anything.

From the open door, it appeared to be a modest apartment with three small bedrooms, two of them with just enough room for a single bed and a flimsy wardrobe. Clothes were strewn all over the floor from the raid. It was not clear whether anyone was present when the police burst in.

At the mosque closest to the family's home, Ali Yassini, who works with the mosque's Islamic Council, said he had barely any contact with the brothers. ''We don't know them; we saw them maybe once a year,'' he said, adding that among Muslim youth in Ripoll there is a generational divide. ''The young ones want to party; these kids, 24 years and younger, they feel they are in jail here.''

On Thursday afternoon, one of the attackers arrived at a branch of Telefurgo, a car rental firm, some 15 miles north of Barcelona. Using the identity documents of Driss Oukabir, he paid 59.90 euros (about $70), on top of a 150-euro deposit, to hire a white Fiat Talento, the firm told Spanish journalists.

Chander Gurnani, 34, who runs a souvenir shop in central Barcelona, first saw that white Fiat Talento at around 5 p.m. on Thursday as it plowed into a young woman, sending her flying through the air. Then it mowed down an old man whose head began to gush blood. Rushing from his shop, Mr. Gurnani, an Indian immigrant, said that he took the man in his arms -- before realizing some 30 seconds later that he was already dead.

So began Thursday's attack on Las Ramblas, the long boulevard that connects the city's port with its most central districts. The van veered south from Plaç de Catalunya, the city's most recognizable square, zigzagging from side to side to hit as many people as possible.

After mowing down at least a dozen people across a stretch of some 1,600 feet and slamming into dozens more, it crashed into displays of cheap souvenirs -- phone covers, bracelets, drawings and even oven gloves -- skidding to a halt on a public artwork by Joan Miró the Catalan artist.

The driver quickly melted into the crowds.

A waiter at a nearby restaurant had no idea why so many people were rushing inside. Nobody explained what was going on, remembered Guldeep Singh, 30, who was back at work less than a day after the attack.

''They were screaming,'' Mr. Singh said. ''They were in shock. They didn't have words.''

For Mr. Singh, the penny dropped when he looked outside to see two people prostrate on the street. By the time an ambulance arrived 20 minutes later, one of them was dead.

Those stuck in the shops and bars of Las Ramblas had little idea about the events that had led them to flee there.

Outside, however, a picture of a complex operation was beginning to emerge. A second van was discovered in Vic, north of Barcelona; the police now think the assailants used it to flee central Barcelona after the attack.

Photographs of Driss Oukabir, whom police had quickly linked to the van hire, began to circulate, prompting him to turn himself in at a police station in Ripoll. He claimed his documents had been stolen and that he was not the man who hired the van.

Down in Alcanar, another man was arrested in connection to the attack. Then, the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, claimed responsibility for the events, in a statement issued through its news agency.

For many survivors, shock and fear now began to give way to relief. A Spanish tour guide, Laia Escribano, had unwittingly taken a group of tourists to the street just minutes afterward and gradually realized how narrow her escape had been.

''I am lucky to be alive,'' said Ms. Escribano, 31. ''If the attack was 10 minutes later, I would have been right there with the students on the tour.''

But as Thursday rolled into Friday, relief gave way to renewed terror. In Cambrils, a small seaside resort town about 50 miles south of Barcelona, another car attack was unfolding.

At 1 a.m., five assailants in an Audi A3 hit a group of civilians before police officers fatally shot five of them, among them Moussa Oukabir. A pedestrian later died after being hit by the car, and the police have confirmed that the Cambrils attack was committed by the same network that sent a van to Barcelona.

In a night of strange developments, however, the oddest of all was perhaps the news from Alcanar. Twenty-four hours after the authorities considered the explosion there a gas leak, the story came full circle.

Alcanar, the police now suggest, was not just a sleepy holiday town. It may have been a place where the attacks were planned -- news that shocked local residents.

''You might think all sorts of things,'' said Nuria Gil, 50, one of the few locals who lives here year-round, ''but not that you have terrorists as neighbors.''

Mourners on Friday on Las Ramblas, the site a day earlier of the deadliest terrorist attack in Spain in more than a decade. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAMUEL ARANDA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A1); Mourners on Las Ramblas in Barcelona, Spain, on Friday. The police have linked the attack, for which the Islamic State claimed responsibility, to a plot that involved at least two cells in Catalonia. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MANU FERNANDEZ/ASSOCIATED PRESS); Left, a collapsed house after an explosion in Alcanar, Spain. Right, an overturned car in Cambrils, Spain, where the police killed suspects in the terrorist attack. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JAUME SELLART/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY; EMILIO MORENATTI/ASSOCIATED PRESS); Injured people on Thursday after the Barcelona attack. Two vehicle attacks in Catalonia killed 14 people and injured more than 80. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID ARMENGOU/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) (A6) 

Document NYTF000020170819ed8j0003i



Foreign Desk; SECTA
At Least 13 Killed in Vehicle Attack on Spanish Street

By ANNE-SOPHIE BOLON, PALKO KARASZ and JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.; Reporting was contributed by Rukmini Callimachi, Michael Wolgelenter, Silvia Taulé, Eric Schmitt, Yonette Joseph, Raphael Minder and Mark Walsh. 
1,710 words
18 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Spain was hit by its worst terrorist attack in more than a decade on Thursday, when a van driver plowed into dozens of people enjoying a sunny afternoon on one of Barcelona's most famous thoroughfares, killing at least 13 people and leaving 80 bloodied on the pavement.

Hours later, the Catalan police said they foiled a second van attack, in the seaside town of Cambrils, 70 miles to the south, fatally shooting four people. A fifth died later of wounds, the police said. The suspects appeared to be wearing explosive belts, according to Spanish news reports. Six civilians and one police officer were injured during the episode, the Catalan emergency services said.

The Barcelona attack was at least the sixth time in the past few years that assailants using vehicles as deadly weapons have struck a European city.

The police cordoned off the Plaza de Cataluñ and Las Ramblas in the heart of Barcelona, both tourist destinations, and began a chaotic pursuit for the attackers.

Two people were later arrested, including a Moroccan man whose identification documents had been used to rent the van. The Barcelona police said neither was believed to be the driver, who escaped on foot and remained at large on Thursday night.

The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the Barcelona assault, which shattered a peaceful afternoon in one of Europe's most picturesque cities. President Trump and other Western leaders quickly condemned the attack and pledged cooperation.

In a sign of the confusion that prevailed after the attack, local television reported that one assailant, armed with a rifle, had run into a restaurant and was besieged by the police. The police said the entire version was false.

Witnesses described people screaming and running for their lives as the van driver wove back and forth just after 5:30 p.m., apparently trying to hit as many people as he could. Police officers swept through the area near Las Ramblas, a wide boulevard with a large pedestrian section, moving people out of the area.

Videos taken by witnesses and posted online showed men, women and children motionless on the ground amid broken umbrellas and chairs, in the shade of trees, many bleeding profusely. Paramedics and friends knelt to comfort them as police sirens wailed.

Whitney Cohn, a mathematics teacher from Montebello, N.Y., was walking along the mall with her husband and two daughters, on the way back to their hotel after visiting a museum, when the van came careening through the crowd, throwing people aside like dolls as screams pierced the air. She grabbed her daughters and started running. ''It was flying,'' Ms. Cohn said in a text exchange from a nearby restaurant. ''The van missed us by a sec.''

Other witnesses described chaos as people dropped their belongings and fled as the van entered the mall and accelerated, hitting people indiscriminately, among them children and the elderly. Among the seriously injured was a 6-year-old girl hospitalized with a cerebral hemorrhage, an official at Vall Hebron University Hospital said.

People streamed onto side streets, many of them weeping. ''It was horrific,'' said Sergi Alcazar, a 25-year-old photographer who arrived 10 minutes after the attack to find victims lying amid broken umbrellas, chairs and cafe tables.

Until Thursday, Spain had been spared from the recent wave of terrorist attacks in Europe -- many involving vehicles plowing into crowds -- claimed by extremists in France, Germany, Britain and elsewhere.

Keith Fleming, an American who lives just off Las Ramblas, told The Associated Press that he was watching television when he heard a noise, looked out over his balcony and ''saw women and children just running and they looked terrified.''

Mr. Fleming said the street was deserted, except for police officers with guns drawn or in riot gear. ''It's just kind of a tense situation,'' The A.P. reported him as saying. ''Clearly people were scared.''

Maj. Josep Lluis Trapero, a senior police official in Spain's Catalonia region, said at a news conference that the police were investigating a possible connection between the van attack and a gas explosion the previous night in Alcanar, a town south of the city, which killed one person and injured several others.

One person, a Spaniard from the Spanish territory of Melilla in Morocco, had been taken into custody in Alcanar, he said. A second man, identified as Driss Oukabar, a Moroccan citizen, was arrested in the northern Catalan town of Ripoll when he walked into a police station and reported that his documents had been stolen.

Major Trapero said neither man appeared to be the driver of the van, which came to a stop near the Barcelona's opera house. The driver escaped on foot, he said.

''It was clearly a terror attack, intended to kill as many people as possible,'' Major Trapero said.

A national police official, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss a continuing investigation, said at least three vans had been rented under Mr. Oukabar's name. As night fell, the Barcelona police were frantically searching for the two other vans, combing the streets and underground parking garages, the official said.

A counterterrorism expert, who was briefed on the details of the investigation, said late Thursday night that the police now believed the plot initially involved the use of explosives and a large truck.

''Part of the plan was they tried to rent a larger truck, but they didn't have the right permit and so they ended up getting'' smaller vans, said the expert, who requested anonymity to share information that had been disclosed to him in confidence.

He added that the building in Alcanar where the explosion occurred had been packed with gas canisters, as well as other materials used to make explosives.

American counterterrorism officials in Washington said they were in contact with the Spanish authorities to offer any assistance, but underscored that the investigation had just started.

Mr. Trump said on Twitter that the United States would ''do whatever is necessary to help,'' telling Spaniards to ''be tough & strong, we love you!''

Pro-Islamic State accounts on the Telegram messaging service shared news of the attack. One channel, called ''Expansion of the Caliphate,'' posted video of the scene alongside a message in Arabic. ''Terror is filling the hearts of the Crusader in the Land of Andalusia,'' it said.

In the past year, the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, has devoted resources to translating its channels and messages into Spanish.

Although countries like France and Britain have repeatedly been named in ISIS propaganda urging followers to stage attacks, Spain has been less in the cross hairs.

The country has, however, been a transit point for recruits of the militant group, both for those going to Syria and those returning. The Spanish police arrested nine people in April who they said may have been connected with deadly attacks in France and Spain.

The Barcelona attack appeared to follow the playbook of recent assaults in which attackers drove vehicles into crowded stretches of large European cities.

''While it's not clear whether the attackers corresponded with ISIS prior to the operation, it's clear that the methods used in the attack is something ISIS encouraged and incited over and again,'' said Laith Alkhouri, a director in New York of the business-risk intelligence company Flashpoint.

In the French city of Nice, a man drove a rental truck into a crowd celebrating Bastille Day on the seaside Promenade des Anglais last year, killing 86 people.

A few days before Christmas last year, a driver in a stolen van mowed down shoppers at a holiday market in Berlin, killing 12 people and wounding dozens.

At least seven civilians were killed and dozens injured in June when knife-wielding assailants sped across London Bridge in a white van, ramming numerous pedestrians before emerging with large hunting knives to attack the capital's Borough Market, a crowded nightspot.

ISIS claimed responsibility, saying the attack had been carried out by ''a detachment of Islamic State fighters.''

That assault was reminiscent of another, on Westminster Bridge in London in March, when Khalid Masood , 52, drove a car into pedestrians, killing four. He then fatally stabbed a police officer near Parliament before he was shot and killed. The police treated that attack, in which 50 were injured, as ''Islamist-related terrorism.''

There have been other deadly attacks using vehicles that were not related to Islamist extremists. A British man rammed a rental van into Muslims leaving prayers in North London during Ramadan, and a man who was part of white supremacist demonstrations in Charlottesville, Va., is accused of driving his car into a crowd Saturday, killing a woman.

In 2004, a series of bombs ripped through commuter trains in Madrid, killing 191 and wounding over 1,800. The bombings were carried out by a group of North African Islamists that intersected with a band of petty criminals.

Leaders of European countries and cities that have suffered attacks quickly expressed solidarity with Barcelona.

In Germany, which has been on alert for potential terrorist threats ahead of the general election on Sept. 24, members of Chancellor Angela Merkel 's cabinet showed their support.

''I am deeply shaken by the terrible news from Barcelona,'' said Thomas de Maizièe, the country's interior minister. ''Once again, terror has shown its grotesque face.''

The injured were attended to after a van hit pedestrians near Las Ramblas in Barcelona, Spain. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GISELLE LOOTS/REUTERS) (A1); Above and left, some of the injured from the attack in central Barcelona on Thursday. The police arrested two people, but neither was believed to be the driver of the van that ran into pedestrians. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SERGI ALCAZAR/EL NACIONAL; DAVID ARMENGOU/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) (A9) MAP: The Path Of Terror (MAP BY SARAH ALMUKHTAR, JEREMY ASHKENAS, LARRY BUCHANAN, TROY GRIGGS, JASMINE C. LEE, SERGIO PEÇNHA, JUGAL K. PATEL and ANJALI SINGHVI/THE NEW YORK TIMES | AERIAL IMAGE BY GOOGLE) (A9) 

Document NYTF000020170818ed8i0003k



ART REVIEW
Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; SECTC
Irreverent Pictures for a Grammar Bible

By ROBERTA SMITH 
1,247 words
18 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
15
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDAround 2002, the artist, illustrator and writer Maira Kalman came across a copy of William Strunk Jr. and E. B. White's ''The Elements of Style'' in a yard sale and decided that this legendary if sometimes contested guide to grammar and clear writing needed visual accompaniment. So she provided some, making 57 illustrations inspired by sentences and phrases selected from the book. All these images Ms. Kalman rendered in gouache in a delectably colored figurative style indebted to David Hockney and Florine Stettheimer. They were then sprinkled throughout a 2005 version of ''Elements'' based on its fourth edition, covered in exuberant red. Now all Ms. Kalman's illustrations can be seen -- together for the first time in New York -- in a smart, beguiling array at the Julie Saul Gallery in Chelsea.

Known to generations of American high school and college students as ''the little book'' or simply Strunk and White, ''Elements'' was originally written and, in 1919, self-published by Strunk, a professor of English at Cornell University, for in-house use. In 1959, the Macmillan company published a new edition revised and expanded by White, a former Strunk student and by then a prominent writer for The New Yorker, and he followed it with new editions in 1972 and 1979. The little book's rules have often raised hackles among grammarians, and in recent years its detractors have been increasingly vocal, especially on the 50th anniversary of the book's publication, in 2009.

However you regard Strunk and White, Ms. Kalman's illustrations match, exaggerate or skew the bits of its language that caught her ear, bringing out the book's implicit wit while adding some of her own. Basically, she made visual illustrations of sentences that were themselves illustrations of different grammatical rules, with examples of both correct and incorrect usage. At every turn Ms. Kalman's pairings remind us that language is a free-floating, malleable thing. They have aspects of Surrealism's exquisite corpses, Conceptual Art's deadpan humor and especially appropriation art's penchant for repurposing existing images and genres.

Ms. Kalman's images are almost invariably based, to some degree, on photographs -- whether of art, events, accomplished people or famous monuments -- sometimes taken by Ms. Kalman herself. Some sources are clear, like the news photo of the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II of Britain, which accompanies the sentence ''The ceremony was both long and tedious.'' Others may tease the brain. ''Bread and butter was all she served,'' portrays two children and a woman in white, possibly their nanny, at a white-clothed dinner table. It vaguely resembles one of Matisse's early familial interiors, but is in fact a Kalman variation. The prevailing whiteness brings to mind Ms. Kalman's installation piece, in collaboration with her son, Alex Kalman, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, ''Sara Berman's Closet,'' a homage to the artist's mother, who wore primarily white clothes that she kept in a strikingly neat and beautiful closet (at the Met through Nov. 26). Ms. Berman appears in the small group of people and animals in the illustration for ''Here today,'' but is absent from the nearly identical group of its companion, ''gone tomorrow.'' As is a large hare.

There are sly visual jokes and cross-references. The illustration for the sentence ''People in glass houses shouldn't throw stones'' conjures Mr. Hockney's work, and is based on a well-known photograph of the living room of Philip Johnson's Glass House. Whether on purpose or not, the shadows and reflections on a pale rug levitate the scene, giving the Glass House a glass floor. Ms. Kalman's affinity for scattering varieties of figures around a scene, as she does in ''The temple of Isis,'' can suggest an admiration for the disjointed performances of Pina Bausch. And indeed, the picture titled ''Do you mind my asking you a question?'' is based on a photograph of Bausch, looking austerely formidable.

One of the sweetest images is ''Well, Susan, this is a fine mess you are in.'' The catastrophic possibilities are narrowed down by an image of a doleful basset hound, whose large ears form a kind of a cloak and whose mouth assumes a resigned curve that seems to say ''Here we go again.'' ''Susan'' appears again in a photograph of William Strunk with his pet in his study, which Ms. Kalman recreates in the book's final pages, along with a portrait of White and a self-portrait of the artist (both with dogs).

In ''The Elements of Style,'' the images coat the volume with a layer of capricious artistic intervention blind to regulation. At the gallery we see the images accompanied only by their titles, where they frequently evoke very oblique New Yorker cartoons and are larger and more luscious than in the book. You become more aware of Ms. Kalman as a miniaturist of action painting, especially in backgrounds and foregrounds. For example, there are the layers of pinks, yellows and oranges that shift about the feet of the 18th-century landed couple based on Thomas Gainsborough's ''Conversation in a Garden.''

The man is doing the talking, gesturing toward a lavish pink cake that Ms. Kalman added to accommodate the title: ''Polly loves cake more than she loves me,'' which Strunk and White recommend as an alternative to the confusing ''Polly loves cake more than me.''

Ms. Kalman's pairings range from the hilariously literal to the nearly abstract. (For the rule, ''Keep related words together,'' Ms. Kalman created the Stettheimerish group of sophisticates with what looks like a murdered guest at a cocktail party: ''He noticed a large stain right in the center of the rug.'' For abstract, the image of an artwork of nearly-invisible elastic lines by the Minimalist sculptor Fred Sandback seems apt for the first rule of composition: ''A basic structural design underlies every kind of writing.''

A gentle, slightly philosophical irreverence is the through-line of Ms. Kalman's sensibility. It should shortly be evident in a dance theater work based in part on ''The Principles of Uncertainty,'' her yearlong blog for The New York Times. The piece is a collaboration with the choreographer John Heginbotham and will debut at Jacob's Pillow in late August and have its New York premier at BAM Fisher in late September, with Ms. Kalman a performer playing herself.

Maira Kalman: The Elements of Style

Through Sept. 16 at Julie Saul Gallery in Manhattan; 212-627-2410, saulgallery.com.

Correction: August 19, 2017, Saturday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An art review on Friday about the Maira Kalman exhibition ''The Elements of Style,'' at Julie Saul Gallery in Manhattan, referred incorrectly to an installation piece at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The piece is a collaboration between Ms. Kalman and her son, Alex; it is not a solo work. The review also misspelled the given name of Ms. Kalman's mother, which is included in the title of the installation piece. It is ''Sara Berman's Closet,'' not ''Sarah Berman's Closet.''

Above and below, four of Maira Kalman's illustrations for ''The Elements of Style.'' The image above is for a section in the book on restrictive clauses, which uses the sentence: ''People who live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS FROM JULIE SAUL GALLERY, NEW YORK) 

Document NYTF000020170819ed8i0002u



U.S.; Politics
Trump Officials Renew Effort to Expand Use of Prison at Guantáamo

By CHARLIE SAVAGE and ADAM GOLDMAN 
996 words
19 August 2017
01:18
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —he Trump administration is making a fresh attempt at drafting an executive order on handling terrorism detainees, reviving a struggle to navigate legal and geopolitical obstacles to expand use of the Guantáamo Bay wartime prison, according to officials familiar with internal deliberations.

Administration officials said President Trump had been expected to sign a detention policy order three weeks ago. But that plan changed after he fired his first chief of staff, Reince Priebus, on July 28 and replaced him with John F. Kelly, a retired Marine Corps general who once oversaw the prison operation at the American naval base in Cuba.

Instead, officials said, on July 31 —r. Kelly’ first day —he National Security Council announced that the White House wanted a new round of interagency deliberations. The message came during a secure video teleconference with counterterrorism strategy and legal officials at military, diplomatic and intelligence agencies.

The agencies were asked to consider three potential versions of the order and make recommendations by this week, according to an official familiar with that process.

One was the version that Mr. Trump was preparing to sign three weeks ago. It would reverse a January 2009 order by President Barack Obama that directed the government to close the prison, and make clear that the Trump administration’ policy was instead to keep it open indefinitely, the official said.

That version would also say that Guantáamo could be used to hold accused members of Al Qaeda or the Islamic State, the official said. Transferring Islamic State suspects there would defy warnings by national security and legal officials about creating legal risks for the broader military campaign underway in Iraq and Syria.

The second version, the official said, would add language that says the secretary of defense, Jim Mattis, may bring newly captured terrorism suspects to the prison. That version explicitly grants an authority that is merely implicit or ambiguous in the first version.

And the third version, the official said, would direct Mr. Mattis to establish criteria about which new detainees should be brought to the prison. It would also make clear that new arrivals would be given periodic reviews by a six-agency parole—ike board that recommends whether to keep holding or to transfer detainees.

Another official familiar with internal deliberations said Mr. Trump is unlikely to sign any detention order for several weeks because the changes may be wrapped into a broader counterterrorism policy review that is underway.

A spokesman for the National Security Council declined to comment.

President George W. Bush opened the military prison in Cuba in January 2002 to hold and interrogate detainees from the Afghanistan War. It sent about 780 men there for indefinite detention without trial. A few were eventually charged by the military commission system that Mr. Bush established there, which has achieved several convictions through plea deals but has struggled to hold contested trials.

After Guantáamo’ image became toxic worldwide, and the Supreme Court ruled that the judicial branch could hear habeas corpus lawsuits by the detainees, Mr. Bush began trying to close the prison. In 2009, Mr. Obama inherited about 242 detainees and continued that policy, directing the government to close the prison within a year.

However, Congress blocked Mr. Obama’ plan to bring several dozen detainees —ho were deemed untriable but unable to be released —o a domestic prison in the United States. Still, arguing that Guantáamo was too expensive and fueled anti-Americanism, Mr. Obama chipped away at its population; 41 remained when he left office.

Five detainees are on a list recommended for transfer to stable countries —ncluding one each from Algeria and Morocco, which have already taken back many others. Mr. Trump, who called for ending all transfers because of the risk of recidivism, has given no sign that he will permit their repatriations.

Still, the Trump administration may soon repatriate a Saudi, Ahmed Muhammed Haza al-Darbi, under a February 2014 plea deal with military commissions prosecutors. He promised to cooperate as a witness in return for being repatriated after three and a half years to serve the remainder of his nine-to-15-year sentence in Saudi Arabia. Mr. Darbi testified this month in videotaped depositions for use in future trials.

Since its first week in office, the administration has internally circulated various drafts of a detention order. Those efforts slowed, however, after Congress and military and intelligence officials pushed back  against ideas in early drafts, like reopening the C.I.A.’ overseas “lack site”risons where the Bush administration tortured terrorism suspects.

The White House dropped that and several other ideas, but as the drafts were watered down, momentum to finish the job faltered. Meanwhile, the administration has brought no new detainees to Guantáamo, despite Mr. Trump’ campaign vow to fill the prison back up.

European and Middle Eastern allies will not transfer detainees to the United States without a promise they will not be sent to Guantáamo. Last month, Spain transferred custody of a terrorism suspect, Ali Charaf Damache, whom the Trump administration brought to federal court in Philadelphia for a civilian trial.

The administration has also sought custody of a Qaeda suspect known as Abu Khaybar, who is being held in Yemen by an unidentified Middle Eastern ally. But that ally, while willing to transfer the man, also will not do so if his destination would be Guantáamo, current and former law enforcement officials say.

On Twitter, follow Charlie Savage @charlie_savage and Adam Goldman @adamgoldmanNYT.

* Administration Officials, Including Sessions, Tour Guantáamo

* The Fight Over Guantáamo’ Parole Board, Explained

* \b ISIS\b0  Detainees May Be Held at Guantáamo, Document Shows

* Leaked Draft of Executive Order Could Revive C.I.A. Prisons

* Trump Poised to Lift Ban on C.I.A. ‘lack Site’risons

A guard tower at Guantáamo Bay. | John Moore/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170818ed8i00a9h



Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
Streaming Services Struggle to Root Out Music That Incites Hatred

By BEN SISARIO 
672 words
18 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A deadly crime is committed by a white supremacist, and the ensuing media coverage draws attention to a dark corner of the music world: white-power rock bands, whose songs are widely available online and are often used as recruiting tools for extremist groups.

This week, after the march of white supremacists in Charlottesville, Va., that led to three deaths, Spotify removed an unspecified number of songs that it said incited hatred and violence.

But the phenomenon is hardly new. And the persistence of this music -- a genre sometimes called hatecore -- points to the difficulties that online media platforms have in policing their content, and to the frustrations of activists and the mainstream music industry in trying to bar hate speech from the most popular online channels.

In a statement, Spotify said that it did not tolerate content that ''favors hatred'' or incites violence on the basis of race, religion or sexuality, and added that it ''takes immediate action to remove any such material as soon as it has been brought to our attention.''

Yet similar material had been around for years. It last came to wide public notice in 2012, after six people were killed at a Sikh temple outside Milwaukee by a white supremacist who played guitar in hatecore bands.

And three years ago, the Southern Poverty Law Center issued a detailed report that identified 54 such bands whose songs were sold on iTunes. Apple removed that music from its store, but the law center, which tracks racist and hate groups, criticized Spotify and Amazon as being ''slow to act.''

Spotify removed the songs shortly after Digital Music News, an industry site, named dozens of white supremacist groups whose songs were available on the service.

For online music services, determining exactly what should be removed is one complication. Spotify relies on official lists of offensive material, like the one kept by the Federal Review Board for Media Harmful to Minors in Germany.

Another factor is Silicon Valley's tendency to favor free speech. And in studying a subculture rife with code words, it can be difficult to pinpoint hate speech, some analysts say.

''Identifying National Socialist black metal from regular black metal is not always easy,'' said Mark Pitcavage, a senior research fellow at the Anti-Defamation League who has studied hatecore groups.

The problem is more complex when it comes to YouTube, which lets users upload material themselves and relies on users to flag offensive content for removal. Those policies, and the site's sheer size, have made YouTube particularly popular with hate groups, said Keegan Hankes, an analyst at the law center.

''This whole scene has moved on to YouTube,'' Mr. Hankes said, adding that the site has become ''an encyclopedia of hate music.''

A quick scan of YouTube shows many songs by well-known hate groups. A search for Skrewdriver, one of the most notorious of these bands, turned up thousands of listings, with tracks that were uploaded as long as nine years ago and have garnered hundreds of thousands of views.

In a statement, a YouTube spokeswoman said that the service, which is owned by Google, has ''clear policies that prohibit content like hate speech and incitement to commit violent acts, and we remove videos violating these policies when flagged by our users.''

Hatecore songs may make up a tiny fraction of the content available on YouTube, but the site has also been criticized as a gathering place for far-right agitators and an outlet for ISIS recruitment. YouTube's sheer size -- more than 400 hours of video are uploaded every minute, the company says -- and the site's position as a bastion of free speech make it particularly difficult to remove hate speech, its advocates say.

Spotify's headquarters in Stockholm. The streaming music service this week removed an unspecified number of songs it said promoted hatred and violence. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JONATHAN NACKSTRAND/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170818ed8i0006g



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Pentagon Hopes to Declassify a Hidden Threat in Mosul: 'Dud' U.S. Bombs

By HELENE COOPER 
855 words
18 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- The Pentagon is seeking to declassify strike targets in Mosul where American bombs did not explode, Defense Department officials say. That information would be used as part of a long and potentially dangerous effort to make the city, the site of eight months of fierce fighting between the Islamic State and an American-led coalition, livable again.

Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, the commander of the campaign against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, said Thursday that he was looking for a way to lift longstanding rules that keep secret, for 25 years, the exact coordinates of unexploded ordnance.

Humanitarian groups and ordnance removal specialists on the ground in West Mosul have reported that the city is littered with booby traps and improvised explosive devices left by Islamic State fighters, in addition to dozens, and possibly hundreds, of so-called dud bombs that were dropped by United States warplanes but never exploded.

''ISIS used the planting of I.E.D.s as literally a weapons system to make it as difficult as they could for Iraqis to return home,'' said David T. Johnson, vice president for strategic development and Washington operations with Janus Global Operations, which works with the United States on ordnance removal. Islamic State fighters booby-trapped West Mosul ''to a degree that people in our business have not seen before,'' Mr. Johnson said in an interview.

A Janus ordnance removal specialist said the company had found makeshift explosive devices in stoves in residences, in laboratories at Mosul University and in the milling machines of a cement factory. On a single day, Wednesday, Janus removal specialists found about 50 improvised bombs in Bashiqa, a town around eight miles east of Mosul.

Several weeks ago, Janus removal specialists found a bomb concealed in a child's stuffed animal in an East Mosul home. The device, the company said, was constructed to explode if someone picked it up. Removal experts were able to disarm it after they noticed wires sticking out of the back of the stuffed animal, which was bulging in the spot where the bomb had been sewn in.

Ordnance removal specialists have discovered so many improvised bombs in Bashiqa that United Nations Development Program officials entering and leaving the camp there have had to drive a circuitous route to avoid being blown up.

In contrast to the booby traps and makeshift bombs left by the Islamic State fighters, the unexploded American ordnance is much easier to find -- once the Pentagon gives removal experts the grid coordinates. The American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State dropped thousands of bombs on Mosul in the battle to free the city. Mosul's fall to the Islamic State in 2014 thrust the Islamic State onto the front pages and home pages of newspapers around the world.

Normally, the Pentagon does not like to disclose details that military planners view as ''operational,'' and the specific location of unexploded American ordnance is included in that definition. But General Townsend said on Thursday that he believed it was necessary to find a way around the 25-year declassification process.

''I'm of the belief that if it's history, there's nothing wrong with the world knowing about it,'' General Townsend said. His was speaking at a meeting in Baghdad with reporters who were accompanying Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the head of United States Central Command, on a trip to Iraq.

''We want to help clear explosive remnants of war from Mosul, and from all the places we're helping the Iraqis fight,'' General Townsend said. ''So we'll find a way to do it.''

Defense officials said the coordinates of unexploded American ordnance in Ramadi, Falluja and other spots in Iraq would probably be declassified as well.

At the moment, removal experts can get the six-digit coordinates of unexploded ordnance from American military officials. But those unclassified reports place the dud bombs only within a 100-meter circle -- a huge area that can take hours, and even days, to search.

Defense officials said that one plan would divulge the 10-digit grid coordinates of dud bombs. That would pinpoint the ordnance to a one- to three-meter area. The dud rate for American bombs depends on the type of bomb used. American officials say that around 2 to 3 percent of ordnance dropped in airstrikes does not explode.

''Every army, if you fight over a piece of ground, you will leave a dud,'' General Townsend said. ''Bombs don't go off. But we'll find a way to help them.''

In the month since the Iraqi government announced the liberation of Mosul, the city has begun the painstaking task of putting itself back together.

''When we went into the city, there were tons of I.E.D.s, explosives, tunnels,'' Brig. Gen. Yahya Rasool, a spokesman for the Iraqi military, said Thursday. ''We are cleaning now the city, and we hope that when everything is done, the citizens will come back and start their lives again.''

Document NYTF000020170818ed8i0005r



Foreign Desk; SECTA
After 2 Years, Small Victory for a Woman Who Survived  ISIS  Crimes

By SOMINI SENGUPTA 
1,104 words
18 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Nadia Murad was 21 years old when, she says, Islamic State fighters abducted her, beat her and raped her. Her offense: belonging to the minority Yazidi community, whom the Islamic State regards as infidels. Her cause for the last two years: demanding justice for the Islamic State's atrocities.

This week, Ms. Murad clinched a small, but important victory. Her country, Iraq, agreed to let the Security Council appoint a panel of independent investigators to gather evidence of the most serious crimes committed by the Islamic State, and not just those against Yazidis. Lacking that, the Security Council would have had to adopt a resolution to create such a panel.

Still to be resolved is where and how those crimes will be prosecuted, and how to make sure those trials are credible and not displays of victor's justice.

Ms. Murad's quest poses an acute test for the promise of international justice, born from the ashes of Nazi genocide 70 years ago, after World War II.

If the most powerful countries in the world cannot hold accountable those who are accused of enslaving women for sex, beheading their perceived enemies, turning children into suicide bombers and carrying out what an international panel believes could be an act of genocide against the Yazidi people, what is the very notion of international justice good for?

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS, is accused of some of the gravest crimes known to humanity, and not only against the Yazidis. It does not have powerful countries defending it, as does say, the government of Syria, which also stands accused of a raft of war crimes.

Not least, the Islamic State committed these atrocities at a time when the world has a set of firmly established laws and a permanent International Criminal Court in The Hague precisely to deter and punish those who commit such crimes.

The I.C.C. has no jurisdiction in Iraq, though; the nation is not a member of the court, and there is no appetite on the Security Council's part to refer the conflict in Iraq to the court.

In early August, the United Nations-authorized Commission of Inquiry urged world powers to recognize the crime of genocide against the Yazidis and to ''undertake steps to refer the situation to justice.'' Yet, even with that, the effort to investigate -- let alone prosecute -- those crimes has not been so straightforward.

The Security Council has the power to dispatch investigators to collect evidence or to set up a special tribunal. But it was reluctant to do either without Iraq's consent.

That consent came Wednesday. In a letter to the United Nations, Iraq's foreign minister, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, said his government would work with the British government on a draft Security Council resolution seeking ''international expertise to criminalize'' the Islamic State. The political sensitivities were clear in his letter. Mr. al-Jaafari emphasized Iraq's ''sovereignty and jurisdiction'' in adopting any such resolution.

Translation: Iraq is wary of letting international investigators pry into crimes on its territory, which could potentially implicate its own forces or allies.

Amal Clooney, a British lawyer and rights activist who represents Ms. Murad, said she welcomed Iraq's consent for an international investigation, as a first step.

''Yazidis and other ISIS victims want justice in a court of law, and they deserve nothing less,'' Ms. Clooney said in a statement Wednesday. ''I hope that the Iraqi government's letter will mark the beginning of the end of impunity for genocide and other crimes that ISIS is committing in Iraq and around the world.''

Justice, of course, means different things to different parties.

Iraq has arrested thousands of suspected Islamic State members under its counterterrorism laws, which include the death penalty for membership in a banned terrorist group.

Islamic State fighters are facing trials in domestic courts from Tunisia to Germany to Iraq, although it remains to be seen how or where the group's most senior leaders will be tried for the most serious international crimes, including genocide.

Trying such crimes in local courts can be tricky. ''Most significantly,'' said Balkees Jarrah, senior counsel with Human Rights Watch, ''political will to permit independent and impartial criminal prosecutions can be in short supply in countries affected by conflict.''

Ms. Murad, now 24, is barely five feet tall. She does not smile much, and she rarely veers away from her prepared remarks, in Arabic. She favors solid black tunics and shoes made for walking. She sometimes looks as though she would rather be doing anything other than recounting for well-dressed, influential world leaders the horrors she lived through.

She has met with the Canadian prime minister, the queen of Jordan, United States ambassadors (representing both the Obama and Trump administrations), two successive secretaries general of the United Nations and, on several occasions, halls of dignitaries and philanthropists.

She has told and retold her awful story. The man who first came for her. ''A monster,'' is how she described him. Her brothers being executed. Mass graves.

And as time goes on, and she finds herself telling and retelling her story, it becomes harder for her to contain her fury.

At a briefing in the Security Council earlier this year, she looked up from her notes at one point and snapped, in halting English, at a room full of hushed diplomats from the world's most powerful countries. ''What more you need before you will act?'' she asked bluntly.

She was honored last year with a human rights prize in honor of the Czech dissident Vaclav Havel. The United Nations appointed her a good will ambassador. Her memoir, ''The Last Girl: My Story of Captivity, and My Fight Against the Islamic State,'' is to be published this fall by Tim Duggan Books, an imprint of Crown Publishing Group.

Ms. Murad, who now lives in Germany, says she never wanted this life. She was a farmer's daughter. She wanted to open a beauty salon.

Her discomfort at being a crusader comes out sometimes. In an interview last fall, she confessed to being worn out, but also unable to give up.

''I will go back to my life when women in captivity go back to their lives, when my community has a place, when I see people accountable for their crimes,'' she said.

Nadia Murad, a member of Iraq's Yazidi community, is seeking justice for ISIS atrocities. She is represented by Amal Clooney. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ELIZABETH LIPPMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170818ed8i00058



World; Europe
Van Hits Pedestrians in Deadly Barcelona Terror Attack

By ANNE-SOPHIE BOLON, PALKO KARASZ and JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr. 
1,750 words
17 August 2017
17:38
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Spain  was hit by its worst terrorist attack in more than a decade on Thursday, when a van driver plowed into dozens of people enjoying a sunny afternoon on one of Barcelona’ most famous thoroughfares, killing at least 13 people and leaving 80 bloodied on the pavement.

Hours later, the Catalan police said they foiled a second vehicular attack, in the seaside town of Cambrils, 70 miles to the south, fatally shooting four people. A fifth died later of wounds, the police said. The suspects appeared to be wearing explosive belts, though these devices were later found to be fake, police said . Six civilians and one police officer were injured during the episode, the Catalan emergency services said.

The Barcelona attack was at least the sixth time in the past few years that assailants using vehicles as deadly weapons have struck a European city.

The police cordoned off the Plaza de Cataluñ and Las Ramblas in the heart of Barcelona, both tourist destinations, and began a chaotic pursuit for the attackers.

Three people were arrested, including a Moroccan man whose identification documents had been used to rent the van. The Barcelona police said none were believed to be the driver, who escaped on foot and remained at large.

The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the Barcelona assault, which shattered a peaceful afternoon in one of Europe’ most picturesque cities. President Trump and other Western leaders quickly condemned the attack and pledged cooperation.

In a sign of the confusion that prevailed after the attack, local television reported that one assailant, armed with a rifle, had run into a restaurant and was besieged by the police. The police said the entire version was false.

Witnesses described people screaming and running for their lives as the van driver wove back and forth just after 5:30 p.m., apparently trying to hit as many people as he could. Police officers swept through the area near Las Ramblas, a wide boulevard with a large pedestrian section, moving people out of the area.

Videos taken by witnesses and posted online showed men, women and children motionless on the ground amid broken umbrellas and chairs, in the shade of trees, many bleeding profusely. Paramedics and friends knelt to comfort them as police sirens wailed.

Whitney Cohn, a mathematics teacher from Montebello, N.Y., was walking along the mall with her husband and two daughters, on the way back to their hotel after visiting a museum, when the van came careening through the crowd, throwing people aside like dolls as screams pierced the air. She grabbed her daughters and started running. “t was flying,”s. Cohn said in a text exchange from a nearby restaurant. “he van missed us by a sec.”

Other witnesses described chaos as people dropped their belongings and fled as the van entered the mall and accelerated, hitting people indiscriminately, among them children and the elderly. Among the seriously injured was a 6-year-old girl hospitalized with a cerebral hemorrhage, an official at Vall Hebron University Hospital said.

People streamed onto side streets, many of them weeping. “t was horrific,”aid Sergi Alcazar, a 25-year-old photographer who arrived 10 minutes after the attack to find victims lying amid broken umbrellas, chairs and cafe tables.

Until Thursday, Spain had been spared from the recent wave of terrorist attacks in Europe —any involving vehicles plowing into crowds —laimed by extremists in France, Germany, Britain and elsewhere.

Keith Fleming, an American who lives just off Las Ramblas, told The Associated Press that he was watching television when he heard a noise, looked out over his balcony and “aw women and children just running and they looked terrified.”

Mr. Fleming said the street was deserted, except for police officers with guns drawn or in riot gear. “t’ just kind of a tense situation,”he A.P. reported him as saying. “learly people were scared.”

Maj. Josep Lluis Trapero, a senior police official in Spain’ Catalonia region, said at a news conference that the police were investigating a possible connection between the van attack and a gas explosion the previous night in Alcanar, a town south of the city, which killed one person and injured several others.

One person, a Spaniard from the Spanish territory of Melilla in Morocco, had been taken into custody in Alcanar, he said. A second man, identified as Driss Oukabar, a Moroccan citizen, was arrested in the northern Catalan town of Ripoll when he walked into a police station and reported that his documents had been stolen.

Major Trapero said neither man appeared to be the driver of the van, which came to a stop near Barcelona’ opera house. The driver escaped on foot, he said.

“t was clearly a terror attack, intended to kill as many people as possible,”ajor Trapero said.

A third person was later   detained in Ripoll , about 65 miles north of Barcelona.

A national police official, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss a continuing investigation, said at least three vans had been rented under Mr. Oukabar’ name. As night fell, the Barcelona police were frantically searching for the two other vans, combing the streets and underground parking garages, the official said.

A counterterrorism expert, who was briefed on the details of the investigation, said late Thursday night that the police now believed the plot initially involved the use of explosives and a large truck.

“art of the plan was they tried to rent a larger truck, but they didn’ have the right permit and so they ended up getting”maller vans, said the expert, who requested anonymity to share information that had been disclosed to him in confidence.

He added that the building in Alcanar where the explosion occurred had been packed with gas canisters, as well as other materials used to make explosives.

American counterterrorism officials in Washington said they were in contact with the Spanish authorities to offer any assistance, but underscored that the investigation had just started.

Mr. Trump said on Twitter  that the United States would “o whatever is necessary to help,”elling Spaniards to “e tough & strong, we love you!”

Pro-Islamic State accounts on the Telegram messaging service shared news of the attack. One channel, called “xpansion of the Caliphate,”osted video of the scene alongside a message in Arabic. “error is filling the hearts of the Crusader in the Land of Andalusia,”t said.

In the past year, the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL, has devoted resources to translating its channels and messages into Spanish.

Although countries like France and Britain have repeatedly been named in ISIS propaganda urging followers to stage attacks, Spain has been less in the cross hairs.

The country has, however, been a transit point for recruits of the militant group, both for those going to Syria and those returning. The Spanish police arrested nine people in April who they said may have been connected with deadly attacks in France and Spain.

The Barcelona attack appeared to follow the playbook of recent assaults in which attackers drove vehicles into crowded stretches of large European cities.

“hile it’ not clear whether the attackers corresponded with ISIS prior to the operation, it’ clear that the methods used in the attack is something ISIS encouraged and incited over and again,”aid Laith Alkhouri, a director in New York of the business-risk intelligence company Flashpoint.

In the French city of Nice, a man drove a rental truck  into a crowd celebrating Bastille Day on the seaside Promenade des Anglais last year, killing 86 people.

A few days before Christmas last year, a driver in a stolen truck mowed down   shoppers  at a holiday market in Berlin, killing 12 people and wounding dozens.

At least seven civilians were killed and dozens injured in June when knife-wielding assailants sped across London Bridge in a white van, ramming numerous pedestrians before emerging with large hunting knives to attack the capital’ Borough Market, a crowded nightspot.

ISIS claimed responsibility, saying the attack had been carried out by “ detachment of Islamic State fighters.”

That assault was reminiscent of another, on Westminster Bridge in London in March, when Khalid Masood , 52, drove a car into pedestrians, killing four. He then fatally stabbed a police officer near Parliament before he was shot and killed. The police treated that attack, in which 50 were injured, as “slamist-related terrorism.”

There have been other deadly attacks using vehicles that were not related to Islamist extremists. A British man rammed a rental van  into Muslims leaving prayers in North London during Ramadan , and a man who was part of white supremacist demonstrations in Charlottesville, Va., is accused of driving his car into a crowd Saturday , killing a woman.

In 2004, a series of bombs ripped through commuter trains in Madrid, killing 191 and wounding over 1,800. The bombings were carried out by a group of North African Islamists that intersected with a band of petty criminals .

Leaders of European countries and cities that have suffered attacks quickly expressed solidarity with Barcelona.

In Germany, which has been on alert for potential terrorist threats ahead of the general election on Sept. 24, members of Chancellor Angela Merkel ’ cabinet showed their support.

“ am deeply shaken by the terrible news from Barcelona,”aid Thomas de Maizièe, Germany’ interior minister. “nce again, terror has shown its grotesque face.”

Reporting was contributed by Rukmini Callimachi, Michael Wolgelenter, Silvia Taulé, Eric Schmitt, Yonette Joseph, Raphael Minder and Mark A. Walsh.

* As Vehicle Attacks Rise, an Ordinary Object Becomes an Instrument of Fear 

* France Remembers the Nice Attack: ‘e Will Never Find the Words’

First responders helped injured people after a van ran into pedestrians on a crowded street on Thursday in Barcelona. | Sergi Alcazar/El Nacional | Downtown Barcelona on Thursday after a van crashed into pedestrians. | David Armengou/European Pressphoto Agency | People left a cordoned off area of Barcelona after the attack on Thursday. | Pau Barrena/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Stunned onlookers minutes after the van ran down pedestrians. | Sergi Alcazar/El Nacional | Injured people after the attack on Thursday. | Sergi Alcazar/El Nacional | At least a dozen people were killed and 80 injured when a van plowed into a crowd in Barcelona. | By AINARA TIEFENTHÄER, CAMILLA SCHICK and DEBORAH ACOSTA 

Document NYTFEED020170817ed8h004bl



Dispatch From Lebanon
World; Middle East
Next Door to War, an Indie Arab Band Sings of Defiance and Joy

By SOMINI SENGUPTA 
1,332 words
16 August 2017
20:05
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

EHDEN, Lebanon —aturday night. The stage is pressed hard against a pine-covered hill. The stars are out. The crowd is shouting “eila.”

I have come to see Mashrou’eila, a Lebanese indie rock band with a loyal boho following, at an outdoor concert in a mountain village north of Beirut. Mashrou’eila sings in Arabic. So I understand none of the lyrics. I do understand something about why its sexy, soulful, defiantly joyful music is a bit like air to its fans.

Tonight, they seem to be inhaling it with all their senses, as though right now, right here, this is what they need, to just be themselves.

a little glimpse of the magic at @Ehdeniyat! Feels good to be back. #balaplastic@greenpeacear@recyclelebanon#dilab#almidan#mercycorpspic.twitter.com/HsJfgUbiK4 —ashrou' leila (@mashrou3leila) August 14, 2017

I am drawn to a pair of young men edging up to the stage, their arms waving like a pair of elegant jellyfish in the purple light.

“e don’ just enjoy the music,”amy Khoury, 22, tells me. “e live the music.”

“hen I listen to their songs,”is companion, Majid Mouawad, 23, adds, “t’ like a feeling of euphoria.”

Any particular song, I ask.

“‘him el Yasmine,’”hey readily offer.

[Video: Shim El Yasmine - Mashrou' Leila Live in San Francisco Watch on YouTube.]

I learn later that it is a song of longing and loss, sung against an aching bass. In the voice of Hamed Sinno, the lead singer, it’ also a song about a man falling in love with another man. Mr. Sinno is the Arab world’ most prominent gay cultural voice.

Smell the jasmine, taste the molasses

And remember to remember me

Brother don’ forget me

My love, my prize.

Mashrou’eila’ five members were born before the end of the civil war in Lebanon in 1990. They grew up amid political assassinations, car bombs, checkpoints. They often say their songs are about what happens in Beirut’ bars —heir latest album, “bn El Leil,”r “on of the Night,”specially is very clubby. But the songs are also about stuff that you don’ readily think of when you think of Beirut bars: class, misogyny, sectarianism, corruption.

[Video: Mashrou' Leila - 04 - Icarus (Official Audio) | مشروع ليلى - ايكاروس Watch on YouTube.]

At the concert last Saturday night, a screen behind the band is filled by a black-and-white illustration of a deserted city block. Bright bits of red fall from the sky. First, they look like rose petals. But as they go on, like a GIF on loop, I wonder: Could they be something else, more sinister, these sharp red shards falling over an empty city?

The song, “bdo,”s about a flower seller who falls in love with a widow who doesn’ love him back. Those are, indeed, just rose petals, the violinist, Haig Papazian tells me later. The street is where Beirut goes to party.

[Video: Mashrou' Leila - ABDO /مشروع ليلى - عبدو Watch on YouTube.]

It is impossible to hear Mashrou’eila’ music without knowing what everyone here knows. That Beirut is still scarred by war. That there’ a war next door in Syria, another in Iraq. That a thumping bass there could be an airstrike. That women are enslaved for sex in some places. That love is forbidden between two men or two women, and that being an Arab, just being an Arab, is to invite fear, revulsion, hatred in many quarters around the world.

How to describe Mashrou’eila’ iconography? To me, Mr. Sinno seems to be channeling Freddie Mercury’ blazing, naughty magic. He starts out on stage with a drapey sequined black cardigan. Layers come off, until a black muscle T-shirt remains, and a black armband to match a rakish mustache.

Mr. Sinno winces when I mention Freddie Mercury. “ think it’ the queer brown musician with a mustache thing,”e says.

Lebanon is the Arab world’ most socially liberal country, though there are parts of the country where Mashrou’eila wouldn’ be welcome. The group wasn’ welcome in Jordan earlier this year either.

“hey represent a kind of freedom in the Middle East,”halia Bejani, a 16-year-old in stylish oversized glasses, tells me. “ don’ like that much the music, but what they convey is really special.”

“t’ rock ‘’oll with an edge,”izar Bouchedid, 52, says. “ou know the songs. But you kind of don’ know.”

Mr. Sinno’ voice has a gravelly quality sometimes. It can howl in the higher octaves, alongside Mr. Papazian’ dirgelike violin.

Some of the bouncy, danceable pieces are like a finger in the eye of chaos, laced with irony.

“il Watan,”r “or the Homeland,”s unequivocally political. It excoriates political leaders for fooling its citizens.

They said ‘top preaching’

’‘ome dance with me a little’

‘hy the long face?’

‘ome dance with me a little’

On screen, a belly dancer entertains.

[Video: Mashrou' Leila - Lil Watan ( Official Music Video ) | مشروع ليلى - للوطن Watch on YouTube.]

“hey’e outspoken,”entures Jehan Bseiso, a poet who is in the audience. “hey defy norms. They’e feminists. Their Arabic —hey use classical and colloquial. I believe it’ subversive.”

At one point in the show, a fan hoists herself on a shoulder and unfurls a rainbow flag. Mr. Sinno accepts it and ties it around his mic stand.

At another point, giant cages of plastic water bottles, all scooped up from the beach along the Mediterranean Sea, spill out and scatter across the stage. The concert is sponsored in part by Greenpeace, to raise awareness about plastic pollution.

Mashrou’eila is known for its cerebral, sometimes impenetrable lyrics. Elias Muhanna, a comparative literature professor at Brown University, writing in The New Yorker last month, cited lines from Sappho and Walt Whitman in the group’ music. Mr. Sinno is the son of an English professor at the American University of Beirut, which is also where the band members met in 2008.

Four of its five members are trained as architects, Mr. Sinno as a graphic designer. Their album art draws from Roman pottery. They talk to one another about the color of their songs. “his feels a bit too purple, throw some green in there, so someone will throw in something really synth-y and high-pitched,”r. Sinno says.

“ink is always sassy.”

For the last song of the night, Mr. Sinno asks those in the audience to hold up their cellphone flashlights. A thousand bursts of light respond to his call. The song is “arikh.”t’ about going to Mars, also an allusion to facing mental illness. He finds this his most difficult song to sing. The lights comfort him.

I find myself thinking of the other torches that a white militia held up the night before at a neo-Nazi  rally in my own country. As I leave the concert, I learn that a man identified by the police as a 20-year-old Nazi sympathizer has driven his car into demonstrators in Charlottesville, Va., protesting the white nationalist rally, killing one person.

On Twitter, my colleague Jenna Wortham posts a photo of a handwritten sign:

"how do you look terror in the face and still muster the courage to love" pic.twitter.com/zMREqKPWzL —enna //\\ Wortham (@jennydeluxe) August 12, 2017

This is a question Mashrou’eila answered. Sexy and defiant.

* For Syrian Actors, a Maddening Road to America

* In One-Woman Show, Arafat Protéé Offers Personal Take on Conflict

* Mocking \b ISIS\b0  in Beirut

* Arabic Music's Modern Voice

* An Image of Tolerance Still Manages to Flicker in Old Movie Theaters

Mashrou’eila during an outdoor concert on Saturday in Ehden, Lebanon. | Somini Sengupta/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170816ed8g00691



opinion
Charlottesville,  ISIS  and Us; Op-Ed Columnist

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
1,227 words
16 August 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

AL UDEID, Qatar —’e been on the road since the Charlottesville killing. I am traveling around the Arab world and Afghanistan with the chief of the U.S. Air Force, Gen. David Goldfein; his civilian boss, the Air Force secretary, Heather Wilson; and their aides. We’e currently at the giant Al Udeid Air Base, from which America’ entire ISIS-Syria-Iraq-Afghanistan air war is run.

With all the news from Charlottesville, I was feeling in the wrong place at the wrong time. And then I looked around me here, and the connection with Charlottesville became obvious. Just one glance at our traveling party and the crews at this base and you realize immediately why we are the most powerful country in the world.

It’ not because we own F-22s. And it surely isn’ that we embrace white supremacy. It’ because we embrace pluralism. It’ because we can still make out of many, one.

I am a pluralism supremacist.

How could I not be? I look around me and see our Air Force chief, who is of Eastern European Jewish descent, reporting to a woman Air Force secretary, who was among the early women graduates of the Air Force Academy and whose senior aide is an African-American woman lieutenant colonel. The base commander here in Qatar, overseeing the whole air war, is of Armenian descent, and his top deputy is of Lebanese descent.

In the control center I’ introduced to the two Russian-speaking U.S. servicemen who 10 to 12 times a day get on the local “otline”ith the Russian command post in Syria to make sure Russian planes don’ collide with ours. One of the servicemen was born in Russia and the other left Kiev, Ukraine, just five years ago, in part, he told me, because he dreamed of joining the U.S. Air Force: “his is the country of opportunity.”

Then we get a briefing from the combat innovation team, which is designing a new algorithm for dynamic targeting with colleagues in Silicon Valley. I ask their commander about his last name —to —nd he explains, “y dad is from Cuba and my mother is from Mexico.”he intelligence briefing was delivered by “aptain Yang.”

The very reason America is the supreme power in this region is that the U.S. military can take all of those different people and make them into a fist. And the very reason we are stuck in this region and can’ get out is that so many of the nation-states and people here are fighting only for their exclusivist dreams of supremacy —hiite supremacy, Sunni supremacy, Alawite supremacy, Taliban supremacy, Turkish supremacy and Persian supremacy.

With a few exceptions, they can’ generate self-sustaining power-sharing. Which is why we keep defeating the worst of them and they keep losing the peace, because the best of them can never share power long enough and deep enough to build lasting stability.

None of the U.S. military people here talk U.S. politics. But I do. As a citizen, I say they deserve a commander in chief who does not need three tries to grudgingly denounce violent white supremacists. Pluralism is our true source of strength at home and abroad. It has to be nurtured, celebrated and protected from its enemies everywhere and always.

Now that I got that off my chest, let’ talk strategy. We toured the command center here with its wall-size screens that take the data from satellites, drones, manned aircraft, cyber, sensors, human intelligence and aerial refueling tankers and meld them into a series of strategic targeting decisions. Watching the choreography of all this is both chilling and mesmerizing.

We are moving “rom wars of attrition to wars of cognition,”xplained General Goldfein. These new integrated systems are simultaneously “tate of the art, unparalleled —nd too slow for the future.”

On one recent day you could look up at those screens and find a Syrian fighter jet preparing to drop bombs near U.S. special forces in Syria. The Syrian jet is about to be blown out of the sky by a U.S. fighter jet, while two Russian fighters watch from a higher altitude and a stealth U.S. F-22 watches the Russians watching the U.S. plane watching the Syrian.

While that is all happening, the coastal Syrian surface-to-air system lights up as Turkish, Jordanian and Israeli jets buzz in and out of theater. And almost daily an Iranian-made drone being directed from the back of an R.V. by Iranian Revolutionary Guards members in the desert of eastern Syria is hunting for U.S. special forces. We’e shot down a couple of those, too.

If you tried to sell this very real drama to a video game company, it would be rejected as unrealistic.

Just one U.S. fighter jet over Syria —nd we have them in the air now 24/7 —as to be aerially refueled eight or nine times during its eight-hour mission. Add in Iraq and Afghanistan, and on any given day the Air Force is coordinating as many as 60 KC-135 tankers (aerial gas stations) operating over these three countries.

Meanwhile, ISIS is buying drones from online shopping sites, jury-rigging them with GoPro cameras and grenades and dropping them on U.S. and Iraqi troops, or it’ armor-plating S.U.V.s, loading them with explosives and a suicide bomber and turning them into Mad Max vehicles driven right into our troops or our allies.

The good news? ISIS, having been largely defeated in Iraq, will most likely be defeated in Syria, too, by Americans, Kurds, Russians, Syrians, Iranians and pro-Iranian militias. The bad news? There is a good chance that ISIS’erritory will ultimately fall under Iran’ sway.

Preventing that would require the Arab-Sunni Muslim world to get its act together, but it is as weak and divided as ever. That’ why Iran now indirectly controls four Arab capitals: Beirut, Baghdad, Sana and Damascus. And what is really scary is that it controls them at a pretty cheap price through proxies. We can defeat ISIS extremism, with our pluralistic fighting machine, but the one thing we can’ do is create Sunni-Shiite pluralism and power-sharing to replace it. Which is why we keep getting dragged back —ot to make things better but, as always, to prevent the bad from becoming the awful.

I wanted it to be otherwise, but it’ not. We tried. So, do we just keep trying? You can’ visit one of these huge U.S. bases built since 9/11, see the dedication of the young men and women, and the sophistication of the systems they have built, and not wonder: What if all of this talent and energy and idealism and pluralism were applied not to propping up a decrepit Arab state system against Iran, but instead fixing the worst neighborhoods of Baltimore, Chicago and Detroit?

We need to have a national discussion about this.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document INHT000020170816ed8g00007



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
OpEd; SECT
Conversions from Islam in Europe

By FAISAL DEVJI 
1,161 words
16 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The International New York Times
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

OXFORD, England -- The conversion of Muslims to liberalism, secularism or atheism has become something of a meme in the West, with arguments raging among scholars, in the press and on social media about the possibility of Islam's undergoing a ''reformation'' or becoming ''modern,'' for which the history of Christianity is supposed to provide a universal blueprint.

It is the almost religious tenor of such transformations that justifies the term ''conversion'' for them. The single-minded adoption of such profane identities may even be more theological than Muslim conversions to Christianity and other faiths, suggesting that they have now replaced churches and temples in representing religious forms of belief.

Europe's refugee crisis has seen a spate of conversions to Christianity among Muslim migrants. While numbers are difficult to obtain, The Guardian reported last year about a church in Berlin whose congregation increased from 140 to 700, the newcomers being Muslim converts from Iran, Afghanistan and Central Asia, and mass baptisms held at a municipal swimming pool in Hamburg, Germany. The Telegraph reported from Beirut, Lebanon, that hundreds of Syrian refugees in the country have converted to Christianity at least in part to benefit from aid distributed by Christian charities and for better chances of having their asylum applications accepted in Europe.

Whether the converts are repulsed by the violent forms Islam has taken in places like Syria and Afghanistan or are backing up their claims for asylum, the conversions occur quietly and rarely as a result of proselytism. Nor do they tend to be accompanied by any transformation in the appearance, behavior or language of the convert. Analyzing the news reports suggests that these conversions are characterized by multiple quotidian and ambiguous motives.

In parts of the Muslim world, but also non-Muslim countries like India, converting from one religion to another may invite legal punishment as well as social censure. Nevertheless, conversions still occur in these places and tend not to follow the theological model of transformation we have inherited from Christianity.

In recent years, a number of poor Muslims, as a Los Angeles Times article reported in 2014, have accepted Hinduism, their ''homecoming'' staged for the media by groups seeking to proclaim India a Hindu nation. Not only was there no talk of transformation in these cases, but also no attempt by Muslims to persecute these converts.

Muslims are also increasingly becoming atheists. A 2015 article in The New Republic reported on the spread of disbelief in the Arab world, citing over 250 web pages or groups about atheism with memberships ranging from a few hundred to thousands. There have always been atheists in the Muslim world, including some famous medieval scientists and philosophers.

The Muslims among whom I was raised in East Africa included many who refused to pray or fast and were openly critical of religion. It would never occur to them to renounce Islam and proclaim atheism as a new identity or mission, which would have catapulted them back into a theological narrative.

In the West many of these men and women call themselves ex-Muslims and since 2007 have been organized into a loose network across more than half a dozen countries, including the United States, Canada, Britain, France, Germany and New Zealand. The identity they have chosen models the renunciation of Islam upon that of addiction, alcoholism or even crime.

By retaining ''Muslim'' in their name, ex-Muslims are recognizing the theological character of their renunciation. This year a young woman described her loss of faith in the North American journal The Ex-Muslim. She had been a pious believer, like many ex-Muslims, who tried to convince herself of Islam's truth by reading the Quran and other religious texts while redoubling her devotions. Her theological reading and practice left her with unanswered questions and doubts, eventually leading her to forsake Islam.

Yet before printing and literacy made it freely available, the Quran was read by only religious authorities or recited by bored schoolboys. It was never considered a unified narrative with a single meaning and was consulted only for specific ritual, juridical or mystical purposes that required training.

But like the Bible, the Quran today is either often read to inspire belief or rejected as unbelievable, as the testimonies of faithful and faithless Muslims demonstrate. In both cases the procedure involved is identical, and indeed it appears as if it is mostly pious Muslims who become ex-Muslims. Already secular or indifferent believers are unlikely to incline toward one or the other group.

Conversion remains commonplace in the Muslim world. But while numbers are difficult to come by, conversions to Christianity are probably more than matched by internal ones between Sunni, Shia, Ahmadi and other forms of Islam in countries like Egypt and Pakistan, often involving grave risks for converts to minority sects. In Iran the Bahai Faith made deep inroads into Shiism during the 19th century. While these changes sometimes involve violence, they continue to occur and so belie the idea of an immobile Islamic society.

There is also a new movement of atheists in countries such as Saudi Arabia and Pakistan, which takes the form of secret societies. A 2012 WIN/Gallup International poll showed that 5 percent of Saudis identified as atheists -- more than in the United States -- while 19 percent did not consider themselves religious, in a country that punishes unbelief with death. An average of 22 percent expressed doubts about religion elsewhere in the Middle East.

These men and women meet in internet chat rooms and unnamed physical locations, like the mystics of old. Fear drives them to secrecy, but we should not dismiss the esoteric dimension of the new atheists. They appear to reject the theological obsession with a singular revelation and universal mission. They tend to focus instead on the kind of knowledge that dissents from popular as much as authoritative opinion, instead of merely replacing it with a more ''correct'' one. Such views are clearly visible on atheist web forums and were also broadcast in a BBC documentary on Pakistani atheists last month.

In recent times the most spectacular refusal to identify as Muslim, if not to reject Islam altogether, came during the terrorist attacks in Bangladesh last year. Storming a restaurant in Dhaka, militants claiming allegiance to ISIS held dozens of people hostage and killed 20. When Muslim hostages were asked to identify themselves and be released, a young man and a young woman decided not to do so, and died alongside their non-Muslim friends. Their refusal involved neither doctrine and belief, nor mission and conversion. Perhaps they could be true to Islam only by appearing to forsake it.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Faisal Devji is the author, most recently, of ''Muslim Zion: Pakistan as a Political Idea'' and teaches history at Oxford University.

Document NYTF000020170816ed8g00047



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Islamic State Is Criticized As Persecutor In U.S. Report

By GARDINER HARRIS 
662 words
16 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration criticized the Islamic State on Tuesday for its persecution of religious minorities but made no mention of a recent rise in attacks against Muslims in the United States, as it released the government's annual accounting of religious persecution around the world.

''As we make progress in defeating ISIS and denying them their caliphate, their terrorist members have and continue to target multiple religions and ethnic groups for rape, kidnapping, enslavement and even death,'' said Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson, referring to the Islamic State, in brief remarks Tuesday morning at the State Department.

He went on to declare that the Islamic State was ''clearly responsible for genocide against Yazidis, Christians and Shia Muslims in areas it controls or has controlled.'' The comments were part of the formal release of the International Religious Freedom Report for 2016, an annual accounting required by Congress of threats to religious freedom around the world.

''Religious persecution and intolerance remains far too prevalent,'' he said. ''Almost 80 percent of the global population live with restrictions on or hostilities to limit their freedom of religion.''

Missing from Tuesday's report was any mention of a spike in acts of violence and bigotry against Muslims in the United States, widely reported in the wake of last year's election. Nor did the report take note of President Trump's proposal as a candidate to ban the entry of all Muslims into the United States, or his subsequent orders to bar the entry of refugees or citizens from seven (later reduced to six) predominantly Muslim countries.

The report listed threats to religious freedom in 199 countries, but the United States was not on the list.

''We do not rate ourselves,'' said Ambassador Michael Kozak of the State Department's Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor. In a press briefing after Mr. Tillerson spoke, he added, ''I would put our record on religious freedom up against anybody in the world.''

The report recognized that the resettlement of refugees suffering religious persecution was ''a vital tool'' but failed to acknowledge that the Trump administration had severely restricted the entry of all refugees into the United States.

''Every year, unfortunately, there are way, way more refugees than any country can take,'' Mr. Kozak said when asked about the seeming incongruity.

Threats against Christians abroad have been a focus of concern for conservatives in the United States, and in May Mr. Trump released a statement denouncing the ''merciless slaughter'' of Christians in Egypt.

In his remarks, Mr. Tillerson noted that the Islamic State had ''claimed responsibility for attacks on Christian pilgrims and churches in Egypt.''

''The protection of these groups and others subject to violent extremism is a human rights priority for the Trump administration,'' he said.

Mr. Tillerson then cited a host of other countries for religious intolerance, including Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Bahrain and Pakistan. He castigated China for persecution of Uighurs, a Muslim minority.

The report noted some improvements, including a change in law in Vietnam to speed recognition of religious minorities and efforts by Oman and the United Arab Emirates to allow the construction of churches. And Mr. Tillerson hailed the nomination of Gov. Sam Brownback of Kansas to serve as the State Department's envoy of religious freedom.

Little in the report released Tuesday was surprising. Divided by country, the report includes a lengthy compendium of publicized instances of religious violence and persecution. But this routine homework of the State Department is mandated by Congress and often followed closely by nongovernment organizations.

Mr. Tillerson's decision in March to skip the traditional personal announcement of an annual human rights report, led to widespread condemnation. Mr. Tillerson has appeared less comfortable with the public diplomacy part of his job. Both Mr. Trump and Vice President Mike Pence have said that the protection of religious freedom is a priority.

Document NYTF000020170816ed8g0003y



opinion
Conversions From Islam in Europe and Beyond; Op-Ed Contributor

By FAISAL DEVJI 
1,165 words
15 August 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

OXFORD, England —he conversion of Muslims to liberalism, secularism or atheism has become something of a meme in the West, with arguments raging among scholars, in the press and on social media about the possibility of Islam’ undergoing a “eformation”r becoming “odern,”or which the history of Christianity is supposed to provide a universal blueprint.

It is the almost religious tenor of such transformations that justifies the term “onversion”or them. The single-minded adoption of such profane identities may even be more theological than Muslim conversions to Christianity and other faiths, suggesting that they have now replaced churches and temples in representing religious forms of belief.

Europe’ refugee crisis has seen a spate of conversions to Christianity among Muslim migrants. While numbers are difficult to obtain, The Guardian reported last year about a church in Berlin whose congregation increased from 140 to 700, the newcomers being Muslim converts from Iran, Afghanistan and Central Asia, and mass baptisms held at a municipal swimming pool in Hamburg, Germany. The Telegraph reported from Beirut, Lebanon, that hundreds of Syrian refugees in the country have converted to Christianity at least in part to benefit from aid distributed by Christian charities and for better chances of having their asylum applications accepted in Europe.

Whether the converts are repulsed by the violent forms Islam has taken in places like Syria and Afghanistan or are backing up their claims for asylum, the conversions occur quietly and rarely as a result of proselytism. Nor do they tend to be accompanied by any transformation in the appearance, behavior or language of the convert. Analyzing the news reports suggests that these conversions are characterized by multiple quotidian and ambiguous motives.

In parts of the Muslim world, but also non-Muslim countries like India, converting from one religion to another may invite legal punishment as well as social censure. Nevertheless, conversions still occur in these places and tend not to follow the theological model of transformation we have inherited from Christianity.

In recent years, a number of poor Muslims, as a Los Angeles Times article reported in 2014, have accepted Hinduism, their “omecoming”taged for the media by groups seeking to proclaim India a Hindu nation. Not only was there no talk of transformation in these cases, but also no attempt by Muslims to persecute these converts.

Muslims are also increasingly becoming atheists. A 2015 article in The New Republic reported on the spread of disbelief in the Arab world, citing over 250 web pages or groups about atheism with memberships ranging from a few hundred to thousands. There have always been atheists in the Muslim world, including some famous medieval scientists and philosophers.

The Muslims among whom I was raised in East Africa included many who refused to pray or fast and were openly critical of religion. It would never occur to them to renounce Islam and proclaim atheism as a new identity or mission, which would have catapulted them back into a theological narrative.

In the West many of these men and women call themselves ex-Muslims and since 2007 have been organized into a loose network across more than half a dozen countries, including the United States, Canada, Britain, France, Germany and New Zealand. The identity they have chosen models the renunciation of Islam upon that of addiction, alcoholism or even crime.

By retaining “uslim”n their name, ex-Muslims are recognizing the theological character of their renunciation. This year a young woman described her loss of faith in the North American journal The Ex-Muslim. She had been a pious believer, like many ex-Muslims, who tried to convince herself of Islam’ truth by reading the Quran and other religious texts while redoubling her devotions. Her theological reading and practice left her with unanswered questions and doubts, eventually leading her to forsake Islam.

Yet before printing and literacy made it freely available, the Quran was read by only religious authorities or recited by bored schoolboys. It was never considered a unified narrative with a single meaning and was consulted only for specific ritual, juridical or mystical purposes that required training.

But like the Bible, the Quran today is either often read to inspire belief or rejected as unbelievable, as the testimonies of faithful and faithless Muslims demonstrate. In both cases the procedure involved is identical, and indeed it appears as if it is mostly pious Muslims who become ex-Muslims. Already secular or indifferent believers are unlikely to incline toward one or the other group.

Conversion remains commonplace in the Muslim world. But while numbers are difficult to come by, conversions to Christianity are probably more than matched by internal ones between Sunni, Shia, Ahmadi and other forms of Islam in countries like Egypt and Pakistan, often involving grave risks for converts to minority sects. In Iran the Bahai Faith made deep inroads into Shiism during the 19th century. While these changes sometimes involve violence, they continue to occur and so belie the idea of an immobile Islamic society.

There is also a new movement of atheists in countries such as Saudi Arabia and Pakistan, which takes the form of secret societies. A 2012 WIN/Gallup International poll showed that 5 percent of Saudis identified as atheists —ore than in the United States —hile 19 percent did not consider themselves religious, in a country that punishes unbelief with death. An average of 22 percent expressed doubts about religion elsewhere in the Middle East.

These men and women meet in internet chat rooms and unnamed physical locations, like the mystics of old. Fear drives them to secrecy, but we should not dismiss the esoteric dimension of the new atheists. They appear to reject the theological obsession with a singular revelation and universal mission. They tend to focus instead on the kind of knowledge that dissents from popular as much as authoritative opinion, instead of merely replacing it with a more “orrect”ne. Such views are clearly visible on atheist web forums and were also broadcast in a BBC documentary on Pakistani atheists last month.

In recent times the most spectacular refusal to identify as Muslim, if not to reject Islam altogether, came during the terrorist attacks in Bangladesh last year. Storming a restaurant in Dhaka, militants claiming allegiance to ISIS held dozens of people hostage and killed 20. When Muslim hostages were asked to identify themselves and be released, a young man and a young woman decided not to do so, and died alongside their non-Muslim friends. Their refusal involved neither doctrine and belief, nor mission and conversion. Perhaps they could be true to Islam only by appearing to forsake it.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Faisal Devji is the author, most recently, of “uslim Zion: Pakistan as a Political Idea”nd teaches history at Oxford University.

Document INHT000020170815ed8f0000f



National Desk; SECTA
Protesters in Durham Topple a Confederate Monument

By MAGGIE ASTOR 
569 words
15 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
18
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Chanting ''No K.K.K., no fascist U.S.A.,'' the protesters slung a rope around the Confederate soldier's neck and pulled.

The crowd stepped back, out of the way, and the soldier came crashing to the ground in a heap of crumpled metal.

From Charlottesville, Va., to New Orleans, officials have removed or considered removing Confederate monuments, to sometimes-violent backlash. But in Durham, N.C., on Monday night, opponents of the relics took matters into their own hands.

Shortly after 7 p.m., the protesters -- part of a group of more than 100 that included anti-fascists and members of organizations like the Democratic Socialists of America, the Workers World Party and the Industrial Workers of the World, according to The News & Observer of Raleigh -- toppled a statue of a Confederate soldier that had stood in front of the old Durham County Courthouse for nearly a century above the inscription, ''In memory of the boys who wore the gray.''

The figure fell headfirst, still attached to a piece of its pedestal, and the crowd -- men and women, black and white, mostly young -- erupted in whoops and cheers. Some protesters ran over and began kicking the statue. Others took photos beside it.

The Durham Police Department said in a statement that it had made no arrests because the episode had occurred on county property, which is under the jurisdiction of the Durham County Sheriff's Office. Members of the sheriff's office filmed the protest as the statue came down, The News & Observer reported, but the office did not respond to a request for comment on Monday night, and it was not clear whether its officers had made any arrests.

Gov. Roy Cooper, a Democrat, wrote on Twitter, ''The racism and deadly violence in Charlottesville is unacceptable, but there is a better way to remove these monuments.''

The do-it-yourself removal prompted strong reactions on social media, with many expressions of support but also at least one person who likened it to the Islamic State's destruction of historical artifacts.

How are protestors tearing down a Civil War statue in Durham, NC any different than ISIS destroying historic relics and museums? -- Margaret P.Smith (@Meggypaul) August 15, 2017

Taking down Confederate monuments is not erasing history - it's declaring that some parts of history belong in a museum, not on a pedestal. -- Caroline O. (@RVAwonk) August 15, 2017

The 15-foot monument, depicting an armed, uniformed Confederate soldier, was dedicated in 1924, six decades after the Civil War.

About two and a half hours after the statue was toppled, Charlie Reece, a member of the Durham City Council, posted screenshots on Twitter of an email exchange between him and a resident.

''Please consider removing the Confederate statue in downtown Durham,'' the resident, whose name Mr. Reece redacted, wrote at 6:20 p.m.

''With respect,'' Mr. Reece replied at 9:32, ''I don't believe there is a Confederate statue in downtown Durham any longer.''

Follow Maggie Astor on Twitter: @MaggieAstor.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

A statue of a Confederate soldier, which had stood for nearly a century, was brought down outside the old Durham County Courthouse in North Carolina on Monday night. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KATE MEDLEY/REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020170815ed8f0005x



Foreign Desk; SECT
 ISIS  Claims Suicide Bombing That Killed at Least 15 in Pakistan

By SALMAN MASOOD 
309 words
14 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- A suicide bomber riding a motorcycle rammed into a military truck near a busy bus station in southwestern Pakistan, killing at least 15 people, including eight soldiers, and wounding at least 40 others, military officials said on Sunday.

The Islamic State group claimed responsibility for the attack on Saturday in Quetta, the capital of Baluchistan Province in the southwest. A military spokesman said the attack had been aimed at sabotaging Independence Day celebrations, as Pakistan will mark its 70th anniversary on Monday.

Active-duty troops in the Pakistani Army have rarely come under attack in Quetta, although paramilitary forces and police officers have repeatedly faced assaults by militants in the city.

The explosion, which was heard far away and set off a fire that engulfed vehicles nearby, left several people critically injured. The wounded were taken to Civil Hospital and Combined Military Hospital.

The attack, near several important government and private buildings -- including the provincial assembly -- renewed concerns about security arrangements in the city, which has long reeled under militant and sectarian violence despite the heavy presence of security forces and paramilitary soldiers.

Gen. Qamar Javed Bajwa, the Pakistani army chief, arrived in the city on Sunday morning to chair a high-level security briefing and visit the wounded at the military hospital, officials said. The interior minister, Ahsan Iqbal, had also traveled to the provincial capital on Saturday for meetings with senior civil and military officials.

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, has claimed to be behind several terrorist attacks in the province, which borders Afghanistan and Iran, in recent months.

Pakistani officials, however, played down the presence of the Islamic State in the province, asserting that the group does not have an organized presence there.

Document NYTF000020170814ed8e00050



Foreign Desk; SECTA
2 Soldiers From U.S. Are Killed On Iraq Duty

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS 
237 words
14 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- Two American soldiers were killed while conducting combat operations in Iraq, the United States military said in a statement on Sunday, adding that ''initial reports indicate the incident was not due to enemy contact.''

Five other soldiers were wounded, the statement said, without providing further details. It did not identify the soldiers or where in Iraq the casualties occurred.

More than 5,000 American troops are taking part in the war against the Islamic State in Iraq, according to the Pentagon. Most operate within heavily guarded bases, collecting and sharing intelligence with Iraqi forces and providing logistical support.

But as the fighting has evolved over the past three years, more American troops are operating close to the front lines. In addition to the two killed on Sunday, five other American soldiers have been killed in Iraq in the fight against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, including two in the battle to retake the northern city of Mosul.

More than 1,200 Iraqi forces were killed in the battle for Mosul and more than 6,000 were wounded, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said this month.

Iraq's prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, declared victory against the Islamic State in Mosul in July, and Iraqi forces are now preparing to retake the Islamic State-held town of Tal Afar.

Document NYTF000020170814ed8e0004o



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Best Sellers: Combined Print & E-Book Fiction: Sunday, August 13th 2017

507 words
13 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

About the Best Sellers:

These lists are an expanded version of those appearing in the August 13, 2017 print edition of the Book Review, reflecting sales for the week ending July 29, 2017. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above it. A dagger (†ndicates that some retailers report receiving bulk orders. For an explanation of our methodology, visit http://www.nytimes.com/best-sellers.

  Weeks


                              est Sellers: Combined Print & E-Book Fiction

This Last On
Week Week List
  
1    1    2


THE LATE SHOW, by Michael Connelly. (Little, Brown) René Ballard, a young detective with the L.A.P.D., investigates crimes against two women.

2 2 19


THE WHISTLER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A whistleblower alerts a Florida investigator to judicial corruption involving the Mob and Indian casinos.

3  1


WILDFIRE, by Ilona Andrews. (Avon) The conclusion to the Hidden Legacy series.

4 3 8


CAMINO ISLAND, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A search for stolen rare manuscripts leads to a Florida island.

5 4 3


HOUSE OF SPIES, by Daniel Silva. (Harper) Gabriel Allon, the Israeli art restorer and spy, now the head of Israel’ secret intelligence service, pursues an ISIS mastermind

6  1


READY PLAYER ONE, by Ernest Cline. (Broadway) It’ 2044, life on a resource-depleted Earth has grown increasingly grim, and the key to a vast fortune is hidden in a virtual-reality world.

7  1


PARADISE VALLEY, by C.J. Box. (Minotaur) A North Dakota investigator pursues a trucker who preys on prostitutes.

8 6 27


THE WOMAN IN CABIN 10, by Ruth Ware. (Scout) A travel writer on a cruise is certain she has heard a body thrown overboard, but no one believes her.

9  1


THE LYING GAME, by Ruth Ware. (Scout) Four school friends come together as their long-held secret threatens to emerge.

10  1


THE MOORES ARE MISSING, by James Patterson and others. (Grand Central) A collection of three novels, each written with a different co-author.

11 15 5


MURDER GAMES, by James Patterson and Howard Roughan. (Little, Brown ) An expert on serial murder becomes involved in the hunt for a New York City killer who leaves a playing card at the crime scene.

12 10 29


MILK AND HONEY, by Rupi Kaur. (Andrews McMeel) Poetic approaches to surviving adversity and loss.

13 8 19


THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood. (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt) Men and women in a dystopian future. The basis of the Hulu series; originally published in 1985.

14  1


OMINOUS, by Lisa Jackson, Nancy Bush and Rosalind Noonan. (Zebra) Three friends reunite in Prairie Creek, Wyo., and are menaced by a killer from their past.

15  1


FATAL THREAT, by Marie Force. (HQN) In the 11th book in the Fatal series of romantic thrillers, a lieutenant in the Washington Metro Police investigates a murder and defends the reputation of her husband, the vice president.

Document NYTF000020170814ed8d0002z



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Best Sellers: Hardcover Fiction: Sunday, August 13th 2017

509 words
13 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

About the Best Sellers:

These lists are an expanded version of those appearing in the August 13, 2017 print edition of the Book Review, reflecting sales for the week ending July 29, 2017. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above it. A dagger (†ndicates that some retailers report receiving bulk orders. For an explanation of our methodology, visit http://www.nytimes.com/best-sellers.

  Weeks


                              est Sellers: Hardcover Fiction

This Last On
Week Week List
  
1    1    2


THE LATE SHOW, by Michael Connelly. (Little, Brown) René Ballard, a young detective with the L.A.P.D., investigates crimes against two women

2 2 8


CAMINO ISLAND, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A search for stolen rare manuscripts leads to a Florida island.

3  1


THE LYING GAME, by Ruth Ware. (Scout) Four school friends reunite as their long-held secret threatens to emerge.

4  1


PARADISE VALLEY, by C J. Box. (Minotaur) A North Dakota investigator pursues a trucker who preys on prostitutes.

5 3 3


HOUSE OF SPIES, by Daniel Silva. (Harper) Gabriel Allon, the Israeli art restorer and spy, now the head of Israel’ secret intelligence service, pursues an ISIS mastermind.

6 4 13


INTO THE WATER, by Paula Hawkins. (Riverhead) In this psychological thriller by the author of “he Girl on the Train,”omen are found drowned in a river in an English town.

7  1


THE PAINTED QUEEN, by Elizabeth Peters and Joan Hess. (Morrow) The final adventure in the series featuring Amelia Peabody and her archaeologist husband, Radcliffe Emerson.

8 7 36


A GENTLEMAN IN MOSCOW, by Amor Towles. (Viking) A Russian count undergoes 30 years of house arrest.

9 5 5


MURDER GAMES, by James Patterson and Howard Roughan. (Little, Brown ) An expert on serial murder becomes involved in the hunt for a New York City killer.

10 6 7


THE IDENTICALS, by Elin Hilderbrand. (Little, Brown) Complications in the lives of identical twins who were raised separately on Nantucket and Martha’ Vineyard.

11 8 5


USE OF FORCE, by Brad Thor. (Atria/Emily Bestler) The counterterrorism operative Scot Harvath is called in when a missing terrorism suspect drowns off the Italian coast.

12  1


DEADFALL, by Linda Fairstein. (Dutton) The Manhattan prosecutor Alexandra Cooper becomes a suspect.

13  1


BATTLEFRONT II: INFERNO SQUAD, by Christie Golden. (Del Rey) A prequel to the “tar Wars”ideo game Battlefront II features the Imperial soldiers of Inferno Squad.

14 12 2


BEFORE WE WERE YOURS, by Lisa Wingate. (Ballantine) A prominent South Carolina lawyer, researching her grandmother’ past, learns about a real-life Tennessee orphanage that kidnapped children and placed them for adoption with wealthy people.

15 10 2


THE BREAKDOWN, by B. A. Paris. (St. Martin's) In this psychological thriller, a woman is plagued by guilt over not having stopped to help a driver who turns out to have been murdered, and by fear of early-onset dementia.

Document NYTF000020170814ed8d00030



World; Asia Pacific
 ISIS  Claims Suicide Bombing That Killed at Least 15 in Pakistan

By SALMAN MASOOD 
385 words
13 August 2017
12:02
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — suicide bomber riding a motorcycle rammed into a military truck near a busy bus station in southwestern Pakistan, killing at least 15 people, including eight soldiers, and wounding at least 40 others, military officials said on Sunday.

The Islamic State group claimed responsibility for the attack on Saturday in Quetta, the capital of Baluchistan Province in the southwest. A military spokesman said the attack had been aimed at sabotaging Independence Day celebrations, as Pakistan will mark its 70th anniversary on Monday.

Active-duty troops in the Pakistani Army have rarely come under attack in Quetta, although paramilitary forces and police officers have repeatedly faced assaults by militants in the city.

The explosion, which was heard far away and set off a fire that engulfed vehicles nearby, left several people critically injured. The wounded were taken to Civil Hospital and Combined Military Hospital.

The attack, near several important government and private buildings —ncluding the provincial assembly —enewed concerns about security arrangements in the city, which has long reeled under militant and sectarian violence despite the heavy presence of security forces and paramilitary soldiers.

Gen. Qamar Javed Bajwa, the Pakistani army chief, arrived in the city on Sunday morning to chair a high-level security briefing and visit the wounded at the military hospital, officials said. The interior minister, Ahsan Iqbal, had also traveled to the provincial capital on Saturday for meetings with senior civil and military officials.

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, has claimed to be behind several terrorist attacks in the province, which borders Afghanistan and Iran, in recent months.

Pakistani officials, however, played down the presence of the Islamic State in the province, asserting that the group does not have an organized presence there.

Vehicles burn after an attack by a suicide bomber on a motorcycle in Quetta, Pakistan, on Saturday. | Banaras Khan/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | An injured person was taken to a hospital after the blast in Quetta. | Banaras Khan/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | An injured Pakistani man after the blast in Quetta. The city is the capital of the southwestern province of Baluchistan, which borders Iran and Afghanistan. | Banaras Khan/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170813ed8d0018h



FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The War Without And the War Within

By CAELAINN HOGAN 
5,034 words
13 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
36
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

On a hazy morning this spring, at the entrance of the Al-Bayrouni cancer center in northeast Damascus, a wall of tires teetered atop a long mound of dirt. Where there were no tires, jagged sheets of metal or rusting barrels had been propped up to create a makeshift shield. The edges of the flat roof were lined with barrels and sandbags. The 500-bed facility, the biggest oncology hospital in Syria, stands on the edge of an old highway, near the Al-Assad and Harasta suburbs, overlooking an active front line between government and opposition forces. As the engines of passing warplanes sucked at the air overhead, soldiers patrolled the grounds. For the government, the highway is a direct supply line to the police hospital and barracks beside the cancer center. For the opposition, controlling the road would provide them a chance to break a siege that has left most medical facilities destroyed or empty.

From the guard's bunker, the face of Bashar al-Assad surveyed those arriving through dark aviator glasses. Throughout the hospital, too, Assad's face beamed down from framed portraits hung on nearly every ward. In the front lobby, Syrian and Palestinian flag bunting was draped from wall to wall. On the side of the building that faced the front line, many wards lay empty, scattered with unplugged monitoring machines, unwound bandages and creased bedsheets. Divots in corridors marked where shrapnel had knocked chunks of plaster from the walls. A wad of chewing gum had been stuck across a crack in a pane of glass. The army had soldiers stationed on the hospital's top floor; young men with guns slung over their shoulders paced the halls there, while a gaggle of white-uniformed nurses sat in a room nearby. One made a heart shape with her hands and blew a kiss at a rose-framed picture of the president. With the medical staff now outnumbering the patients, her days at the hospital were boring, she complained.

That day, like most days in recent months, the rainbow row of colored seats leading to the ward for children with cancer were almost all empty. Most of the mothers and fathers who did make it to this waiting area had faced a harrowing choice: Travel with their children along a road they knew had been the target of mortar fire, to a hospital that overlooked a front line; or stay put and pray the conflict would soon end, knowing that the disease could be spreading through the bodies of their children. Some of the parents had to leave their other children behind in cities being bombed, unable to see them for months, living alone in shelters and cheap hotels so their sick children could get treatment. One woman from Raqqa told me she paid thousands of Syrian pounds to a smuggler to walk by foot with her months-old baby, across terrain strewn with mines -- afraid that if they were caught she would be beheaded, but knowing that if they stayed, her newborn son would die from the cancer.

In one room, the lighter-fluid stench of chemotherapy clung to a girl's spindly body like a cloud. The shaking of the walls, as airstrikes found their mark nearby, couldn't shift the smell; it left a rusty taste in the mouth, stung the eyes. The 9-year-old was sitting up in bed, a blue blanket pulled over her legs. Her eyes were set intensely on the pen in her hand, drawing the round outline of a smiley face, next to shaky letters that spelled out her name: Shahd.

Shahd had grown accustomed to the sound of bombings. In east Damascus, the front line of the battle between government forces and the opposition had fluctuated since she arrived two months earlier. Her head was fuzzy bald, though her eyebrows remained. When she smiled -- mouth wide open, like the face she'd drawn on the page -- her teeth glinted a translucent gray, blackened by the intensity of the treatment. Shahd knew she was sick, but her mother had never spoken the word ''cancer'' to her. The diagnosis was Ewing's sarcoma, a rare form of cancer occurring in bones and soft tissue. A tumor on the eighth vertebrae of her spine restricted the movement of her legs. By the time she reached the hospital, Shahd's cancer had spread throughout her body. But over more than five journeys back and forth between the hospital and her home for chemo, some of the cancer had retreated and shrunk. She even regained some sensation in her legs. As long as they could still reach the hospital, her mother felt she still had control over her daughter's disease.

Seven-year-old Fatima Hadeed, a leukemia patient, had come from ISIS-held Raqqa; she sat on her bed in a swaddle of pink duvet, quietly watching everything around her as the orange chemo liquid flowed steadily from an IV bag. Damaged veins ran like strikes of lightning along the tops of her hands and up the soft fleshy skin of her inner arms. Just over a month earlier, she shared the room with 9-year-old Samar Hatabi, who grew up in Aleppo, in one of the now-gutted neighborhoods on the eastern side of the city. Samar also had leukemia. When she wasn't wearing the heavy-fringed wig that she put on to go outside, the short hairs sprouting from her bald head heralded the return of a widow's peak. The girls' parents would sometimes chat about the treatments their children were undergoing. They avoided speaking of what was happening in the cities they had left behind.

Throughout the ward, mothers sat sentry beside each bed. They had come from all over Syria to the front line just for this, to hold the hands of their children and stay with them, sleeping on pullout armchairs. At Children's University Hospital, in the Mezze neighborhood of Damascus, parents were not allowed to stay in the rooms. There was no space.

The children receiving treatment at Al-Bayrouni no longer reacted to the rattling windows and walls after each strike. Instead they talked about the things that young kids usually do: The last time they were in school. Their favorite hobbies. What they wanted to be when they grew up. The parents showed me photos from when their children still had hair. The eyes and the corners of the mouth matched up, but there was a vast distance between then and now. The cancer had worn down the children and claimed parts for itself.

The country where they have grown up has also been stripped of what their parents used to cherish. It is barely recognizable but still theirs. When airstrikes hit nearby, a woman reassured Shahd and the other children that it was the government. ''It is us,'' she stressed. ''It's normal, it's us.'' I wondered what that ''us'' meant to these families, who had come from both sides of the front lines.

In Syria these days, people talk about a ''cancer of fears.'' They blame the tumors in the bodies of their children on the traumas of war: on the daily fear of government airstrikes and opposition attacks; on the fumes breathed in from the use of dirty fuel since the oil fields were taken over by ISIS; on bodies weakened and warped from shortages of food. Many fear that even if the war ends, the conflict will mark the health of future generations. The effects of the carcinogenic materials used in the war will most likely only be reflected in Syrian cancer rates years down the line. An oncologist working in a clinic in besieged Eastern Ghouta, the site of chemical attacks, already reported significantly rising rates of cancer in her patients.

The fear of the parents at Al-Bayrouni -- that the war was the cause of their children's cancers -- is hard to prove or disprove. But the effects of the war on treatment and survival rates are clear. Delays in treatment can quicken progression and worsen outcomes. With cancer, after all, timing can be everything. If caught early, roughly 70 percent of patients with Ewing's sarcoma, the rare cancer Shahd was fighting, are alive five years later; but after the disease has spread, that figure drops to around 30 percent. For the most common form of childhood leukemia, five-year remission rates can reach 85 percent, but this can depend on its stage at diagnosis and how rapidly the cancer responds to treatment. The six-year conflict has claimed the lives of more than 300,000 Syrians, but as of 2014, 200,000 more have died from chronic diseases, including cancer. Of the millions who have fled the country, an estimated 27,000 were skilled physicians, more than half the total number of medical doctors who worked in the country before the conflict. Half the nation's hospitals and health centers have been destroyed, in many cases deliberately.

The Al-Bayrouni cancer center once received as many as 1,400 patients a day. Doctors there had high hopes of expanding the center, but now most of the beds lie empty, with wards damaged by shelling abandoned. After years of conflict, most hospitals, including Al-Bayrouni, face shortages of medicines and medical equipment, as well as a limited number of oncology professionals. The Ministry of Health's national cancer registry has reported that this year an estimated 25,000 new cancer patients will be in need of treatment. But the actual number of cancer patients is very likely much higher, possibly up to three times that number, because of disruptions in the registry's reporting and the mass displacement of people. In Damascus, oncology facilities have been overwhelmed, with patients coming from all over Syria to the capital. The Syrian government provides anticancer medicine free of charge in its public oncology facilities, but since the war began, these are not always available. Wars are expensive, and so the health budget has repeatedly been cut. The World Health Organization, according to a report it published in April, needs almost $7 million in the coming year to increase access to treatment for Syria's cancer patients. People who must procure medicine or medical supplies on their own turn to private pharmacies or black-market traders. But since the war began, the average salary of working Syrians has plummeted to around $70 a month. The cost of a single course of chemo can be equivalent to a year's salary.

These days, even the provision of health care has become politicized. American brand medicines once on the shelves of hospital pharmacies are now imported from government allies like Iran. Areas under siege are often cut off from medical supplies, and the only hospitals fully equipped to treat cancer patients are in government-controlled places, meaning free treatment is readily available to only those who can safely enter those areas.

Every day, a bus takes up to a dozen cancer patients from the Bab Al Hawa Hospital, the largest in opposition-held Syria, across to Turkey. The border is open to those with a medical referral, but only 30 people with chronic diseases like cancer are allowed per day. The waiting list is months long. Before the war, most would have gone to Damascus for treatment. But fear of the disease's progressing competes with the fear many have of going to a government-run facility, knowing that they came from opposition areas. Some recount stories of patients arrested while trying to reach government hospitals or made to pay bribes at each checkpoint.

In Gaziantep, a sprawling Turkish city, I visited a hostel that has been set up specifically for Syrians battling cancer in exile. A 35-year-old tailor named Jaber Abu Ali described the journey he took across the border every 20 days from opposition-held Idlib for chemo. He was not able to bring his pregnant wife and two young children across, so he had to go back and forth for treatment. Both he and his friend at the hostel, a 25-year-old named Ehsan Barakat, said it was impossible to seek treatment in Damascus. Ehsan traveled all the way from Dara'a, the birthplace of the revolution, to Turkey for treatment, even though Al-Bayrouni was only a few hours' drive from his home. On the way, he was captured by ISIS for one day. He had to pay a smuggler $200 to take him around government-held areas. Ehsan was hopeful that his thyroid cancer would be cured, but Ali was facing what seemed like an impossible battle. When I asked where his cancer had spread, Ali's hand rested on his abdomen, his side, his chest, his rib cage: The cancer was in his colon, his kidneys, his lungs. There was never cancer in his family before, he said. He blamed the war.

The risk of traveling in Syria had complicated treatment for almost everyone. Early on, as the war shifted and metastasized, roads became lifelines between different territories, crucial thruways of communication and control. Opposition forces were constantly trying to take over sections that connected the main bastions of government control. When fighting intensified, checkpoints often closed. Patients who were on buses, sick from chemo, were stuck for hours in the cold and in the heat, delirious from fatigue and fear, pain rippling through their bodies. Even for people in Harasta, in neighborhoods that had been under siege for years, it sometimes seemed impossible to reach Al-Bayrouni, though it was just a few minutes up the road.

The day I met Shahd, she had finally been told that she could go home after a two-week stay at the hospital. She had completed the round of chemo within a few days, but it had taken longer than usual for her to gain enough strength for the journey back to her home in Tartus, a government-held city on the Mediterranean coast, three hours north by car. Her cancer was advanced, which gave her a lower chance of ever being cured. But the treatment reduced the pain and the spread of the disease and could give her years more with her family. Even the slimmest of chances was worth the journey for her mother, Sabah.

When it was time to leave, a nurse pulled the blue curtain around Shahd's bed, and she and Sabah helped change the girl's clothes. They lifted Shahd gently into a wheelchair, her legs limp in front of her in baggy green pajamas. Sabah paced a small circle in heeled boots, making last arrangements over the phone for their trip. A man in army fatigues joined them, a cousin named Basel, who was stationed nearby. He wheeled Shahd down to a waiting car and lifted her into the back seat. The rumbles of the bombings in the distance continued as they sped off toward the sounds to catch a 1 p.m. bus.

Sabah had defied many people's advice in taking her daughter to Al-Bayrouni. Other parents at the hospitals in the city told her that terrorists were stationed along the edges of the road; they warned her that she could be shot on the way or blown up by a stray mortar shell. But Sabah had spent a month in Damascus waiting in crowded hospital hallways for her daughter to receive treatment. They were far from home, and she was close to losing hope. ''We decided we will go to Harasta, even if there are hundreds of terrorists,'' Sabah said. ''We can't wait much longer.'' They had made their first journey through a thick fog, watching the white blur of shapes pass by on the screen of Sabah's mobile phone, filming as the bus hurtled past the twisted frames of wrecked cars, like strange trees lining the road, afraid to watch with their own eyes.

For the family of Samar, the young leukemia patient from Aleppo, the ordeal began in July 2016. The girl's face began to turn yellow and then her walking became unsteady and painful. Her father, Ahmad, took her to the clinic run by the Red Crescent relief organization, next to the Aleppo University Hospital, where she stayed for more than two weeks for tests. When her leukemia was eventually confirmed, the doctors referred her to Basma, a support association for children with cancer, which operated the ward in the Al-Bayrouni hospital. The Al-Kindi Hospital in Aleppo, which used to be a top cancer center and a rival to Al-Bayrouni, had been destroyed in the war, occupied both by rebel and regime forces at different stages. It remained in the control of pro-government forces but was being used as a type of military base.

On Aug. 1, Ahmad and Samar's mother, Faiza, took Samar to Damascus. They gave her painkillers before the journey. For nine hours they traveled on a crowded bus. It had been a long time since they had left Aleppo, and the country they once knew now seemed almost entirely foreign. On the outskirts of their city, people displaced from the violence had set up camp in abandoned buildings. Bunkers piled with sandbags and checkpoints marked with oil barrels dotted the highway. They passed cities like Homs, whose decimation they had seen only in YouTube videos. At the time, the opposition forces controlled half of Aleppo, and in Harasta, pro-government airstrikes were hitting nearby. But Ahmad and Faiza had never questioned their decision to go to Damascus. Even though the roads were treacherous and the cost of traveling would leave their family nearly destitute, it was the only way to get the treatment their daughter needed.

In Damascus, they found themselves at Children's Hospital in Mezze, with its notorious overcrowding. Mezze is a mostly upmarket neighborhood, where the main public and university hospitals are situated, as well as a number of foreign embassies. The evening I visited the hospital, it was Mother's Day in Syria, and waiters in the upscale restaurants nearby were carrying cakes alight with sparklers to tables of gathered families. But on the ground floor of Children's Hospital, where the wards are too crammed for mothers to join their children, nearly 100 women were bedding down for the night. They stretched out on plastic chairs or curled atop thick blankets on the floor. By the elevators, they pressed their foreheads to the ground in prayer.

Faiza couldn't bear for Samar to stay there, so on their fourth day in the city, they made their first journey to Al-Bayrouni. They traveled back and forth every four or five days for the next five months. In between treatments, Samar's family shifted from one hotel to another, always desperate to find a cheaper room. They continued to pay rent for their apartment in Aleppo, where Samar's sister and brother remained. Ahmad was unemployed when Samar became sick; an injury had cost him his job at the local knitting factory. Ahmad and Faiza wanted to return to Aleppo, but they were afraid that if they did, the war would make it impossible for them to get back to Al-Bayrouni and Samar would miss her treatment. ''I refused to hear anything about what happened in Aleppo,'' Ahmad told me. ''If I heard someone talk about that, I would go away. We decided to not think of any other thing but our daughter.''

Fatima, Samar's roommate at Al-Bayrouni, lived less than a 10-minute drive from Children's Hospital, in the district of Mezze 86. It is a neighborhood of mainly Alawites, the Shia sect that Assad belongs to, but a far cry from the upscale houses closer to downtown. People from some of the wealthier areas of the city would most likely call it a slum. In the dappled light of their living room, Fatima's mother, a petite 34-year-old named Mediyah, scrolled through her phone for updates on the situation in Harasta.

Her daughter was barely a year old when the revolution began in Syria. It was the girl's grandmother, also named Fatima, who first noticed that the girl, then 6, was sick. At a local clinic in Raqqa, the doctor ran a blood test and suspected leukemia. It took a month to get a full diagnosis. The grandmother was determined that the girl be taken to Damascus for treatment. By the time she left her home with her uncle, Fatima's round little face was turning yellow.

Fatima and her uncle traveled by bus in the opposite direction from Damascus, through ISIS territory, to the heavily bombed, opposition-held border town of Azaz, where refugees cross to Turkey. Then they took another bus to Aleppo, Fatima weak and in pain, and crossed front lines to government-held territory. It took them a week to get to Damascus. Fatima was close to death when they arrived. Mediyah followed soon after, when it was clear her daughter would have to remain in Damascus. After a five-hour bus ride to another town, she took an airplane operated by a private donor that sometimes helped transport cancer patients and their relatives to the capital. ''My husband promised me he will try to come here,'' Mediyah said. ''It's too expensive here; he couldn't come right away.''

Over the first month, Mediyah and Fatima's uncle took the girl to the hospital a dozen times as an outpatient. When they realized it would be too difficult to travel back to Raqqa, Mediyah found the apartment in Damascus and the girl's grandmother joined them. Both women refused to speak about how they had managed to get out of Raqqa, ISIS's de facto capital. They declined even to speak the caliphate's name, only acknowledging there were ''armed groups'' there. Relatives abroad, they told me, had sent money to help them make the journey and to survive in Damascus. They wouldn't say anything about the men in their family, not the men's jobs or what they had done during the war. Both women became panicked and tight-lipped whenever the subject was raised.

The doctors had said it would take five years to consider Fatima cured of the leukemia. Her regular trips to the hospital would gradually decrease, dwindling to only a checkup every few months, but until Fatima was given the all-clear and Mediyah felt her daughter was safe, she was determined to stay in Damascus.

Mediyah tried to calculate in her head the number of times over the last eight months that she has taken Fatima to Al-Bayrouni, but she gave up after a few minutes and shrugged. On the days Fatima needed to be at the hospital for treatment, Mediyah took a local bus to a minivan to a point where they could transfer again for a short but tense drive to the hospital. Sometimes there was shelling on the highway. ''The war is easier on me than the sickness of my child,'' she said. On their last trip, the bus drove very fast, speeding through the checkpoints because of the fighting. It still took them an hour and a half to reach the hospital. And yet she preferred the journey to the front lines than going to the busy wards in Damascus. Despite the airstrikes around the hospital, she and Fatima felt at home there. Fatima recognized the doctors and the nurses. She could go to the art room to draw sometimes, when she was feeling strong enough. Mediyah could sleep beside her bed at night.

While Fatima and Mediyah were at Al-Bayrouni, the elderly Fatima cared for the five other children, sometimes for more than a week at a time. When they were all together in the apartment in Mezze, they rarely went out, except to go to the shops for food or to the pharmacies for Fatima's treatment. When I visited them at their home, all six children, three boys and three girls, sat together on a mattress on the floor. The youngest was only a year and a half old; the oldest was 14, a quiet boy who looked small for his age. Fatima sat with a bright wool hat over her smooth head, looking taller out of the hospital bed, her legs akimbo in jeans and sneakers, jostling with the siblings who sat with her. The window beside them faced the wall of another building, with electric wires hanging low over the narrow lane.

By the summer, the cost of living there was impossible for the family to afford. They gathered their belongings again to travel to Tabqa, a city recently reclaimed from ISIS. There, Fatima's father was waiting for them. Though the streets were still littered with rubble, bodies buried beneath, it was close to the place they considered home.

In May, after months of silence, a WhatsApp message came from Sabah, who was back home in Tartus. ''Shahd died,'' the message read. Shahd would have turned 10 in two weeks. She died on the ward at Al-Bayrouni, her mother at her side.

They had made the journey back to the hospital three times over those months. After each chemo session, Shahd would lose her appetite completely, her body weakening. As she lost strength, the tumors in her body made gains. ''The cancer reached all the way to her brain,'' Sabah said. In the final weeks, Shahd slipped into a coma. The Alawites believe that each person is born from a star and will return again to the sky, after taking many forms here on Earth. Though her daughter's departure left a hollow pit inside her, Sabah took strength from her belief that she would be reborn. ''I wish for that,'' she said. ''I'm waiting for her return.''

Shahd's body was taken to a plot of land owned by her father's family in a rural area far from their home, surrounded by mountainous forests, near the sea. Shahd was buried on the edge of a field that lay in the shade of tall oaks and the delicate boughs of walnut trees. There is no threat of violence on the road there, and Sabah and her surviving daughters can visit her without fear.

Not every parent who lost a child to cancer at the hospital had the chance to take that child home to be buried. Samar, who had sometimes shared Fatima's room, died on the last day of January. She was buried just south of Damascus. When I visited Faiza and Ahmad in Aleppo, empty fields and even the stretch of a salt lake were dotted with the angular skeletons of buildings and the twisted frames of burned-out cars, punctuated by tanks or military bunkers. Less than three months earlier, after a brutal siege, east Aleppo was reclaimed by the Syrian Army, and when I arrived, families were picking their way through the streets, returning to collapsing buildings that used to be homes.

Ahmad met me outside the doorway of a lightless building downtown. A grassy verge opposite the house was a crooked skyline of scattered headstones in the dark, one of the improvised graveyards throughout the city. The family had moved from east Aleppo five years ago, their neighborhood besieged, their house eventually destroyed. Up two flights of a concrete stairwell, Ahmad sat on the carpeted floor of their small rental apartment with Faiza and their 20-year-old son, Abdulsalam, and 22-year-old daughter, Aisha. In Ahmad's hands was a lilac plastic bag, crisscrossed with creases from being folded and unfolded. One by one, he gingerly removed pieces of paper from the bag, the records that documented the last months of his daughter's life. From a shelf, Faiza pulled out a dusty black plastic bag and removed two of Samar's pink school bags. On an old mobile phone that she used as a photo album, she scrolled through pictures of her daughter in Damascus: Samar grinning in a park, her hip cocked and her hand on her waist, a glossy black bob wig on her head.

In the last days of her life, Samar could not walk, so Ahmad carried her wherever they went. They would take a bus to the hospital; they took a taxi only once, on the last day of her life, when she became so ill she was choking for air. ''She couldn't breathe anymore, she couldn't breathe alone,'' he said. Ahmad cupped his palms around his phone and showed me the last photo he took of his daughter. She was laid out on a hospital table, a small cocoon he could scoop easily in his arms, her small, sunken face wrapped in a delicate white shroud.

Ahmad was saving money to travel back to Damascus, to visit his daughter's grave. A week after my visit with him, I went and saw it myself. It was in a brand-new section of a martyrs' cemetery that opened several years ago to provide cheaper graves to meet the demand for burial space since the war. A bare plot marked Samar's final resting place. There was no headstone, only a number, which Ahmad had memorized by heart, just as he remembered her age: 9 years, 22 days.

Caelainn Hogan lives in Dublin. She has written for Harper's Magazine, The New Yorker and Vice.

(MM36-MM37); Fatima Hadeed, 7, in the apartment where her family lives in the Mezze 86 neighborhood of Damascus. (MM38); Mothers waiting topass the security checkpoint to enter Children's Hospital in Damascus. (MM39); Young patients at Children's Hospital. (MM40-MM41); Sabah Abrahem and her 9-year-old daughter, Shahd Ghareb, who was fighting Ewing's sarcoma, prepare to leave the Al-Bayrouni cancer center in Harasta after receiving a chemotherapy treatment. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SEBASTIÁ LISTE/NOOR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM42-MM43) 

Document NYTF000020170813ed8d0006z

