 


Foreign Desk; SECTA
A Freed but Scarred City Tests Trump

By MICHAEL R. GORDON 
1,692 words
2 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

TABQA, Syria -- The young man unburdened himself about the dark years of living under the Islamic State as a crowd of curious onlookers gathered in front of a weathered storefront in the town marketplace.

The militants, said the man, a 22-year-old named Abdul Qadir Khalil, killed many residents, doled out precious jobs and severely limited travel to and from the city. ''When they left, our situation was much better mentally,'' Mr. Khalil said. ''If things were fixed, our society would be better and we would come to our normal life.''

He ticked off a list of the things Tabqa needs: electricity, water, fuel and a sizable bakery. Then, laughing about his new freedom to openly denounce the militants, he said, ''If they ever come back, they will slaughter all of us.''

Life is slowly returning to the streets of Tabqa, a city of about 100,000 strategically positioned just 30 miles west of Raqqa, the capital of the self-proclaimed caliphate of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

Women are well represented on the town's new governing council, and small children greet visitors with a ''V'' sign for victory.

But nearly two months after the Islamic State was driven off by the American-led coalition fighting the militants, the needs are even more vast than Mr. Khalil suggested, with no functioning hospitals or schools, not even the heavy equipment needed to uncover the dead.

In that respect, Tabqa stands as a laboratory for testing the Trump administration's policy of empowering commanders in Syria to make battlefield decisions to defeat the militants while relying on a small team of State Department officials and Army civil affairs units to cement the uneasy peace that follows -- all without getting into the business of nation-building.

It is also a dry run for the impending capture of Raqqa, a larger, far more densely populated and better defended city.

''Tabqa is the most immediate post-ISIS town where we could really get our feet on the ground,'' said Brett H. McGurk, President Trump's special envoy to the coalition.

The United States' strategy in Syria is to wage the ground campaign against the Islamic State through local forces in order to maintain a small American footprint. But even that requires the deployment of American advisers, plus artillery, satellite-guided rockets, Apache attack helicopters and Army Rangers -- some 1,000 troops in all. The American presence comes as Iran and the Shiite militias it backs, as well as the Syrian government and Russia, are maneuvering to control territory in eastern Syria after Raqqa is taken.

The visit to Tabqa on Thursday was a first opportunity for Mr. McGurk, a small group of senior coalition officials and the Western news media to get a look at the newly liberated city, still struggling to recover from the physical and psychological scars of nearly three years of harsh control by the militants.

''Basically, what you've got here is hundreds, if not thousands, of bodies in the rubble, which is causing a lot of flies, the flies are biting kids, the kids are getting infected,'' said Al Dwyer, a senior official with the United States Agency for International Development, as American Special Operations forces drove to Tabqa in armored S.U.V.s. ''Lot of rats. Smells. This is keeping people from coming back in.''

The Tabqa operation was proposed in mid-March to Lt. Gen. Stephen Townsend, the commander of the American-led task force that is battling the Islamic State, by the top commander of the Syrian Democratic Forces, the combination of Syrian Kurds and Arab fighters who would provide the ground troops for the battle. It was approved without a single White House meeting.

Just one week later, hundreds of Arab and Kurdish fighters, including many who had never flown before, were airlifted on American helicopters and Osprey planes to the southern banks of Lake Assad, across from Tabqa. Barges ferried their vehicles across the azure water while another group of Syrian fighters to the east hopped from island to island as they zipped along the Euphrates on American fast boats.

In the fierce battle that ensued, about 100 Kurdish and Arab fighters were killed and perhaps 10 times as many militants. One of the final confrontations occurred inside the 200-foot-tall Tabqa Dam, which used to supply 20 percent of Syria's electricity.

To try to save the dam, Syrian fighters cut a deal granting about 70 militants safe passage out of town. But the Islamic State did its best to sabotage the complex anyway: The aging red turbines were blown up while the control panels were sprayed with bullets.

Syrian engineers have been trying to get one or two turbines running by cannibalizing parts from the wreckage. But with no Soviet-era parts on hand, nobody seems to think that the structure will be generating power in the months ahead, and the hazards of working in and around the dam are still significant: Last week, one newly trained Syrian demining expert was killed when he triggered an improvised explosive device.

But the question foremost in the minds of Tabqa's residents is how they are going to return their lives to some semblance of normal. ''There is no electricity, no food, no bread, and we need fuel for our trucks,'' said Khalid Mohammed Ali Tata, 54. ''Also, there are no jobs.''

International politics has added to the challenge. The Syrian government stopped paying teacher and other government salaries several months ago, depriving many residents of the ability to buy what limited food is available.

The assumption is that the salaries will eventually start to flow again, if only so President Bashar al-Assad's government can demonstrate its nominal control of the region. But Syrian forces are blocked from coming closer to the town by a new ''deconfliction line'' that was negotiated by American and Russian generals, and it is not clear how quickly the authorities in Damascus might start the payments.

Turkey, annoyed by the United States' decision to train and arm a Kurdish militia it has claimed is linked to the separatist Kurdistan Workers' Party, has sealed its borders, including for the most basic humanitarian assistance. The United Nations is active in Syria but has yet to begin any relief efforts in Tabqa, and it has mounted only one effort outside of the areas squarely controlled by the Assad government.

That leaves the United States to serve as a stopgap for the most immediate needs. Nearly 50 tons of flour, paid for by the Pentagon, were trucked in from Iraq to an American-funded warehouse on Wednesday. Another large shipment of American food aid -- enough for 30,000 people for 30 days -- will be divided among several towns and camps for displaced people in the Raqqa area, including Tabqa.

The United States is also sending in heavy equipment to move debris and is funding demining efforts.

And the American-led coalition is vetting and training forces to hold Tabqa, Raqqa and other nearby areas after they are retaken. They are being put through a two-week training course and will be responsible for maintaining public safety, tracking down any Islamic State fighters in hiding, preventing revenge killings and generally keeping order.

The problems run far deeper than that, and it is not clear who, if anyone, will rebuild the town's collapsed and damaged buildings or fix the turbines inside the dam. But citing the lessons of Iraq, the Trump administration is staying away from nation-building, whether it involves picking local leaders or undertaking major reconstruction programs.

''We are not going to get beauty; it's about pragmatism,'' said Maj. Gen. Rupert Jones of the British Army, the deputy commander of the coalition force. ''If they have put their troops in harm's way, then it's got to be their design.''

But not all of the town's requests are being heeded. Shortly after driving over the dam, one coalition soldier pointed out a building where the Islamic State indoctrinated children as ''cubs of the caliphate,'' the militants' version of the Cub Scouts.

As Mr. McGurk, the president's special envoy, was meeting with the new Tabqa Civil Council, a leader of the body made an impassioned plea for help deprogramming the town's children, who have not attended normal schools since the Islamic State took control of the area.

''A fundamental problem in our society is that ISIS' ideology has been implanted in little kids' brains, which means it will carry on in the future,'' said Ahmad al-Ahmad, the co-president of the council. ''We need psychological assistance for the kids in school and to teach them the real way of living.''

The Americans said that they were ready to provide desks and chalkboards, but that the Tabqa council should direct requests to the United Nations International Children's Fund, when the United Nations finally reaches the town.

Even as they are trying to help Tabqa, American officials are trying to mobilize more international support for what they anticipate will be a far more demanding situation in Raqqa. Experts have already identified 400 potential ''stabilization sites'' in the city that may need to be repaired and cleared of mines and other explosives, like water treatment and electrical power plants, grain storage silos and other crucial parts of the city's infrastructure.

''Tabqa is a dry run,'' Mr. McGurk said. ''There is a lot of work ahead.''

A Syrian Democratic Forces fighter surveyed damage in Tabqa after the city was captured from the Islamic State in May. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RODI SAID/REUTERS); Abdul Qadir Khalil, center, said people in Tabqa lacked basic necessities like electricity, water, food and fuel. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL R. GORDON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A1); Above, Brett H. McGurk, center, the United States envoy to the international coalition fighting Islamic State militants, in Tabqa, Syria, last week. Left, a member of the security force. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RODI SAID/REUTER; MICHAEL R. GORDON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A13) 

Document NYTF000020170702ed720008l



Foreign Desk; SECTA
For Abused, Gay Iraqi in Turkey, U.S. Refugee Freeze Is Cruelest Blow

By PATRICK KINGSLEY and KARAM SHOUMALI 
975 words
2 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
13
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ISTANBUL -- For Mohammed, an Iraqi civil engineer, the cruelest experience of his life was not when his father tortured him for being gay.

It was not when Islamic State extremists took over the 26-year-old's hometown in northern Iraq, forcing him to flee to Turkey. Or when he says he was almost raped at knife point and later laughed out of a Turkish police station when he tried to report the crime. Nor was it in January, when President Trump first tried -- unsuccessfully -- to bar refugees from entering America.

As Mohammed tells it, the cruelest blow instead came this past week, when the United States Supreme Court agreed to reinstate Mr. Trump's 120-day freeze on refugee resettlement.

Tens of thousands of applicants for resettlement in the United States are affected by the freeze, and Mohammed is among the unluckiest: His application has been accepted for months, and he was simply waiting for the American government to give him an arrival date.

''That is the one that destroyed me the most,'' he said on Saturday, as he compared the many challenges he has faced in Iraq and Turkey. ''I still had some hope before. Now I have none at all.''

Mohammed's full name and current location are being withheld because of the dangers he faces in Turkey.

He is, ironically, fleeing much of the very extremism that Mr. Trump says he wants to wipe out. Mohammed left Mosul soon after Islamic State militants seized control of the city, when his sister warned him that their father had told the extremist group that he had a gay son.

But Mohammed's persecution had started much earlier. In 2009, when he was 18, his father, a former officer in the army of Saddam Hussein, caught him during a sexual encounter with male friends. So began half a decade of torture and abuse. As punishment for his sexuality, Mohammed's father beat him with metal, and sometimes burned him with a hot skewer. His legs and feet still bear the scars.

He was effectively kept under house arrest, allowed out only to complete his engineering degree, and later to work at a local engineering firm. If he was late arriving home, his father would increase the intensity of the beatings. Once, he says, his father punched his head so hard that Mohammed was hospitalized for two days with internal bleeding.

''Torture,'' Mohamed said, ''was a constant thing.''

With the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, closing in, Mohammed finally decided to escape, taking a bus to Turkey, Iraq's northern neighbor.

Here, he applied for asylum, beginning a long and often byzantine process during which he was screened by the United Nations refugee agency; the International Catholic Migration Commission, a nongovernmental group that has for decades been involved in the resettlement and vetting of refugees to the United States; and at least three American government agencies, in what United Nations officials have described as the world's most rigorous refugee-screening system. In the meantime, Mohammed's life has been neither safe nor stable.

Turkey currently has more non-Palestinian refugees than any other country in the world. But unlike in Western nations, refugees in Turkey are not given the same rights as the indigenous population. The vast majority do not have the right to work, and many resort to exploitative conditions on the black market.

Mohammed found odd factory jobs, but was always paid around half the legal minimum wage and never received the social security payments that Turkish workers get.

His employment was also easily terminated, as he found out late last year, when a factory manager fired him for developing a friendship with a gay colleague, Mohammed said.

That left him almost destitute, with no income to pay for the tiny room he shares with four strangers whom he does not trust. To keep afloat, Mohammed began to sell his clothes, then his camera, then his watch.

In January, after he was finally approved for resettlement in the United States, Mohammed hoped the windfall from hawking his possessions might tide him over until his departure was confirmed. But then Mr. Trump was inaugurated, and confirmation never came. Instead, the president suspended refugee resettlement, a move that was upheld by the Supreme Court decision this past week.

Now Mohammed is thinking of selling his last remaining valuable, his cellphone. He said he was down to his last 20 Turkish lira, less than $6.

With no family to call on for help, he feels afraid and abandoned, and ostracized because of his sexuality. While homosexuality is legal in Turkey, gay people face frequent abuse and discrimination. Istanbul's pride events have been banned for the past three years, and people trying to march have been tear-gassed and arrested.

One gay Syrian refugee was murdered in a particularly brutal fashion last summer, and Mohammed himself has been subject to abuse. He recalls being spat on for being gay, and was nearly raped at knife point last year before managing to call for help.

When he reported the episode to the police the next morning, ''they started laughing at me,'' Mohammed recalled. ''They said: 'You're not a girl so you can't be raped.'''

Jobless and friendless, Mohammed, who is represented by the International Refugee Assistance Project, a New York-based refugee rights group providing him with pro bono legal assistance, now feels ''on the edge between life and death.''

''I've been wronged all my life -- by my father, by my family, by Iraqi society, by Turkish society,'' he said in an interview.

''And now,'' Mohammed added, ''by the U.S. resettlement system.''

Follow Patrick Kingsley on Twitter @PatrickKingsley.

Document NYTF000020170702ed720008r



NONFICTION
Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Silk on a Stick

By AARON RETICA 
713 words
2 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
16
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A FLAG WORTH DYING FOR

The Power and Politics of National Symbols

By Tim Marshall

Illustrated. 290 pp. Scribner. $26.

Some books are not meant to be read straight through, but maybe that shouldn't be held against them. Even if we learn nothing profound from them, we may get something out of plowing in.

''A Flag Worth Dying For: The Power and Politics of National Symbols,'' by Tim Marshall, a longtime diplomatic and foreign correspondent for Sky News and the BBC, is just such a book. It takes us on a lightning tour of the world of flags, with extra space for the Stars and Stripes and the Union Jack, but touching down on nearly every continent and in dozens of countries.

There is something a little dutiful about this tour, but Marshall offers us a surprising fact or six along the way. I was interested to discover, for example, that Gilbert Baker, the designer of the rainbow flag that emerged as a symbol of gay pride in the late 1970s, was inspired by the ubiquity of the American flag during the bicentennial celebrations in 1976.

Marshall oscillates between telling the story of the way flags unite us and the way they divide us. He is acutely aware that they often do both at the same time, and it is this tension that brings out his most illuminating writing. In one revealing instance, he describes traveling on a bus to a soccer match. When a collection of Leeds United supporters spy a group of black teenagers out the window, they begin to yell at them: ''There's no black in the Union Jack! Send the bastards back!''

One thing Marshall has taken away from his many years reporting abroad is that no matter how cosmopolitan they might seem, nations are essentially ''tribes with flags,'' as the diplomat Tahseen Bashir famously put it while extolling the nationhood of his native Egypt. Marshall is especially good on how flags encode the history of the violence that brought the nations they represent into being and how quickly they can become emblems of racial and ethnic bigotry. But for all Marshall's sophistication, there are inevitably some puzzling choices. The flags of Turkey, Iran and Israel all appear in the chapter ''Colors of Arabia.''

Marshall also tries to make other categories of flags reveal more than they probably can, as when he describes the apocalyptic design choices of vicious nonstate actors like ISIS or a more benign one like that of the European Union. The United Nations banner, he says mawkishly, and against much of the evidence he presents, can serve as a ''reminder that we can come together and that for all our flaws, and all our flags, we are one family.''

The writing in books like this is often rushed and cramped on the one hand and glib and expansive on the other, and Marshall does not transcend the genre. The supposedly clever bits can be particularly annoying. When Marshall discusses Oliver Cromwell's abandonment of the royal flag in 1649, he mentions the regicide of King Charles I before remarking, ''Eleven years later ... one of them made a comeback and it wasn't the headless Charles.'' By the time racing's checkered flag makes an appearance on Page 260, readers may well be ready for it to fly.

''A Flag Worth Dying For'' does not pretend to have the kind of coherent argument about terrain begetting destiny that Marshall's previous book, ''Prisoners of Geography: Ten Maps That Explain Everything About the World,'' did, but it suffers from the absence of one nonetheless. Oddly, Marshall's clearest statement on the strength of feeling flags arouse occurs in the acknowledgments at the end of the book, where he points out that ''flags are an emotive subject,'' and then pretty much leaves it at that. Readers looking for an understanding of how silk waving from a stick can come to mean everything will be disappointed, but they will not leave empty-handed either.

Aaron Retica is a senior staff editor for the Op-Ed page of The Times.

Emotive subject: Flag-raising on Iwo Jima, Feb. 23, 1945. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOE ROSENTHAL/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170702ed720004d



FICTION
Book Review Desk; SECTBR
West Meets East

By JOSHUA COHEN 
1,178 words
2 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
17
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

COMPASS

By Mathias Éard

Translated by Charlotte Mandell

447 pp. New Directions. $26.95.

Edward Said, May Peace Be Upon Him, regarded Orientalism as an Occidentalist illusion, and the Orient itself as ''a theatrical stage affixed to Europe'' upon which ''Westerners'' from Flaubert to Napoleon projected their lavish fantasies of violent djinns and nymphomaniacal houris, which were ultimately more revelatory of the psychic yearnings of European culture than of the daily lives of diverse ''Easterners'': Turks, Egyptians, Iranians and Syrians.

Today, nearly 40 years after the publication of ''Orientalism,'' Said's thesis has been elevated to the status of dogma in Western academe, and among Western writers who -- having lost the public imagination and fighting increasingly internecine intellectual skirmishes -- have taken to issuing soft fatwas against one another for the sin of writing from the ''perspective'' or ''experience'' of a person (a fictional person) of another ethnicity or race. Meanwhile, Arabic and Persian writers -- the Others themselves -- keep being jailed, tortured and having their heads cut off.

''Compass,'' Mathias Éard's masterly new novel that attempts to redeem the specter of the Orient (it won the Prix Goncourt in 2015, and was shortlisted this year for the Man Booker International Prize), refers to Said prophet-style, as ''the Great Name.'' After acknowledging that the Palestinian-Manhattanite polymath ''had asked a burning but pertinent question: the relationship between knowledge and power in the Orient,'' the narrator goes on to say, ''I had no opinion, and I still don't, I think; Edward Said was an excellent pianist.''

Which is all that matters -- if not to Éard himself, then to the narrator, an insomniac musicologist named Franz Ritter, who lies bedridden in Vienna, the ''Porta Orientalis,'' fervid with his memories, and an unspecified but assuredly fatal illness. There's no room in Franz's sickroom for debate about what it means ''to appropriate,'' or ''to be appropriate''; his only concern is for beauty, because beauty -- especially nonverbal beauty, musical beauty -- is a foretaste, or forehearing, of Paradise, where we'll all finally speak the same language again, akin to the twittering of birds.

Éard -- the French author of 2012's ''Street of Thieves,'' set during the Arab Spring, and of the widely lauded ''Zone,'' a 2008 novel about Mediterranean Europe, Nazism and the Yugoslav wars presented all in the course of a single train journey, and a single 500-page sentence -- here posits aestheticism not as a political substitute, but as a political ''compass'': If you take pleasure from music, if you're good at performing or, above all, composing good music, then in his cosmology you're innocent, even if you happen to be what the Saidists would call a ''colonizer.''

In ''Compass,'' Orientalism is offered up as a third way or ''alterity'' -- the Orient not a place, even an imaginary place, but a passage, a circumvention of the East-West dialectic. The novel's characters -- modulated from major to minor to major again -- live in literal pipe dreams, which they access through opium, sex, the delirium of infirmity (syphilis or tuberculosis being the historical choice), and an almost fundamentalist submission to the religion of art. The narrator Ritter has written scholarship about how ''revolution in music in the 19th and 20th centuries owed everything to the Orient''; how Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, Schöberg, et al. used ''the Other to modify the Self, to bastardize it, for genius wants bastardy.'' He sits up through the night like a donnish Scheherazade, lecturing the darkness on the discredited discipline of Orientalism, through a survey of the careers of the Orientalists he's known: disreputable loners all; emeritus drifters at home nowhere, or only in museums, library archives, and more ancient forms of ruins. There's the Prussian archaeologist and ''madman'' Bilger; the Aryanologist and ''specialist in Arabic coitus'' Faugier; and Ritter's inamorata, his Unsterbliche Geliebte (Immortal Beloved), Sarah, a Jewish Parisienne who has captured his heart (her research interests include legends of medieval European cardiophagy, or heart-eating). As Ritter counts down the clock to morning -- to the sun, which rises in the cardinality of his obsession -- he turns to recounting times past, excavating the precipitous collapse of his profession in the last days ''before Google'' and ISIS, when he and his colleagues still traveled through the region, and lived it up on fieldwork grants in Tehran (until the Islamic Revolution), and Damascus, Aleppo and Palmyra (until the civil war).

Ritter inflects his fictional peregrinations with nonfictional prose-flights concerning musical Orientalism, which read like Thomas Bernhard editing Wikipedia, or a Levantine-themed edition of Grove's Dictionary of Music. Famous names and motifs -- Mozart's Rondo Alla Turca, Beethoven's Marcia Alla Turca -- entwine with excursuses on obscurer maestros: a brief account of Gaetano Donizetti, a composer of bel canto, leads to a biographical sketch of his brother, Giuseppe, who ''introduced European music to the Ottoman ruling classes.'' Occasionally, Ritter's virtuoso solo will take in literature too, but even then his predilections tend to veer from the canon, with ruminations on Robert Musil followed by a portrait of his second cousin Alois Musil, an Austro-Hungarian priest who'd ''set off, on camelback, in the company of a few Ottoman gendarmes 'loaned' by the kaimmakam of Akaba, into the desert to find the famous pleasure castle of Qasr Tuba, which no one had heard of for centuries, except the Bedouins.''

This is where Ritter's Orientalism dovetails with Said's: both are alternative histories of the West, the stifled chronicles of its cravings for emancipation (from liberalism), or escape (from la vie bourgeoise). But while Said meant his thesis in a corrective spirit, Ritter means his as a tragedy -- not least because he's expressing himself in prose, which is a fallen medium. Words, the medium of poetry but also of criticism, have to be translated to be made comprehensible, while music is universally coherent, the expression of pre- or post-verbal emotions in time.

''All art constantly aspires toward the condition of music'': Walter Pater's fusty dictum is a neo-Romantic cri de coeur for Éard. All of his books share the hope of transposing prose into the empyrean of pure sound, where words can never correspond to stable meanings, but can merely indicate the energies underlying an attempt at stabilizing meanings, and the bitterness that ensues when those attempts inevitably fail (even in Charlotte Mandell's resoundingly successful translation). Ritter's record of this pursuit is the record of his pursuit of love -- but of a distant love, a doomed love -- a love that won't be returned; not by Sarah, not by the ''foreign'' cultures he dwells among, and, most grievously, not by music itself. He becomes the bard of a world growing smaller even as its rifts become larger. He's the composer of a discomposing age, lamenting that ''these days only Khomeini talks about love.''

Joshua Cohen's next novel, ''Moving Kings,'' will be published this month.

Mathias Éard (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARC MELKI) 

Document NYTF000020170702ed7200037



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Iraq Recaptures Mosque in Mosul, but Only Rubble Remains

By MEGAN SPECIA and RICK GLADSTONE; Alissa J. Rubin contributed reporting from Erbil, Iraq, and Falih Hassan and Omar Al-Jawoshy from Baghdad. 
898 words
30 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
12
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq announced the recapture of Al Nuri Grand Mosque in Mosul on Thursday from Islamic State militants, calling it a sign of the end of the extremists' grip on the region and vowing to chase them out of the country.

''We are seeing the end of the fake Daesh state, the liberation of Mosul proves that,'' Mr. Abadi said on Twitter , using the Arabic acronym for the Islamic State. ''We will not relent. Our brave forces will bring victory.''

Mosul has still not been entirely wrested from Islamic State control despite a complex eight-month battle for the city. But Thursday's announcement signified a further push to eliminate the group.

As Iraqi forces claim control of the mosque for the first time since 2014, all that is left is debris. The mosque's distinctive leaning minaret dominated the skyline of Mosul's Old City for nearly eight centuries, standing as a symbol of the city's deeply rooted cultural heritage.

The mosque complex is nearly gone, reduced to a pile of rubble on June 21, after Islamic State militants packed the building with explosives as their grasp on the city continued to slip.

The iconic 12th century Al Hadba minaret is now just a stump, seen broken nearly to its base in footage released by Iraqi forces who entered the area where the mosque once stood.

They assessed what remained as they stepped carefully through crumbling walls and climbed over debris that once made up one of the city's grandest buildings.

''This is the remains of the minaret, which was blown up by the terrorist gang,'' said one official from Iraq's counterterrorism service in a video released by the group.

The intricate detailing on the minaret can be seen peeking out over crumbling debris, but its top is gone.

''And this is the dome of the mosque, which was also blown up by the terrorist gang,'' the man says as the camera cuts to a shot of the green dome that now sits precariously atop damaged walls. It is one of the few distinctive features of the building still visible amid the ruin.

After the city was captured by the Islamic State in 2014, the mosque played a starring role in the group's propaganda as it grabbed power in the region.

It was the setting for a rare 2014 public speech by the group's professed leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , in which he declared a caliphate and asserted control over Mosul. It was the last time he was seen publicly.

The group's notorious black flag has been flying from the top of the Al Hadba minaret since that summer.

Before the Islamic State seized control, the mosque was long a valued landmark the country sought to preserve.

In 2012, Unesco identified the mosque's minaret for assessment and preservation, after fears that its teetering posture could lead to collapse if measures were not taken. The local governorate had planned to work alongside local officials to ensure its survival. Last week, the director general of Unesco, Irina Bokova, lamented the loss of the building.

''Al Hadba minaret and Al Nuri Mosque in Mosul were among the most iconic sites in the city, and stood as a symbol of identity, resilience and belonging,'' Ms. Bokova said in a statement. ''This new destruction deepens the wounds of a society already affected by an unprecedented humanitarian tragedy.''

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, has been under an intensifying assault in Mosul and across Iraq's western border with Syria, where the extremist group is losing its grip on Raqqa, its de facto capital for the past three years. Tens of thousands of civilians remain trapped in both cities.

Unicef said on Thursday that thousands of children in western Mosul are stuck there because of the fighting.

''Boys and girls who have managed to escape show signs of moderate malnutrition and carry psychosocial scars of the conflict,'' Peter Hawkins, the Unicef representative in Iraq, said in a statement.

Aid groups that have been helping displaced civilians in Syria and Iraq expressed strong caution about the Iraqi prime minister's victorious proclamation. They emphasized that the fighting in Mosul was by no means over.

The International Rescue Committee , which responds to the most urgent humanitarian emergencies in more than 40 countries, said in a statement that as many as 1.5 million Iraqis have been unable to escape Mosul, and that at least 150,000 people, half of them children, still live in other areas of Iraq controlled by the Islamic State.

''The retaking of Mosul does not mean an automatic end to the suffering of the 1.5 million people that spent more than two years living under harsh ISIS rule,'' said Wendy Taeuber, the International Rescue Committee's Iraq director. ''Despite the declaration, ISIS still controls some areas in the Old City of Mosul and ongoing fighting will continue to threaten the lives of civilians.''

The destroyed Al Nuri Grand Mosque in Mosul. Iraqi forces claimed control of the mosque for the first time since 2014. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FELIPE DANA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170630ed6u0005v



Times Insider
What We’e Reading

Compiled by ANDREA KANNAPELL 
657 words
30 June 2017
22:07
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

New York Times reporters and editors are highlighting great stories from around the web. You can receive What We’e reading by email, and let us know how you like it at wwr@nytimes.com.

Facebook Rules

From ProPublica: —n Tuesday, Mark Zuckerbergannounced that Facebook now has two billion monthly users. He also recently issued a new mission statement: “o give people the power to build community and bring the world closer together.”hat power is largely influenced by how those two billion people can express themselves via text, images and video in their posts. In this investigation, Julia Angwin and Hannes Grassegger reveal the secret guidelines that Facebook’ moderators use to distinguish between hate speech and political expression, and shed light on the rules’hortcomings. —ynthia Collins, editor, social media

_____

Lots to Talk About

From The New York Times: More partisan writing you shouldn’ miss. Writers from the left, right and center react to the Supreme Court’ decision on the travel ban, the health care bill and more. —nna Dubenko, senior digital strategist

_____

Defenseless

From Longreads: Two weeks at a migrant shelter in Ciudad Juáez, Mexico, yielded stories of dashed hopes, trauma and horror, as well as a picture of a priest trying to help. “he strange thing is that migrants exist, but at the same time they do not exist, because they have no identification papers,”e says, “nd therefore everyone does whatever they want to them.”In English or Spanish.) —ernanda Santos, Phoenix Bureau chief

_____

Escape to Africa

From Guernica: Nina Simone, the singer and pianist who blended jazz, gospel, blues and so many other styles she seemed to defy classification, spent three years living in Liberia during the mid-1970s. This story vividly recalls her time there, a period in which she barely recorded or performed but most certainly socialized. Liberia brought Simone “elease, a lick of freedom”rom the United States’ppressive racial climate but, in the end, “adn’ nourished her work.”—andy Archibold, deputy sports editor

_____

‘ven the Devil Has Left’

From The Atavist: You might not think to ask what happens to ISIS soldiers who are killed. The writer, a fellow news assistant, did, and he takes readers on a dark journey behind the Mosul front line where victory and defiance take precedent, and the treatment of the dead flies directly in the face of tradition. —emy Tumin, news assistant

_____

Second Skin

From Bloomberg Businessweek: A company in Iceland is pioneering a treatment that uses dried and processed fish skin to heal human wounds. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the treatment last year. Once processed, “ne gram of fish skin is worth more than a gram of gold,”ays the company’ chairman. —atrick Boehler, briefings

_____

The Year of the Tick

From Slate: This year, the risk of Lyme disease is expected to be high, especially if you live in the Northeast, Mid-Atlantic or Midwest. This writer, who has covered the tick beat for Nature and Scientific American and even started a tick Facebook group, “ick Talk,”ells why. She also offers five strategies to protect your family. —ynda Richardson, senior staff editor, Travel

_____

The First Big Thing

The Wall St. Journal: A fun trip back in time with Joanna Stern as she tries to make it through a whole day with an original iPhone from 2007. If you owned one of these marvels, the video might make you nostalgic. If you waited for a 3G or a 4 before you finally kicked your BlackBerry habit, it’l make you feel glad you were patient. —ichael Roston, senior staff editor, Science

Noah Berger/Associated Press | David Mcnew/Getty Images | Jose Mendez/European Pressphoto Agency | Sam Flak/The New York Times | Bryan Denton for The New York Times | Paulo Whitaker/Reuters | Ben Garver/Berkshire Eagle, via Associated Press | Shannon Stapleton/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170630ed6u0086h



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Reverting to Its Roots To Pose Insurgent Threat

By ERIC SCHMITT 
1,021 words
30 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The Islamic State has carried out nearly 1,500 attacks in 16 cities across Iraq and Syria after they were declared freed from the militants' control in recent months, providing new evidence that the group is reverting to its insurgent roots and foreshadowing long-term security threats.

The information was compiled by the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point in a study made public on Thursday that warns that any military gains will fall short without increased efforts to restore the security, governance and economies in territory once held by the Islamic State.

''Pushing the Islamic State out as the formal governing party in a territory is not a sufficient development when it comes to ending the group's ability to enact violence against individuals in Iraq and Syria,'' the 20-page report said.

American diplomatic and military leaders say an even greater challenge than ousting the Islamic State, or ISIS, from its self-declared religious state, or caliphate, in eastern Syria and northern and western Iraq may well be the daunting political and economic reconstruction in the years ahead.

Counterterrorism specialists said the new study illuminates a trend that has been emerging for several months, as American-backed ground forces in Iraq and Syria have steadily rolled back territorial gains the Islamic State achieved in 2014 and used as the basis for its global appeal to Muslims to come join the caliphate. Now, its strongholds of Mosul, Iraq, and Raqqa, Syria, its self-declared capital, are besieged, and senior leaders have fled as opposing forces close in.

''ISIS has anticipated the loss of its government for over a year,'' said William McCants, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and the author of ''The ISIS Apocalypse: The History, Strategy and Doomsday Vision of the Islamic State.'' ''They are prepared to wage a war from the shadows to reclaim it.''

The report's authors, Daniel Milton and Muhammad al-Ubaydi, say their findings aim to draw a more accurate picture of the military challenges in Iraq and Syria, especially in maintaining security in cities large and small that have been reclaimed from the Islamic State.

''Despite all of these positive connotations, the liberation of cities in Iraq and Syria has proved to be much more of a mixed bag for those living in the aftermath,'' the report said. ''Part of this is the challenge of governing post-liberation areas where city infrastructure has been destroyed and where security threats still remain.''

The report cites the example of Falluja, which was freed by Iraqi forces in June 2016.

Many months later, news media reports suggest that residents still face an array of challenges, such as destroyed buildings, live Islamic State munitions buried in the rubble and the continuing threat of Islamic State attacks, the report said.

In March 2017, the mayor of Falluja was still living in Erbil, a city in Iraqi Kurdistan in northern Iraq, and traveling to Falluja only on certain days for work.

The report draws on Islamic State claims that it carried out 1,468 attacks in 16 cities -- 11 in Iraq and five in Syria -- from the time insurgents were driven out of those cities until April.

In some cases, violence dropped off sharply once the militants were routed, with the Islamic State either unwilling or uninterested in carrying out harassing attacks ranging from small-arms ambushes to suicide attacks. But in other cities, the threat of violence remains pervasive.

The eastern part of Mosul, in northern Iraq, has had the highest number of attacks per month, 130, since Iraqi forces drove out Islamic State fighters. Baiji, Iraq, has the second-highest number of monthly attacks, at 21.

Islamic State fighters have employed a variety of tactics against cities they once controlled.

Attacks that occur from a distance, employing weapons such as rockets and sniper rifles, were used in 56 percent of all strikes, while suicide bombings were used in only about 5 percent of operations, the report found.

In the western Iraqi city of Ramadi, the Islamic State used a large number of improvised explosives, particularly those called ''sticky'' bombs because assailants usually attached them to a car or truck using adhesive.

Suicide operations, while less common over all, have been used consistently to terrorize cities after they were freed from Islamic State control.

But the relative difficulty of preparing and carrying out such attacks, including finding makeshift armor and retrofitting vehicles with it and building bombs, still makes them a selective weapon of choice.

''More complex suicide bombings, particular those involving vehicles, cannot be assembled on the spot,'' the report concluded.

Insurgent activity in cities after the Islamic State's defeats varies in the two countries (more in Iraq than in Syria), with researchers suggesting a correlation between proximity of the liberated city to the front lines.

For instance, Ramadi is 32 miles closer to Islamic State territory than Falluja. Falluja's average number of monthly attacks is just over one, while Ramadi's is nearly 11, the report found.

Researchers also found that the Islamic State maintained the resources and expertise to carry out strikes against areas in which it was defeated, but seemed focused on avoiding operations that would exhaust its strengths in those areas, and on its ability to fight there in the future.

Enduring security, however, has not guaranteed political reconciliation. ''Even in locations where the Islamic State is driven out and relative peace is restored, difficult political challenges remain,'' the report said.

In March in Manbij, Syria, the report noted, United States forces intentionally drove through the streets of the city to prevent fighting between the two American allies -- the Turkish Army and the Arab and Kurdish fighters that made up the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Eric Schmitt on Twitter @EricSchmittNYT .

Iraqi soldiers called to survivors of an Islamic State suicide car bombing in Mosul in March. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170630ed6u0004e



Lens
Multimedia
In the Marshlands, ‘nother Face of Iraq’

By JOHN OTIS 
610 words
29 June 2017
10:00
NYT Blogs
NYTB
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved 

After 18 months covering the battle against Islamic State fighters in northern Iraq, Emilienne Malfatto felt compelled to show a less-violent side of the war-torn nation. And she found one in Chibayish, a small district in the Mesopotamian marshes.

“hen you say ‘raq,’eople just think war: the two wars in Baghdad or bombings,”s. Malfatto said. “ut you also have this beautiful place with beautiful people. It’ like another face of Iraq.”

The marshlands, comprising a nearly 8,000-square-mile area, are at the junction of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers. Their denizens, the Ma’an —lso known as the Marsh Arabs —ive free from threats posed elsewhere by ISIS and militias.

She had first journeyed to Chibayish in late 2016, going alone to develop rapport and trust with members of the community. She benefited both from her command of the language and by being female. Women were quick to embrace and engage her, Ms. Malfatto said, explaining that a male stranger would not elicit that same quick trust or openness.

“eople were really willing to open up,”aid Ms. Malfatto, who extolled the Ma’an’ remarkable hospitality. She forged strong bonds with several families who offered shelter in their reed houses, provided food and arranged boat rides into the marshes, which she described as having a mythical quality. She also made sure to be respectful of their conservative customs.

“ am absolutely not a religious person, and I am quite fascinated by faith as an object of study,”he said. In particular, she was struck by the levity that accompanied daily prayer, and by the way such worship was integrated into everyday moments. She hopes her portrayal of Muslims will be a counterbalance to the current stigmatization of Islam in political debate and the media.

The families gave Ms. Malfatto intimate access to everyday life in the marshes, including a family eating a breakfast of fresh buffalo milk, sugary tea and homemade bread; boat drivers piloting along murky waters; and portraits of Ma’an women with well-worn faces and hands.

The last few decades have brought changes to the Iraqi marshlands. Once, they had been a tourist destination, home to a variety of wildlife. But in the 1990s, Saddam Hussein drained the marshlands in an attempt to flush out Shiite rebels who had fled there after the Persian Gulf war of 1991.

After U.S. forces toppled Hussein’ regime in 2003, the Ma’an returned to the marshes, destroying the dams and dikes that had been constructed. Water again flowed through the area, once more allowing vegetation and livestock to thrive.

However, threats to the marshlands remain, a result of climate change and dam construction on the rivers. Rising temperatures have led to large amounts of water evaporation. Construction of newer dams upriver in Turkey, where the headwaters of the Tigris and the Euphrates are located, has also reduced the rivers’low.

Twice in the last 10 years —n 2008 and in 2015 —hose conditions led to the marshes nearly vanishing. It’ likely they will dry up yet again, perhaps this time for good. And though Iraq is still grappling with ISIS and war recovery, Ms. Malfatto hopes that the threat to the Ma’an and their livelihood will not go ignored.

“raq has other problems,”he said. “aybe they think they have more important stuff to deal with. On the other hand, they cannot let this part of the country die.”

Follow @emalfatto and @nytimesphoto on Twitter. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.

Document NYTB000020170629ed6t00001



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Hacks Raise Fear Of N.S.A. ARSENAL

By NICOLE PERLROTH and DAVID E. SANGER 
1,311 words
29 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Twice in the past month, National Security Agency cyberweapons stolen from its arsenal have been turned against two very different partners of the United States -- Britain and Ukraine.

The N.S.A. has kept quiet, not acknowledging its role in developing the weapons. White House officials have deflected many questions, and responded to others by arguing that the focus should be on the attackers themselves, not the manufacturer of their weapons.

But the silence is wearing thin for victims of the assaults, as a series of escalating attacks using N.S.A. cyberweapons have hit hospitals, a nuclear site and American businesses. Now there is growing concern that United States intelligence agencies have rushed to create digital weapons that they cannot keep safe from adversaries or disable once they fall into the wrong hands.

On Wednesday, the calls for the agency to address its role in the latest attacks grew louder, as victims and technology companies cried foul. Representative Ted Lieu, a California Democrat and a former Air Force officer who serves on the House Judiciary and Foreign Affairs Committees, urged the N.S.A. to help stop the attacks and to stop hoarding knowledge of the computer vulnerabilities upon which these weapons rely.

In an email on Wednesday evening, Michael Anton, a spokesman for the National Security Council at the White House, noted that the government ''employs a disciplined, high-level interagency decision-making process for disclosure of known vulnerabilities'' in software, ''unlike any other country in the world.''

Mr. Anton said the administration ''is committed to responsibly balancing national security interests and public safety and security,'' but declined to comment ''on the origin of any of the code making up this malware.''

Beyond that, the government has blamed others. Two weeks ago, the United States -- through the Department of Homeland Security -- said it had evidence North Korea was responsible for a wave of attacks in May using ransomware called WannaCry that shut down hospitals, rail traffic and production lines. The attacks on Tuesday against targets in Ukraine, which spread worldwide, appeared more likely to be the work of Russian hackers, though no culprit has been formally identified.

In both cases, the attackers used hacking tools that exploited vulnerabilities in Microsoft software. The tools were stolen from the N.S.A., and a group called the Shadow Brokers made them public in April. The group first started offering N.S.A. weapons for sale in August, and recently even offered to provide N.S.A. exploits to paid monthly subscribers.

Though the identities of the Shadow Brokers remain a mystery, former intelligence officials say there is no question from where the weapons came: a unit deep within the agency that was until recently called ''Tailored Access Operations.''

While the government has remained quiet, private industry has not. Brad Smith, the president of Microsoft, said outright that the National Security Agency was the source of the ''vulnerabilities'' now wreaking havoc and called on the agency to ''consider the damage to civilians that comes from hoarding these vulnerabilities and the use of these exploits.''

For the American spy agency, which has invested billions of dollars developing an arsenal of weapons that have been used against the Iranian nuclear program, North Korea's missile launches and Islamic State militants, what is unfolding across the world amounts to a digital nightmare. It was as if the Air Force lost some of its most sophisticated missiles and discovered an adversary was launching them against American allies -- yet refused to respond, or even to acknowledge that the missiles were built for American use.

Officials fret that the potential damage from the Shadow Brokers leaks could go much further, and the agency's own weaponry could be used to destroy critical infrastructure in allied nations or in the United States.

''Whether it's North Korea, Russia, China, Iran or ISIS, almost all of the flash points out there now involve a cyber element,'' Leon E. Panetta, the former defense secretary and Central Intelligence Agency chief said in a recent interview, before the weapons were turned against American interests.

''I'm not sure we understand the full capability of what can happen, that these sophisticated viruses can suddenly mutate into other areas you didn't intend, more and more,'' Mr. Panetta said. ''That's the threat we're going to face in the near future.''

Using the remnants of American weapons is not entirely new. Elements of Stuxnet, the computer worm that disabled the centrifuges used in Iran's nuclear weapons program seven years ago, have been incorporated in some attacks.

In the past two months, attackers have retrofitted the agency's more recent weapons to steal credentials from American companies. Cybercriminals have used them to pilfer digital currency. North Korean hackers are believed to have used them to obtain badly needed currency from easy hacking targets like hospitals in England and manufacturing plants in Japan.

And on Tuesday, on the eve of Ukraine's Constitution Day -- which commemorates the country's first constitution after breaking away from the Soviet Union -- attackers used N.S.A.-developed techniques to freeze computers in Ukrainian hospitals, supermarkets, and even the systems for radiation monitoring at the old Chernobyl nuclear plant.

The so-called ransomware that gained the most attention in the Ukraine attack is believed to have been a smoke screen for a deeper assault aimed at destroying victims' computers entirely. And while WannaCry had a kill switch that was used to contain it, the attackers hitting Ukraine made sure there was no such mechanism. They also ensured that their code could infect computers that had received software patches intended to protect them.

''You're seeing a refinement of these capabilities, and it only heads in one direction,'' said Robert Silvers, the former assistant secretary of cyber policy at the Department of Homeland Security, now a partner at the law firm Paul Hastings.

Though the original targets of Tuesday's attacks appear to have been government agencies and businesses in Ukraine, the attacks inflicted enormous collateral damage, taking down some 2,000 global targets in more than 65 countries, including Merck, the American drug giant, Maersk, the Danish shipping company, and Rosneft, the Russian state owned energy giant. The attack so crippled operations at a subsidiary of Federal Express that trading had to be briefly halted for FedEx stock.

''When these viruses fall into the wrong hands, people can use them for financial gain, or whatever incentive they have -- and the greatest fear is one of miscalculation, that something unintended can happen,'' Mr. Panetta said.

Mr. Panetta was among the officials warning years ago of a ''cyber Pearl Harbor'' that could bring down the American power grid. But he and others never imagined that those same enemies might use the N.S.A.'s own cyberweapons.

For the past six years, government officials were comforted by the fact that their most fervent adversaries -- North Korea, Iran, extremist groups -- did not have the skills or digital tools to inflict major damage. The bigger cyberpowers, Russia and China in particular, seemed to exercise some restraint, though Russia's meddling in the 2016 presidential election added a new, more subtle threat.

But armed with the N.S.A.'s own tools, the limits are gone.

''We now have actors, like North Korea and segments of the Islamic State, who have access to N.S.A. tools who don't care about economic and other ties between nation states,'' said Jon Wellinghoff, the former chairman of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.

So long as flaws in computer code exist to create openings for digital weapons and spy tools, security experts say, the N.S.A. is not likely to stop hoarding software vulnerabilities any time soon.

Document NYTF000020170629ed6t0005c



Foreign Desk; SECT
 ISIS , Aided by Ex-Taliban Groups, Makes Inroads in Northern Afghanistan

By JAWAD SUKHANYAR and ROD NORDLAND; Jawad Sukhanyar reported from Kabul and Rod Nordland from London. Fahim Abed contributed reporting from Kabul. 
882 words
29 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan -- Two Taliban groups that recently switched allegiance to the Islamic State have overrun an embattled district in northern Afghanistan, killing at least 10 government fighters and a large number of civilians, according to Afghan officials in the area.

In addition, government officials accuse the Islamic State fighters of being responsible for the deaths of 15 medical patients, but it was not immediately clear if they had died from their wounds or if they had been executed by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

The events represent a new front for the extremist group, which is opposed by the Taliban as well as by the government and has not previously had significant successes in northern Afghanistan.

The attack took place in the district of Darzab, in the southwest of Jowzjan Province, a remote area that has long seesawed between government and Taliban control, with local warlords switching allegiances frequently. Fighters loyal to the country's exiled vice president and warlord, Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, have also played a role.

Last week, Islamic State fighters overran all of Darzab, according to the acting district governor, Baz Mohammad Dawar. Government officials were able to regain control of the district's center, but not most of the rest of the territory; 10 police officers or soldiers were killed in the fight, he said.

With the district's clinic under Islamic State control, 15 patients were evacuated to the capital of Jowzjan Province, Sheberghan, but they died en route, Afghan officials said.

Mohammad Reza Ghafori, the spokesman for the provincial governor, said that Islamic State fighters had destroyed the 50-bed clinic, forcing the patients to flee.

Mr. Dawar said he thought the patients had died of their injuries on the rugged journey because of a lack of medical staff members in the area. Other officials said it seemed likely that the fighters, who controlled the area the patients had to travel through, had killed them.

In the village of Betaw in Darzab, Islamic State militants killed seven local police officers and 15 civilians, according to a local elder, and threatened to kill anyone who held funeral ceremonies for them. Some held them anyway.

''We live in a state of fear,'' the elder said by telephone. ''All of us who participated in the funeral are now scared that ISIS will attack and kill us.'' The elder spoke on the condition of anonymity because he feared retaliation by militants. It was not clear if the seven police officers were counted among the 10 cited by the governor, or if they were additional casualties.

''ISIS is more powerful than the Taliban were in Darzab because their fighters are brave,'' said Hajji Obaidullah, the former police chief of the district. He and other local officials said that two former Taliban commanders, Qari Hikmat and Mufti Nemat, had combined forces and switched their allegiance to the Islamic State in recent months. He said the government had rushed in hundreds of reinforcements, in the form of police officers and soldiers from other areas, to keep the district center from falling to insurgents.

''There is no Taliban in Darzab now, but only ISIS,'' said Halima Sadaf, a member of the Jowzjan Provincial Council, who is from Darzab.

''They took over the district before Eid al-Fitr,'' she said, referring to the holiday signifying the end of Ramadan that began on Sunday.

''But Afghan national security forces pushed them out of the capital of the district; the rest of the district is all with them,'' she added. ''They are strong and regrouping to launch another offensive.''

One of the Islamic State commanders, Mufti Nemat, was persuaded last year to quit the Taliban and join the government side after a heavily publicized intervention by General Dostum, the first vice president. Mufti Nemat was previously a religious teacher in General Dostum's home village. He later accused the government and General Dostum of reneging on promises made to him, announcing that he was joining forces with Qari Hikmat and would support the Islamic State.

Spokesmen for General Dostum and for the Taliban both confirmed that Mr. Nemat had left the Taliban, joined General Dostum's side, but then gone over to the ISIS camp. ''Nemat is a threat for the government. He knows the Darzab District and the area very well; he is a very dangerous guy,'' said Enayatullah Babur Farahmand, General Dostum's chief of staff. He blamed government inaction for alienating Mr. Nemat.

Zabihullah Mujahid, a Taliban spokesman who was reached via WhatsApp, said both local leaders who had joined ISIS had been rejected by the Taliban. Qari Hikmat, Mr. Mujahid said, had been sentenced to prison by the Taliban on corruption charges but he escaped and joined ISIS.

The Islamic State in Khorasan, as the group is known in Afghanistan, has generally been active only in the eastern province of Nangarhar, where fighters are locked in a struggle with the government as well as with local Taliban forces. Taking a district elsewhere in the country would be a significant advance for the group.

Document NYTF000020170629ed6t0003l



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Trump Warns Assad After Reports of Possible Gas Preparations

By MICHAEL D. SHEAR, HELENE COOPER and ERIC SCHMITT; Ben Hubbard contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon; Rick Gladstone from New York; and Gardiner Harris from Washington. 
1,344 words
28 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Trump has drawn a new red line for President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, with American officials describing preparations at a Syrian air base for a chemical weapons assault as they sought Tuesday to bolster Mr. Trump's threat to deter an attack.

But the administration elaborated little on the president's unexpected, 87-word statement a night earlier that warned that Mr. Assad would ''pay a heavy price'' if he again released toxic gas on rebel-held territory, leaving lingering questions in Washington and in the Middle East about Mr. Trump's intentions in Syria.

American officials have declined to rate their level of confidence about whether a chemical attack is imminent or to say whether the administration has pursued diplomatic channels to stop it. Military officials, who were initially caught off guard by Monday night's White House statement, would not discuss what options they were considering. Conversations with allies about the chemical weapons intelligence have been kept largely secret.

In previous administrations, debates about how best to deter atrocities have played out publicly around the world. President George W. Bush took months to argue his case -- later proved to be flawed -- about the existence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. President Barack Obama offered detailed explanations about his deliberations on how to respond when Mr. Assad used chemical weapons to kill 1,400 people in 2013.

On Tuesday, White House officials said only that Mr. Trump's statement spoke for itself.

That silence added to the uncertainty about whether a new military confrontation with Syria was looming just two months after Mr. Trump fired dozens of Tomahawk missiles at a Syrian base, Al Shayrat airfield, after a chemical weapons attack that killed dozens.

Mr. Assad's government vigorously denied the accusation of preparations for an attack, calling Mr. Trump's statement a provocation. And in Russia, a close ally of Syria's, a senior lawmaker accused the United States of using the declaration about chemical weapons to plan an attack on Syria.

As if to punctuate his contempt for the Trump administration's warning, Mr. Assad visited a Russian air base near Latakia in the western part of the country on Tuesday, accompanied by Gen. Valery V. Gerasimov, the Russian military's chief of staff. The Syrian news media, which reported the visit, distributed a video clip of Mr. Assad climbing into the cockpit of a Russian Sukhoi Su-35 parked at the base, where Russia has conducted many of its bombing operations to support the government's side in the six-year civil war.

In Washington on Tuesday, American officials explained only briefly what had prompted the White House effort at deterrence. Capt. Jeff Davis , a Pentagon spokesman, told reporters that what looked like active preparations for a chemical attack had been seen at Al Shayrat. One Pentagon official said an aircraft shelter at the base that had been hit by an American Tomahawk missile in April was being used for the preparation.

Monday's statement caught military officials by surprise, with one at the United States Central Command, which oversees combat operations in the Middle East, saying at the time that he had ''no idea'' what it was referring to.

The highly classified nature of the intelligence -- and the likelihood that it involved information provided by an American ally -- kept the assessment and the potential administration response closely held, two American officials said.

A White House spokeswoman, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, said on Tuesday that relevant agencies, including the Pentagon, the State Department, the C.I.A. and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, had been involved in issuing the statement. But White House officials repeatedly declined to provide details about the timing or content of the deliberations.

''Not going to comment further,'' Sean Spicer , the White House press secretary, said in response to several emailed questions.

An American defense official said that Defense Secretary Jim Mattis had been aware of the movements at Al Shayrat and that the White House statement was coming.

Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson ''was aware of'' the White House statement and had informed his Russian counterpart, Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov , on Monday morning about the American concerns, said Heather Nauert, a State Department spokeswoman. But she said she could not share evidence of the Syrian preparations because it was ''an intelligence matter.''

Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the ranking Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, said the administration had briefed him before the White House issued its statement. But he declined to comment on what had caused the concern that Syria might be readying a chemical strike.

''If further use of chemical weapons can be discouraged, I think that's worthwhile,'' Mr. Schiff said in a telephone interview.

Neither White House nor Pentagon officials said an attack, or retaliation, was imminent in Syria, where the United States is backing Syrian fighters combating Islamic State militants on an increasingly complex battlefield.

''The Department of Defense remains focused on operations to defeat ISIS,'' Maj. Adrian Rankine-Galloway, a Defense Department spokesman, said in a statement, using an acronym for the Islamic State. ''Nevertheless, the continued brutality of the Assad regime and his use of chemical weapons presents a clear threat to regional stability and security, as well as the national security interests of the United States and our allies.''

The United States has closely monitored the Syrian air base since the Pentagon carried out the cruise missile strikes in April, using a combination of satellite imagery, electronic signals intercepts and on-the-ground spying.

In recent days, American and allied intelligence agencies detected activities at the base that were consistent with how the Syrian military prepared for using chemical weapons in the past, including preparation of aircraft and munitions. French officials said that during a telephone conversation Tuesday, Mr. Trump talked with President Emmanuel Macron about the need to work toward ''a common response'' to any chemical attack in Syria.

In Damascus, Ali Haidar, the Syrian minister for national reconciliation, was quoted by The Associated Press as saying that the government did not have chemical weapons. He accused the White House of releasing the statement to pave the way for a ''diplomatic battle'' against Syria at the United Nations.

Officials in Russia called the accusations ''unacceptable.''

''I am not aware of any information about a threat that chemical weapons could be used,'' Dmitri S. Peskov, the Kremlin spokesman, said on Tuesday.

Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif of Iran, Mr. Assad's only regional ally, also rejected the Trump administration's warning, describing it as a ploy.

''Another dangerous U.S. escalation in Syria on fake pretext will only serve ISIS, precisely when it's being wiped out by Iraqi & Syrian people,'' Mr. Zarif tweeted.

Mr. Trump has taken a different approach to the use of chemical weapons in Syria than Mr. Obama did. After the 2013 attack, Mr. Obama declined to strike the Syrian government, despite having declared the use of chemical weapons a ''red line.'' Instead, he agreed to a deal, proposed by Russia, for the government to dispose of its chemical weapons stockpiles and manufacturing capabilities.

But American officials suspect that Syria kept some of its means to produce chemical weapons.

''What's driving this is that Assad is so short of manpower that when he goes on the offensive out east, he's tempted to use chemical weapons and other strategic weapons elsewhere to prevent territorial loss,'' said Andrew J. Tabler, a Syria analyst with the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

Follow Michael D. Shear @shearm, Helene Cooper @helenecooper and Eric Schmitt @EricSchmittNYT on Twitter.

Syrians in Idlib Province being treated after what was thought to be a chemical weapons attack in April. Dozens were killed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALAA ALYOUSEF, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170628ed6s0006b



opinion
A Way Out of the Qatar Mess; Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
671 words
28 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The dangerous dispute between Qatar and other Arab gulf states, chiefly Saudi Arabia, has gone on for three weeks, diverting attention from fighting the Islamic State and other serious challenges. It shows little sign of resolution. The Saudis and the United Arab Emirates provoked the row by breaking diplomatic relations with Qatar and imposing an effective embargo, ostensibly because of Qatar’ coddling of terrorists and other issues.

Senator Bob Corkernow suggests a way to end the impasse and force some sort of reconciliation: halt arms sales throughout the region. As chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Mr. Corker, a Tennessee Republican, must give preliminary approval to major arms sales, along with the panel’ senior Democrat, Senator Ben Cardin, and the Democratic and Republican leaders of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.

In a letter to Secretary of State Rex Tillerson on Monday, Mr. Corker said that recent disputes among the gulf states “nly serve to hurt efforts to fight ISIS and counter Iran.”uture arms sales approvals would thus be held up until he receives “ better understanding of the path to resolve the current dispute and reunify”he regional group, the Gulf Cooperation Council.

This would give Mr. Tillerson a new tool for resolving the crisis, though the impact may not be immediate. The Trump administration is already moving forward with a plan to send $510 million in precision-guided munitions to Saudi Arabia for use in the Yemen civil war against Iranian-backed Houthi rebels and with a $12 billion deal for Qatar to buy F-15 jets. But the Saudis and the emirates might eventually come looking for more weapons to prosecute that war, at which point the United States should say no. The war is a humanitarian catastrophe that urgently needs a political settlement.

President Trump himself is also partly responsible for the mess, having encouraged the Saudis by siding against Qatar when the embargo was declared early this month, even taking credit for the decision. He appeared unconcerned by the fact that Qatar hosts two American military bases crucial to the anti-ISIS effort. And he later added fuel to the conflict by accusing Qatar of funding  terrorism at a “ery high level”oon after Mr. Tillerson called for calm.

The Saudis and the emirates might have tried to work out their differences with Qatar instead of acting unilaterally and only later outlining what steps could be taken to get the embargo lifted. The demands they finally made public on Friday were obviously intended to humiliate Qatar rather than to serve as the basis for negotiations. Among them were that Qatar shut down the news network Al Jazeera, abandon ties with Islamist organizations, provide details about funding for political dissidents and close a Turkish military base.

There is no question that Qatar needs to crack down harder on extremists and terrorist financing. But so do Saudi Arabia, the emirates and other gulf states, whose anger may have less to do with terrorism than with Qatar’ ties to Iran —audi Arabia’ main rival.

Mr. Tillerson, who has close relationships in the region from his days as chief executive at ExxonMobil, has tried to mediate the dispute with little success. On Tuesday, he held separate meetings with the foreign ministers of Qatar and Kuwait. Afterward, there were hints Qatar had agreed with the Americans on tougher antiterrorism efforts, including embedding United States Treasury officials in its central bank to pursue terrorist financiers. But the Saudi foreign minister signaled a tough line, saying his country’ demands were not negotiable. Nothing good can come of this dispute if it is allowed to persist.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY MARK PERNICE)

* President Trump Picks Sides, Not Diplomacy, in the Gulf

* Senator Puts Hold on Arms Sales to Persian Gulf Nations Over Qatar Feud

Document INHT000020170628ed6s0000m



World; Asia Pacific
Philippine Military Says 17 Mutilated Civilian Bodies Found in Marawi

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
726 words
28 June 2017
14:36
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA —he Philippine military said on Wednesday that troops had found the mutilated bodies of 17 civilians in the besieged southern city of Marawi, where government forces have been struggling to dislodge militants who have entrenched themselves for the last month.

The bodies were recovered Wednesday while troops and police officers conducted clearing operations near Gadungan, a devastated section of the city. The discovery came more than a month after Islamic State-inspired gunmen with the Abu Sayyaf and Maute militant groups overran Marawi, a city of 200,000.

“he recovered cadavers are believed to be among those civilians who were helplessly murdered by the Maute and Abu Sayyaf terrorists,”aid Brig. Gen. Rolando Bautista of the Philippine Army. “his is a manifestation of their brutality. They killed these innocent civilians in cold blood.”

The grisly discovery came as government troops were struggling to retake the city from the Islamist militants, whose numbers are believed to have dwindled to between 150 and 200 fighters.

The recovered bodies brought the death toll in more than a month of fighting to 44 civilians, 71 soldiers and police officers and 299 militants, the military said.

The militants are believed to be holding dozens of hostages who officials say are being used as human shields, including a Roman Catholic priest. The military said Tuesday that the gunmen also forced the hostages to convert to Islam and marry some of them for use as sex slaves.

The fighting began on May 23, when the police and the military tried to arrest the leader of an Abu Sayyaf faction, Isnilon Hapilon, said to be the leader of the Philippine branch of the Islamic State.

The attempt was thwarted by fighters from Abu Sayyaf and Maute, backed by militants from elsewhere in Southeast Asia and the Middle East, who then went on a rampage in Marawi, a predominantly Muslim city in the mostly Catholic Philippines.

The government has struggled in its efforts to dislodge the enemy fighters, who are believed to be heavily armed and hiding in trenches and bombed-out homes and mosques.

Restituto Padilla, a military spokesman, said Wednesday that the government was observing a “o negotiation policy”mid earlier reports that one of the leaders of the Maute group, Abdullah Maute, was willing to free the priest in exchange for the release of his parents, who were captured earlier.

Mr. Hapilon is believed to be holed up in Marawi, although recent unconfirmed intelligence reports suggest he may have fled the area.

Mr. Padilla said that Mr. Hapilon must be caught “ead or alive.”

“s to the hostages, we’e not negotiating at this point,”e added. “e know the mind-set of these people. We know how they think. So regardless of negotiations or not, they may end up killing them anyway.”

President Rodrigo Duterte on Tuesday night also revealed that he had relatives who had joined the militants in Marawi.

“ have cousins who joined the Maute,”r. Duterte said at a dinner in Manila to mark the Muslim holiday of Eid al-Fitr. “ecause they were there, a cousin of mine died. They went there, a truckload of them.”

At the dinner, he discussed knowing about how the militants were stockpiling arms and were fortifying positions in Marawi before he decided to declare martial law. The declaration of martial law came shortly after the military attacked the militants, only to be met with fierce resistance.

He said his presidential guards knew about his relatives joining the militants’ause and asked him about it, to which he said he replied, “hey are my cousins. Let them be.”

He said they may have joined the militants “or the sake of adventure.”

* Australia to Send Spy Planes to Help Philippines Recapture Marawi

* Hiding Christians in the Basement: Fear and Heroism in a Philippine War Zone

* Destroying a Philippine City to Save It From \b ISIS\b0  Allies

* Philippine Forces Struggle to Retake City Held by Islamist Militants

Government troops heading into the conflict zone against Abu Sayyaf and Maute militant fighters in Marawi, Philippines, on Wednesday. | Jorge Silva/Reuters | A truck carrying bodies in Marawi on Wednesday. The Philippine military said that troops had found the mutilated bodies of 17 civilians in the city. | Jorge Silva/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170628ed6s003s5



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Dozens Said To Be Killed In Bombing Of  ISIS  Prison

By BEN HUBBARD; Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington, and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul. 
590 words
28 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- An airstrike in eastern Syria destroyed a house that the Islamic State had turned into a prison, killing dozens of people, Syrian activists said Tuesday, and they blamed the military coalition led by the United States for the attack.

A spokesman for the coalition confirmed that it had bombed buildings controlled by the Islamic State in the area on Monday and said that it was investigating the reports of civilian deaths.

Reports of civilians killed by coalition airstrikes in Iraq and Syria have climbed in recent months, and American officials have attributed the rise to the increasingly urban nature of the battle to defeat the jihadists.

But the total civilian toll remains unclear because of the remoteness of many of the strike sites and the lack of independent sources in territory held by the Islamic State who can verify reports.

Independent watchdog groups cite much higher numbers of civilian deaths than the figure reported by the coalition.

This month, the coalition said in a statement that it believed that it had unintentionally killed at least 484 civilians in Iraq and Syria since the start of the air campaign against the jihadists in 2014. More than 130 of those were killed in April, an increase in the monthly toll.

But Airwars, an organization that tracks civilian casualty reports through social media and other sources, said that as of June 8, the coalition had killed at least 4,118 civilians, and perhaps more than 16,000, since the start of the bombing campaign.

Neither group has finished investigating the reported strike on the prison.

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which tracks the conflict in Syria from Britain with the help of contacts on the ground, said the strike early Monday had destroyed a house near the town of Mayadeen in eastern Syria that the jihadists had converted into a prison. The group said the strike had killed at least 42 civilian prisoners, 15 Islamic State guards and an unknown number of Islamic State members who had been locked up, presumably for running afoul of the group.

Another Syrian activist group, Deirezzor24, also reported the strike, saying the Islamic State had used the house to lock up hundreds of members of rebel groups who opposed the jihadists. It said that more than 60 civilians and a pair of Islamic State guards had been killed in Monday's strike.

Yaser al-Hamad, a Syrian from the area who is now in Germany, said via the messaging service WhatsApp that the house, which had three floors and was surrounded by a high wall, was seized by the Islamic State in 2015. After it was bombed on Monday, Islamic State militants dug bodies out of the rubble and put them in a nearby ice factory, where residents were called to claim them, said Mr. Hamad, who spoke with relatives of the dead. Most of the bodies were unrecognizable, he said.

Col. Ryan Dillon, a United States military spokesman in Baghdad, said the coalition had struck command-and-control facilities and other infrastructure belonging to the Islamic State near Mayadeen on Monday. Reports of civilian deaths would be investigated, Colonel Dillon said, with the results published in a monthly summary.

''The coalition's goal is always for zero human casualties,'' he said. ''We apply rigorous standards to our targeting process and take extraordinary efforts to protect noncombatants.''

Document NYTF000020170628ed6s0006a



World; Middle East
U.S. Has Seen Chemical Weapons Activity in Syria, Pentagon Says

By MICHAEL D. SHEAR, HELENE COOPER and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,418 words
27 June 2017
13:40
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —resident Trump has drawn a new red line for President Bashar al- Assad  of Syria , with American officials describing preparations at a Syrian air base for a chemical weapons assault as they sought Tuesday to bolster Mr. Trump’ threat to deter an attack.

But the administration elaborated little on the president’ unexpected, 87-word statement a night earlier that warned that Mr. Assad would “ay a heavy price”f he again releases toxic gas on rebel-held territory, leaving lingering questions in Washington and in the Middle East about Mr. Trump’ intentions in Syria.

American officials have declined to rate their level of confidence about whether a chemical attack is imminent or say whether the administration has pursued diplomatic channels to stop it. Military officials, who were initially caught off guard by Monday night’ White House statement, would not discuss what options they are considering. Conversations with allies about the chemical weapons intelligence have been kept largely secret.

In previous administrations, debates about how best to deter atrocities have played out publicly around the world. President George W. Bush took months to argue his case —ater proved to be flawed —bout the existence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. President Barack Obama offered detailed explanations about his deliberations on how to respond when Mr. Assad used chemical weapons to kill 1,400 people in 2013.

On Tuesday, White House officials said only that Mr. Trump’ statement spoke for itself.

That silence added to the uncertainty about whether a new military confrontation with Syria is looming just two months after Mr. Trump fired dozens of Tomahawk missiles at the Syrian base, Al Shayrat airfield, after a chemical weapons attack  that killed dozens.

Mr. Assad’ government vigorously denied the accusation of preparations for an attack, calling Mr. Trump’ statement a provocation. And in Russia , a close ally of Syria’, a senior lawmaker accused the United States of using the declaration about chemical weapons to plan an attack on Syria.

As if to punctuate his contempt for the Trump administration’ warning, Mr. Assad visited a Russian air base near Latakia in the western part of the country on Tuesday, accompanied by Gen. Valery V. Gerasimov, the Russian military’ chief of staff. The Syrian news media, which reported the visit, distributed a video clip  of Mr. Assad climbing into the cockpit of a Russian Sukhoi Su-35 parked at the base, where Russia has conducted many of its bombing operations to support the government’ side in the six-year civil war.

[Video: شاهد بالفيديو .. الرئيس الاسد في قاعدة حميميم العسكرية الروسية Watch on YouTube. ]

In Washington on Tuesday, American officials explained only briefly what prompted the White House effort at deterrence. Capt. Jeff Davis , a Pentagon spokesman, told reporters that what looked like active preparations for a chemical attack had been seen at Al Shayrat. One Pentagon official said an aircraft shelter at the base that had been hit by an American Tomahawk missile in April was being used for the preparation.

Monday’ statement caught military officials by surprise, with one at the United States Central Command, which oversees combat operations in the Middle East, saying at the time that he had “o idea”hat the White House statement was referring to.

The highly classified nature of the intelligence —nd the likelihood it involved information provided by an American ally —ept the assessment and the potential administration response closely held, two American officials said.

A White House spokeswoman, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, said on Tuesday that relevant agencies, including the Pentagon, the State Department, the C.I.A. and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, were involved in issuing the statement. But White House officials repeatedly declined to provide details about the timing or content of the deliberations.

“ot going to comment further,”Sean Spicer , the White House press secretary, said in response to several emailed questions.

An American defense official said that Defense Secretary Jim Mattis was aware of the movements at Al Shayrat and that the White House statement was coming.

Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson “as aware of”he White House statement and had informed his Russian counterpart, Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov , on Monday morning about the American concerns, said Heather Nauert, a State Department spokeswoman. But she said she could not share evidence of the Syrian preparations because it was “n intelligence matter.”

Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the ranking Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, said the administration had briefed him before the White House issued its statement. But he declined to comment on what triggered concern that Syria was readying a possible chemical strike.

“f further use of chemical weapons can be discouraged, I think that’ worthwhile,”r. Schiff said in a telephone interview.

Neither White House nor Pentagon officials said an attack, or retaliation, was imminent in Syria, where the United States is backing Syrian fighters combating Islamic State militants on an increasingly complex battlefield.

“he Department of Defense remains focused on operations to defeat ISIS,”aj. Adrian Rankine-Galloway, a Defense Department spokesman, said in a statement, using an acronym for the Islamic State. “evertheless, the continued brutality of the Assad regime and his use of chemical weapons presents a clear threat to regional stability and security, as well as the national security interests of the United States and our allies.”

The United States has closely monitored the Syrian air base since the Pentagon carried out the cruise missile strikes in April, using a combination of satellite imagery, electronic signals intercepts and on-the-ground spying.

In recent days, American and allied intelligence agencies detected activities at the base that were consistent with how the Syrian military prepared for using chemical weapons in the past, including preparation of aircraft and munitions. French officials said that during a telephone conversation Tuesday, Mr. Trump talked with President Emmanuel Macron about the need to work toward “ common response”o any chemical attack in Syria.

In Damascus, Ali Haidar, the Syrian minister for national reconciliation, was quoted by The Associated Press as saying that the government did not have chemical weapons. He accused the White House of releasing the statement to pave the way for a “iplomatic battle”gainst Syria at the United Nations.

Officials in Russia called the accusations “nacceptable.”

“ am not aware of any information about a threat that chemical weapons could be used,”mitri S. Peskov, the Kremlin spokesman, said on Tuesday.

Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif of Iran, Mr. Assad’ only regional ally, also rejected the Trump administration’ warning, describing it as a ploy.

“nother dangerous U.S. escalation in Syria on fake pretext will only serve ISIS, precisely when it’ being wiped out by Iraqi & Syrian people,”r. Zarif tweeted .

Mr. Trump has taken a different approach to the use of chemical weapons in Syria than Mr. Obama did. After the 2013 attack, Mr. Obama declined to strike the Syrian government, despite having declared the use of chemical weapons a “ed line.”nstead, he agreed to a deal, proposed by Russia, for the Syrian government to dispose of its chemical weapons stockpiles and manufacturing capabilities.

But American officials suspect that Syria kept some of its means to produce chemical weapons.

“hat’ driving this is that Assad is so short of manpower that when he goes on the offensive out east, he’ tempted to use chemical weapons and other strategic weapons elsewhere to prevent territorial loss,”aid Andrew J. Tabler, a Syria analyst with the Washington Institute for Near East Policy .

Follow Michael D. Shear @shearm, Helene Cooper @helenecooper and Eric Schmitt @EricSchmittNYT on Twitter.Ben Hubbard contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon; Rick Gladstone from New York; and Gardiner Harris from Washington.

* Syria Will ‘ay a Heavy Price’or Another Chemical Attack, White House Says 

* Worst Chemical Attack in Years in Syria; U.S. Blames Assad 

* Dozens of U.S. Missiles Hit Air Base in Syria 

* Blasts in the Night, a Smell, and a Flood of Syrian Victims 

A child receiving treatment at a hospital in Khan Sheikhoun, Syria, after a nerve agent was used in an attack in April. The White House has accused the Syrian government of preparing a new chemical attack. | Omar Haj Kadour/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170627ed6r003pd



opinion
The Iran Puzzle; Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
855 words
26 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

One of the Obama administration’ biggest diplomatic ambitions was to establish better relations with Iran, a nation with which the United States has been at odds since the fall of the shah and the rise of a powerful theocratic government in Tehran in 1979. The most important manifestation of that effort was a deal negotiated by the administration and its allies under which Iran agreed to curb its nuclear program in exchange for the lifting of economic sanctions.

That momentary thaw, if not the agreement itself, now seems at risk. Partly this is a result of Iran’ barely-concealed territorial and political ambitions, which are rightly of concern in Washington. Partly it is a result of President Trump’ fondness for Saudi Arabia, a Sunni Muslim nation, which has led him to demonize Iran, a Shiite nation and the Saudis’hief rival for regional influence.

A potential flashpoint is looming in Syria. There, Iran and the United States share a common goal of defeating the Islamic State. But they have competing interests, which are growing even as the fight against ISIS seems to be going well and indeed may be approaching the endgame.

Trump administration officials worry that the Iranians, aided by the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, will seek control of enough territory in two adjacent countries, Syria and Iraq, so as to establish a land bridge from Tehran all the way to Lebanon. There they could resupply their Hezbollah allies, thus enlarging their regional influence.

Iran undoubtedly intends to play a larger regional role, and there are reasons to be wary. But the administration hasn’ explained its concerns publicly and there are questions about how it plans to deal with the challenge.

Since the Syrian civil war began in 2011, Iran has been one of Mr. Assad’ chief allies, deploying thousands of Hezbollah and other Shiite fighters and providing other forms of aid to help him beat back Syrian rebels. Iran’ interests in Syria are thus markedly different from its interests in Iraq. In Iraq it has fought ISIS. In Syria, its focus has been on helping the Assad regime.

It is in Syria where the interests of Iran and the United States are most sharply at odds, and in Iraq where they most nearly converge. American and Iraqi security forces have just about driven ISIS from Mosul, a major Iraqi city. In Syria, America is also seeking to crush ISIS, but is doing so in concert with Syrian opposition forces, not Mr. Assad, whom it has long opposed.

As in Iraq, the fight against ISIS is going well; ISIS is close to being routed from its headquarters in the city of Raqqa. But the prospect of victory has opened the door to new tensions between American-led forces and Iranian-Syrian forces. That has manifested itself in a series of encounters this month in which the United States shot down a Syrian warplane, came close to shooting down another and downed two Iranian-made drones that were nearing American-backed troops on the ground. Iran, meanwhile, used ballistic missiles against ISIS targets.

ISIS now controls only about half the territory it once held in Syria, and, as the space shrinks, the various combatants are concentrating on a smaller area, along Syria’ eastern border with Iraq and Jordan and in the Euphrates River Valley, home to oil reserves and water.

Administration officials suspect that Iran is more interested in controlling territory in these areas than defeating ISIS, and that the presence of Iranian and Syrian government forces could impede the American-led effort to finish ISIS off in Raqqa. It could also obstruct American plans to establish outposts in the Syrian and Western Iraqi desert so that fleeing ISIS fighters can be killed or captured, thus preventing them from hunkering down and later re-emerging as a threat, these officials say.

Adding to the combustible environment is Russia, the other major Assad defender, which threatened to retaliate to what Washington called its recent “elf defense”oves by treating American planes as targets. Despite this, administration officials, reflecting a president who shares Saudi Arabia’ hard-line anti-Iran views, seem to consider Iran a bigger problem than Moscow and one that could threaten Israel, Jordan and other allies.

Could Mr. Trump stumble into a wider war in Syria? There are reasons to worry. He has yet to offer a comprehensive plan for dealing with Syria, including the diplomacy needed to develop a political solution to end the civil war, which could create a more stable country less vulnerable to extremist groups.

The fear is that Mr. Trump’ demonizing of Iran, and his unwillingness to engage its government, could result in a broadening of the American military mission from defeating ISIS to preventing Iranian influence from expanding. This would be dangerous. Iran is a vexing state to be smartly managed, not assumed to be an implacable enemy.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document INHT000020170626ed6q0000e



Briefing
Senate Health Bill, Liu Xiaobo, Harry Potter: Your Monday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,331 words
26 June 2017
11:30
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

• busy docket .

The Supreme Court said today that it would hear a case on President Trump’ revised travel ban, setting up a major decision on executive power.

The justices also agreed to hear an appeal from a baker who lost a discrimination case after refusing to make a cake for a gay couple. He had cited religious objections.

•enate scrambles on health bill.

Republican leaders are trying to rally support for their measure to repeal the Affordable Care Act in time for a vote this week, before a congressional recess.

President Trump expressed confidence on Sunday that the bill would pass, but five Republican senators have said they won’ support the bill without changes. One is Dean Heller of Nevada, a state that expanded Medicaid coverage under Obamacare and that has much to lose from its repeal. We looked at the choices he faces.

We also checked in on local news outlets across the U.S., where reaction to the bill appears to be uniformly negative.

•here Trump zigs, Tillerson zags.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson has found himself out of sync with President Trump and his top advisers, especially on Middle East policy. We look at how the top U.S. diplomat’ priorities have hit a wall.

Separately, the White House is pushing military spending in Africa over humanitarian and development assistance.

•ew blow for a battered work force.

Thousands of people in the U.S. face unemployment as retailers struggle to compete with online shopping.

Even as e-commerce grows, it isn’ absorbing these workers.

•apturing vital data on ISIS.

We got a rare glimpse of a handful of secret and increasingly risky commando raids in the nearly three-year American ground war against the Islamic State.

•hy Grenfell Tower burned.

A team of reporters in London investigated how the incineration of the 24-story high rise —he deadliest fire in Britain in more than a century —as rooted in a regulatory breakdown.

•ailed Chinese dissident is hospitalized.

Liu Xiaobo, who received the Nobel Peace Prize for his writings promoting democracy, has been moved from prison to be treated for late-stage cancer, one of his lawyers said today.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

In today’ show, President Trump’ promise to repeal Obamacare could come down to abortion, and a look at a group of strong advocates for his stance on immigration.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•akata, the Japanese auto parts maker crippled by vast airbag recalls, filed for bankruptcy protection in the U.S. on Sunday.

•ood delivery services require precision: Bananas can’ get cold, and milk mustn’ tip. A day on the truck shows why the business is so troublesome.

•he second-phase results of stress tests for banks in the U.S. are among the headlines to watch this week.

•.S. stocks were mixed on Friday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

•e’e introducing a weekly Smarter Living newsletter to deliver tips for a better, more fulfilling life straight to your inbox. Sign up here, and catch up on our latest advice.

•ecipe of the day: Green goddess dressing makes a zippy marinade for roast chicken.

Over the weekend

•housands lined the streets for New York City’ annual Pride March. We captured similar celebrations around the world in a 360 video.

•artha, a Neapolitan mastiff, won the dubious distinction of “orld’ Ugliest Dog.”ne person described her as “o ugly she’ beautiful.”

•“ransformers: The Last Knight”as No. 1 at the North American box office but took in a disappointing $45.3 million, easily the least of the franchise.

Noteworthy

•oar with a golden eagle.

In today’ 360 video, take flight with Widow at an Oregon training facility for injured or captive birds.

• maritime mystery.

Investigators have plenty to unravel after a collision between a U.S. destroyer and a cargo ship that left seven sailors dead.

Veteran seamen describe it as incomprehensible.

• uiz time!

Did you keep up with last week’ news from around the world? Test your knowledge.

•he Times Reader Center.

We spend a good deal of time listening to readers’uestions, concerns and suggestions. But our readers often don’ know how we’e thinking about this feedback, or how we’e responding to it. We’ like to change that.

We’e set up a forum for our journalists to speak directly to you about our coverage. Please let us know what you think.

•uotation of the day.

“t was almost an out-of-body experience after being so deeply hurt and nobody listening, and nobody wanting to talk to you about this.”

—Sabine Durden, on how President Trump’ vow to stop illegal immigration resonated among families who had lost loved ones at the hands of undocumented immigrants.

Back Story

A certain boy wizard was introduced to the world 20 years ago today, when “arry Potter and the Philosopher’ Stone”as published in Britain.

The book, about Harry and other students at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, was an immediate hit that just kept growing in popularity. The magic inspired real-world Quidditch teams, book clubs, theme parks and a multibillion-dollar film franchise.

J. K. Rowling wrote “hilosopher’ Stone”n the cafes of Edinburgh, and the hometown paper, The Scotsman, praised her as “a first-rate writer for children.”

(The J. stands for Joanne —o to her friends —nd the K. for Kathleen, her grandmother’ name. Her publisher was worried that a book by an obviously female author wouldn’ appeal to boys. And her surname is pronounced like “owling.”)

A year later, the book arrived in the U.S. with a tweak to its title: “hilosopher’”ecame “orcerer’”to more clearly convey that it was about magic.

It was a New York Times best seller for weeks before a review on Feb. 14, 1999, called it “ wonderful first novel”y an author who had achieved “omething quite special.”

As Albus Dumbledore, one of her characters, once said, words are “ur most inexhaustible source of magic.”

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Women gathered at Angel Stadium in Anaheim, Calif., on Sunday for prayers and a celebration of Eid al-Fitr, the Muslim festival marking the end of Ramadan. | Patrick T. Fallon/Reuters | During the recent dispute between Qatar and Saudi Arabia, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson tried to position himself as an intermediary. The president, however, openly sided with the Saudis. | Brendan Smialowski/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Sinclair Browne is a driver in New York for Peapod, an online grocery business. “’ fast,”e said. “n and out, in and out.” Bryan Anselm for The New York Times | The N.B.A.’ logo was a frequent sight during New York City’ Pride March on Sunday. It was the only major professional sports league to take a prominent role in the gay pride event. | Justin Gilliland/The New York Times | Fans in costume celebrated the release of “arry Potter and the Deathly Hallows,”he seventh and final book in the series, in July 2007. | Hiroko Masuike for The New York Times | Take a flight in 360°ideo with Widow, a golden eagle. | By DAVE SANDERS, NIKO KOPPEL and GUGLIELMO MATTIOLI 

Document NYTFEED020170626ed6q0028m



World; Middle East
Commando Raids on  ISIS  Yield Vital Data in Shadowy War

By ERIC SCHMITT 
1,244 words
25 June 2017
06:01
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —ne late afternoon in April, helicopter-borne American commandos intercepted a vehicle in southeastern Syria carrying a close associate of the Islamic State’ supreme leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. 

The associate, Abdurakhmon Uzbeki, was a rare prize whom United States Special Operations forces had been tracking for months: a midlevel but highly trusted operative skilled in raising money; spiriting insurgent leaders out of Raqqa, the Islamic State’ besieged capital in Syria; and plotting attacks against the West. Captured alive, Mr. Uzbeki could be an intelligence bonanza. Federal prosecutors had already begun preparing criminal charges against him for possible prosecution in the United States.

As the commandos swooped in, however, a firefight broke out. Mr. Uzbeki, a combat-hardened veteran of shadow wars in Syria and Pakistan, died in the gun battle, thwarting the military’ hopes of extracting from him any information about Islamic State operations, leaders and strategy.

New details about the operation, and a similar episode in January that sought to seize another midlevel Islamic State operative, offer a rare glimpse into the handful of secret and increasingly risky commando raids of the secretive, nearly three-year American ground war against the Islamic State. Cellphones and other material swept up by Special Operations forces proved valuable for future raids, though the missions fell short of their goal to capture, not kill, terrorist leaders in order to obtain fresh, firsthand information about the inner circle and war council of the group, also known as \b ISIS\b0 .

“f we can scoop somebody up alive, with their cellphones and diaries, it really can help speed up the demise of a terrorist group like ISIS,”aid Dell L. Dailey, a retired commander of the military’ Joint Special Operations Command and the chairman of the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point. 

American military and intelligence officials caution that the Islamic State is far from defeated, particularly with a sophisticated propaganda apparatus that continues to inspire and, in some cases, enable its global following to carry out attacks. But in the self-proclaimed caliphate across swaths of Iraq and Syria, the terrorist group’ last two major strongholds are under siege, many senior leaders have fled south to the Euphrates River Valley, and its legions of foreign fighters are battling to the death or slipping away, possibly to wreak havoc in Europe.

The race to drive the jihadists out of eastern Syria, where they have held sway for three years, has gained new urgency as rival forces converge on ungoverned parts of the region. Syrian forces and Iranian-backed militias that support them are advancing east, closer to American-backed fighters battling to reclaim Raqqa. Russia threatened on Monday to target American and allied aircraft the day after the United States military brought down a Syrian warplane.

This highly volatile environment puts an increasing premium on the Special Operations missions.

Despite his nom de guerre, Mr. Uzbeki, 39, was a native of Tajikistan, not Uzbekistan, and honed his fighting skills with the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan , a Taliban -allied jihadist group, according to an American military official. About 10 years ago, he moved to Pakistan, where he had extensive contacts with Al Qaeda, the official said. In recent years, he had moved to Syria and joined the Islamic State’ fighting ranks.

Mr. Uzbeki was close to Mr. Baghdadi, the Islamic State’ leader, and helped plot a deadly attack on a nightclub in Istanbul on New Year’ Day. He was targeted for his role in the Islamic State’ plotting of attacks around the world, said Col. John J. Thomas, a spokesman for the United States Central Command. “e facilitated the movement of ISIS foreign terror fighters and funds,”olonel Thomas told reporters in April.

After months of waiting for an opportunity to seize Mr. Uzbeki without putting civilians at risk, one arose on April 6 for the so-called expeditionary targeting force, a group of commandos from the secretive Joint Special Operations Command who hunt Islamic State leaders in Iraq and Syria.

About 3 p.m., Mr. Uzbeki was driving from Mayadeen, a city in southeastern Syria that has become an enclave for Islamic State leaders fleeing Raqqa. (The Central Command said this past week that it had killed Turki al-Bin’li,  a senior recruiter and propagandist, in an airstrike on May 31 in Mayadeen.)

“s Mosul and Raqqa come under increasing pressure, we’e seen ISIS elements moving into the Euphrates River Valley over the past few months,”aid Cmdr. William Marks, a spokesman for the Defense Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Uzbeki had just dropped off a higher-ranking Islamic State leader in Mayadeen and was returning to Raqqa when the commandos ambushed him. Though he died, the soldiers were able to recover cellphones and other materials, a military official said.

In a similar raid in early January, American commandos killed another midlevel Islamic State leader they had been trying to capture and interrogate in the eastern Syrian province of Deir al-Zour, which is largely under Islamic State control. The insurgent, whom the military did not identify, was also killed when he resisted capture. Important information was also collected from this raid, military officials said.

The model for these kinds of operations in Syria emerged in May 2015 when two dozen Delta Force commandos entered Syria aboard Black Hawk helicopters and V-22 Ospreys from Iraq and killed Abu Sayyaf , whom American officials described as the Islamic State’ “mir of oil and gas.”

The information harvested from the laptops, cellphones and other materials recovered in the raid yielded the first important insights about the Islamic State’ leadership structure, financial operations and security measures.

Equally important, Abu Sayyaf ’ wife, Umm, who was captured in the operation, provided information to investigators for weeks, American officials said, before she was turned over to the Iraqi authorities.

So successful was that raid that seven months later, Ashton B. Carter, then the defense secretary, disclosed at a House hearing that he was creating a “pecialized expeditionary targeting force.”

The commandos —nitially numbering about 100 troops, including support personnel —ould have a mission similar to, but smaller than, the one they carried out in tandem with President George W. Bush ’ surge of American troops in Iraq in 2007. There, commandos conducted a series of high-tempo, nightly raids to capture or kill fighters from Al Qaeda and other former Baathist groups in Iraq.

In recent months, the targeting force has intensified its drone strikes and raids in Syria against the Islamic State’ external operations planners, who have inspired, supported and directed attacks beyond their declared caliphate and into the West. A small number of capture missions are in the works, tracking insurgent leaders, military officials said.

“hen the target is indeed captured alive, then we often can get even more valuable information through interrogations, immediate and continuing over time,”aid William Wechsler, a former top counterterrorism official at the Pentagon. “ll of this helps us better understand the enemy network, prioritize new targets, and identify external terrorist plots.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter  and in the Morning Briefing newsletter .

Adam Goldman contributed reporting.

Armed men identified by the Syrian Democratic Forces as American Special Operations forces in the Syrian province of Raqqa last year. | Delil Souleiman/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170625ed6p000p6



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Raids on  ISIS  Yield Vital Data In Shadowy War

By ERIC SCHMITT; Adam Goldman contributed reporting. 
1,245 words
25 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- One late afternoon in April, helicopter-borne American commandos intercepted a vehicle in southeastern Syria carrying a close associate of the Islamic State's supreme leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi .

The associate, Abdurakhmon Uzbeki, was a rare prize whom United States Special Operations forces had been tracking for months: a midlevel but highly trusted operative skilled in raising money; spiriting insurgent leaders out of Raqqa, the Islamic State's besieged capital in Syria; and plotting attacks against the West. Captured alive, Mr. Uzbeki could be an intelligence bonanza. Federal prosecutors had already begun preparing criminal charges against him for possible prosecution in the United States.

As the commandos swooped in, however, a firefight broke out. Mr. Uzbeki, a combat-hardened veteran of shadow wars in Syria and Pakistan, died in the gun battle, thwarting the military's hopes of extracting from him any information about Islamic State operations, leaders and strategy.

New details about the operation, and a similar episode in January that sought to seize another midlevel Islamic State operative, offer a rare glimpse into the handful of secret and increasingly risky commando raids of the secretive, nearly three-year American ground war against the Islamic State. Cellphones and other material swept up by Special Operations forces proved valuable for future raids, though the missions fell short of their goal to capture, not kill, terrorist leaders in order to obtain fresh, firsthand information about the inner circle and war council of the group, also known as ISIS.

''If we can scoop somebody up alive, with their cellphones and diaries, it really can help speed up the demise of a terrorist group like ISIS,'' said Dell L. Dailey, a retired commander of the military's Joint Special Operations Command and the chairman of the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point.

American military and intelligence officials caution that the Islamic State is far from defeated, particularly with a sophisticated propaganda apparatus that continues to inspire and, in some cases, enable its global following to carry out attacks. But in the self-proclaimed caliphate across swaths of Iraq and Syria, the terrorist group's last two major strongholds are under siege, many senior leaders have fled south to the Euphrates River Valley, and its legions of foreign fighters are battling to the death or slipping away, possibly to wreak havoc in Europe.

The race to drive the jihadists out of eastern Syria, where they have held sway for three years, has gained new urgency as rival forces converge on ungoverned parts of the region. Syrian forces and Iranian-backed militias that support them are advancing east, closer to American-backed fighters battling to reclaim Raqqa. Russia threatened on Monday to target American and allied aircraft the day after the United States military brought down a Syrian warplane.

This highly volatile environment puts an increasing premium on the Special Operations missions.

Despite his nom de guerre, Mr. Uzbeki, 39, was a native of Tajikistan, not Uzbekistan, and honed his fighting skills with the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan , a Taliban -allied jihadist group, according to an American military official. About 10 years ago, he moved to Pakistan, where he had extensive contacts with Al Qaeda, the official said. In recent years, he had moved to Syria and joined the Islamic State's fighting ranks.

Mr. Uzbeki was close to Mr. Baghdadi, the Islamic State's leader, and helped plot a deadly attack on a nightclub in Istanbul on New Year's Day. He was targeted for his role in the Islamic State's plotting of attacks around the world, said Col. John J. Thomas, a spokesman for the United States Central Command. ''He facilitated the movement of ISIS foreign terror fighters and funds,'' Colonel Thomas told reporters in April.

After months of waiting for an opportunity to seize Mr. Uzbeki without putting civilians at risk, one arose on April 6 for the so-called expeditionary targeting force, a group of commandos from the secretive Joint Special Operations Command who hunt Islamic State leaders in Iraq and Syria.

About 3 p.m., Mr. Uzbeki was driving from Mayadeen, a city in southeastern Syria that has become an enclave for Islamic State leaders fleeing Raqqa. (The Central Command said this past week that it had killed Turki al-Bin'ali, a senior recruiter and propagandist, in an airstrike on May 31 in Mayadeen.)

''As Mosul and Raqqa come under increasing pressure, we've seen ISIS elements moving into the Euphrates River Valley over the past few months,'' said Cmdr. William Marks, a spokesman for the Defense Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Uzbeki had just dropped off a higher-ranking Islamic State leader in Mayadeen and was returning to Raqqa when the commandos ambushed him. Though he died, the soldiers were able to recover cellphones and other materials, a military official said.

In a similar raid in early January, American commandos killed another midlevel Islamic State leader they had been trying to capture and interrogate in the eastern Syrian province of Deir al-Zour, which is largely under Islamic State control. The insurgent, whom the military did not identify, was also killed when he resisted capture. Important information was also collected from this raid, military officials said.

The model for these kinds of operations in Syria emerged in May 2015 when two dozen Delta Force commandos entered Syria aboard Black Hawk helicopters and V-22 Ospreys from Iraq and killed Abu Sayyaf , whom American officials described as the Islamic State's ''emir of oil and gas.''

The information harvested from the laptops, cellphones and other materials recovered in the raid yielded the first important insights about the Islamic State's leadership structure, financial operations and security measures.

Equally important, Abu Sayyaf 's wife, Umm, who was captured in the operation, provided information to investigators for weeks, American officials said, before she was turned over to the Iraqi authorities.

So successful was that raid that seven months later, Ashton B. Carter, then the defense secretary, disclosed at a House hearing that he was creating a ''specialized expeditionary targeting force.''

The commandos -- initially numbering about 100 troops, including support personnel -- would have a mission similar to, but smaller than, the one they carried out in tandem with President George W. Bush 's surge of American troops in Iraq in 2007. There, commandos conducted a series of high-tempo, nightly raids to capture or kill fighters from Al Qaeda and other former Baathist groups in Iraq.

In recent months, the targeting force has intensified its drone strikes and raids in Syria against the Islamic State's external operations planners, who have inspired, supported and directed attacks beyond their declared caliphate and into the West. A small number of capture missions are in the works, tracking insurgent leaders, military officials said.

''When the target is indeed captured alive, then we often can get even more valuable information through interrogations, immediate and continuing over time,'' said William Wechsler, a former top counterterrorism official at the Pentagon. ''All of this helps us better understand the enemy network, prioritize new targets, and identify external terrorist plots.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Armed men identified by the Syrian Democratic Forces as American Special Operations forces in northern Syria last year. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DELIL SOULEIMAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A10) 

Document NYTF000020170625ed6p0005q



world
Commando Raids on  ISIS  Yield Vital Data in Shadowy War

By ERIC SCHMITT 
1,254 words
25 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —ne late afternoon in April, helicopter-borne American commandos intercepted a vehicle in southeastern Syria  carrying a close associate of the Islamic State’ supreme leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.  carrying a close associate of the Islamic State’ supreme leader,

The associate, Abdurakhmon Uzbeki, was a rare prize whom United States Special Operations forces  had been tracking for months: a midlevel but highly trusted operative skilled in raising money; spiriting insurgent leaders out of Raqqa, the Islamic State’ besieged capital in Syria; and plotting attacks against the West. Captured alive, Mr. Uzbeki could be an intelligence bonanza. Federal prosecutors had already begun preparing criminal charges against him for possible prosecution in the United States.

As the commandos swooped in, however, a firefight broke out. Mr. Uzbeki, a combat-hardened veteran of shadow wars in Syria and Pakistan, died in the gun battle, thwarting the military’ hopes of extracting from him any information about Islamic State operations, leaders and strategy.

New details about the operation, and a similar episode in January that sought to seize another midlevel Islamic State operative, offer a rare glimpse into the handful of secret and increasingly risky commando raids of the secretive, nearly three-year American ground war against the Islamic State. Cellphones and other material swept up by Special Operations forces proved valuable for future raids, though the missions fell short of their goal to capture, not kill, terrorist leaders in order to obtain fresh, firsthand information about the inner circle and war council of the group, also known as \b ISIS\b0 .

“f we can scoop somebody up alive, with their cellphones and diaries, it really can help speed up the demise of a terrorist group like ISIS,”aid Dell L. Dailey, a retired commander of the military’ Joint Special Operations Command and the chairman of the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point. 

American military and intelligence officials caution that the Islamic State is far from defeated, particularly with a sophisticated propaganda apparatus that continues to inspire and, in some cases, enable its global following to carry out attacks. But in the self-proclaimed caliphate across swaths of Iraq and Syria, the terrorist group’ last two major strongholds are under siege, many senior leaders have fled south to the Euphrates River Valley, and its legions of foreign fighters are battling to the death or slipping away, possibly to wreak havoc in Europe.

The race to drive the jihadists out of eastern Syria, where they have held sway for three years, has gained new urgency as rival forces converge on ungoverned parts of the region. Syrian forces and Iranian-backed militias that support them are advancing east, closer to American-backed fighters battling to reclaim Raqqa. Russia threatened on Monday to target American and allied aircraft the day after the United States military brought down a Syrian warplane.

This highly volatile environment puts an increasing premium on the Special Operations missions.

Despite his nom de guerre, Mr. Uzbeki, 39, was a native of Tajikistan, not Uzbekistan, and honed his fighting skills with the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan , a Taliban -allied jihadist group, according to an American military official. About 10 years ago, he moved to Pakistan, where he had extensive contacts with Al Qaeda, the official said. In recent years, he had moved to Syria and joined the Islamic State’ fighting ranks.

Mr. Uzbeki was close to Mr. Baghdadi, the Islamic State’ leader, and helped plot a deadly attack on a nightclub in Istanbul on New Year’ Day. He was targeted for his role in the Islamic State’ plotting of attacks around the world, said Col. John J. Thomas, a spokesman for the United States Central Command. “e facilitated the movement of ISIS foreign terror fighters and funds,”olonel Thomas told reporters in April.

After months of waiting for an opportunity to seize Mr. Uzbeki without putting civilians at risk, one arose on April 6 for the so-called expeditionary targeting force, a group of commandos from the secretive Joint Special Operations Command who hunt Islamic State leaders in Iraq and Syria.

About 3 p.m., Mr. Uzbeki was driving from Mayadeen, a city in southeastern Syria that has become an enclave for Islamic State leaders fleeing Raqqa. (The Central Command said this past week that it had killed Turki al-Bin’li,  a senior recruiter and propagandist, in an airstrike on May 31 in Mayadeen.)

“s Mosul and Raqqa come under increasing pressure, we’e seen ISIS elements moving into the Euphrates River Valley over the past few months,”aid Cmdr. William Marks, a spokesman for the Defense Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Uzbeki had just dropped off a higher-ranking Islamic State leader in Mayadeen and was returning to Raqqa when the commandos ambushed him. Though he died, the soldiers were able to recover cellphones and other materials, a military official said.

In a similar raid in early January, American commandos killed another midlevel Islamic State leader they had been trying to capture and interrogate in the eastern Syrian province of Deir al-Zour, which is largely under Islamic State control. The insurgent, whom the military did not identify, was also killed when he resisted capture. Important information was also collected from this raid, military officials said.

The model for these kinds of operations in Syria emerged in May 2015 when two dozen Delta Force commandos entered Syria aboard Black Hawk helicopters and V-22 Ospreys from Iraq and killed Abu Sayyaf , whom American officials described as the Islamic State’ “mir of oil and gas.”

The information harvested from the laptops, cellphones and other materials recovered in the raid yielded the first important insights about the Islamic State’ leadership structure, financial operations and security measures.

Equally important, Abu Sayyaf ’ wife, Umm, who was captured in the operation, provided information to investigators for weeks, American officials said, before she was turned over to the Iraqi authorities.

So successful was that raid that seven months later, Ashton B. Carter, then the defense secretary, disclosed at a House hearing that he was creating a “pecialized expeditionary targeting force.”

The commandos —nitially numbering about 100 troops, including support personnel —ould have a mission similar to, but smaller than, the one they carried out in tandem with President George W. Bush ’ surge of American troops in Iraq in 2007. There, commandos conducted a series of high-tempo, nightly raids to capture or kill fighters from Al Qaeda and other former Baathist groups in Iraq.

In recent months, the targeting force has intensified its drone strikes and raids in Syria against the Islamic State’ external operations planners, who have inspired, supported and directed attacks beyond their declared caliphate and into the West. A small number of capture missions are in the works, tracking insurgent leaders, military officials said.

“hen the target is indeed captured alive, then we often can get even more valuable information through interrogations, immediate and continuing over time,”aid William Wechsler, a former top counterterrorism official at the Pentagon. “ll of this helps us better understand the enemy network, prioritize new targets, and identify external terrorist plots.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter  and in the Morning Briefing newsletter .

Adam Goldman contributed reporting.

PHOTO: Armed men identified by the Syrian Democratic Forces as American Special Operations forces in northern Syria last year. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DELIL SOULEIMAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE —GETTY IMAGES ) (A10)

Document INHT000020170625ed6p0000h



FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The Boys From Baga

By SARAH A. TOPOL 
10,566 words
25 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
42
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

When the boys of Baga think back to home on the shores of Lake Chad in northeastern Nigeria, they remember a life that was not hard on any human. At dusk, fishermen cast their nets in the lake's blue-green waters, careful to avoid the spots where townspeople swam and washed. The next morning, men and boys -- so many it would be impossible to count them all -- would head back after prayer to retrieve them. Some ran ''fast-fast'' into the cold waters; others tread cautiously, readying their bodies for the chill and checking for objects hidden under the surface.

Each fisherman knew his net, marked with plastic ribbons and wood, by sight. The only mix-ups were intentional, when someone wanted to steal someone else's fish. The boys knew the punishment for this: charms that could destroy your life, make a man lose his customers and shame him from showing his face in the town market. By 10 a.m., the boys walked through the encroaching Saharan sands to the mud-and-cement homes of Baga to see what their parents needed of them. Few went to school, and so by afternoon they mostly gravitated back to what they called ''the riverside,'' where they liked to go even if they had nothing to do at all.

Kolomi's group gathered on the mud-and-grass banks beneath a shady tree. They called themselves Ajegunle, the name of a neighborhood in Lagos, though they didn't know it at the time. They just liked the sound of the word. A-jeh-GOON-leh. They were jokers and pranksters and rode their bikes backward into trees and trained two brown dogs to hunt hares. They named the female Ramat, for Kolomi's school, and the male Cena, after the American wrestler John Cena, whose colorful clothes flashed across the town's TV screens.

Fannami, a small and bony 13-year-old with knotted muscles and big eyes rimmed with thick lashes, admired Ajegunle's dogs from his house. How had they trained them so well? How did they sprint so fast when Kolomi called, only to stop short on their hind legs, as if ready to dance? Since his father had died, Fannami supported his family and was often home with his mother. He greeted Kolomi every time he passed; Kolomi, a short and handsome 12-year-old with a clever smile, waved back.

Neither boy spoke to Mustapha, though they knew the lanky teenager with narrow-set eyes, whose voice seldom rose above a whisper. His group built a shed to mark its territory and had a reputation -- they smoked cigarettes and Indian hemp. Fannami and Kolomi knew that if Mustapha became angry, he would not forgive easily. Mustapha's mother died when he was young, and he heard his father's two other wives say cruel things to her before she passed. Years ago, his father was charmed, though Mustapha didn't know why. He knew only that his father lost his provisions shop selling things like macaroni and soap and that he could no longer frequent the market. Eventually, he fell ill. Mustapha, 15, didn't want that kind of trouble in his life. He avoided most people, except his best friend, Abba, who was a few years older. They told each other everything. When he was alone, he liked to walk to where the town elders gathered and sit close enough to eavesdrop. When he heard an inside joke, gossip or wisdom meant for their ears alone, it was as if he'd caught a secret.

Strangers rarely appeared at the riverside, but the boys remember when that started to change. Since they were small, they had heard about Boko Haram, which translates roughly as ''Western education is sinful.'' The group started out in the early 2000s as a peaceful protest movement 120 miles away in the state capital, Maiduguri. Its charismatic leader, Mohammed Yusuf, preached about ending endemic corruption through Shariah law and more equitably sharing the great oil wealth of Nigeria. He promised to end the poverty that plagued towns like Baga across Borno State, leaving villages without roads, electricity and water.

When Fannami's mother heard the reports, she appealed to her sister. ''Look at this man, saying 'boko haram'!'' she said. ''Does that mean we should not enroll our children in school?'' She was a kind and devout woman. She taught Fannami the Quran at home, and told him never to beg, never to gossip and always to try to forgive. She decided that she agreed with Yusuf. All along the riverside, people were talking: ''Look, some genuine people have come-o to do the work of God.''

But in 2009, after years of rising tensions and occasional violence, Nigerian troops shot hundreds of Yusuf's followers, captured him and turned him over to the police, who killed him in custody. Boko Haram went underground. Commanded by Abubakar Shekau, Yusuf's former lieutenant, the group grew increasingly militant and began to attack security services and politicians in revenge for the killings. As the insurgency unfurled across the state, it did not miss Baga. One day, armed men on motorcycles killed a politician in the central market. Mustapha watched as nobody said a thing. This was a matter between the government and Boko Haram. It was then that the unknown men began to arrive at the riverside, guns slung over their shoulders, heads wrapped in turbans leaving only their eyes visible. They paid for the things they wanted and left. Sometimes Mustapha felt fearful of them, but he wanted to sell his fish, and the insurgents were customers -- what was it his business?

Boko Haram grew bolder, and their words more threatening. They began abducting and killing innocent people in other towns -- Muslim clerics, traditional rulers, Christians and teachers, anyone who opposed their ideology. The chatter on the riverside changed as well. Whatever hope the villagers had in the organization was washed away. Ah, there's no sincerity in this thing, the people said.

Then one April day in 2013, the insurgents killed a Nigerian soldier in Baga. The Army retaliated by setting fire to the village. This had become a common military strategy -- collective retribution and scorched earth -- but no one had ever seen it on a scale like this. For two days, the earth shook and the land burned; many boys and their families hid along the riverside. When they came back, they learned some 200 people had been killed and 2,400 structures were destroyed -- homes and market stalls turned to soot and ash. Villagers swore they saw soldiers throwing children into the flames. The people of Baga had no choice but to rebuild, but they no longer trusted the military, and they didn't trust the insurgents. The boys learned to live in the between.

Kolomi was at Ajegunle's tree with his friends. It was midday and the dogs were resting at their feet when the gunfire erupted. Ramat and Cena startled and began barking. Kolomi looked around -- turbaned men stood blocking the paths from the shore to town. Boko Haram shot in the air. Some boys ran into the lake, but others didn't react fast enough. The men aimed at movement. Many fell; many were brushed by bullets; Ramat was killed.

''Nobody move!'' the men shouted. ''All of you lie down and face down!''

The boys obeyed. No matter how old or how brave, Kolomi, Fannami, Mustapha and a tall 13-year-old named Zanna, whose group usually gathered nearby, lay with their faces on the earth, flat. The men tied their hands with rope. Anyone who protested was slaughtered with knives. From the ground, the boys could hear the sounds. The insurgents ordered them into waiting trucks.

It was crowded inside. There was too much heat and not enough air. After the trucks started moving, there was no stopping and no water. The sun moved across the sky. Some boys died, lying atop other boys, a tangle of sinewy adolescent limbs that moaned, shuddered and then grew still. The boys who survived stopped feeling. Maybe the sun set, maybe another kind of darkness descended, maybe twilight settled in, but they had stopped noticing. The trucks moved north along dusty roads. They bumped past clusters of thin-leafed neem trees, spindly acacia trees and the charred remains of other villages that Boko Haram or the military had destroyed.

Over the course of a four-day siege in January 2015, Boko Haram carted away the boys of Baga. No one knows exactly how many were taken, but by the end, it seemed as if almost every family was missing a boy or a girl. Virtually an entire town's worth of children vanished. Across Borno State in that year, Boko Haram battered villages like Baga, ransacking, burning, looting, establishing control over territory or abducting people and taking them to their bases. From the parched northern border with Niger to the Sambisa Forest in the south, the insurgency seemed to know no bounds -- Cameroon, Niger and Nigeria were not safe. Boko Haram was expanding its army.

The trucks eventually stopped in front of a traditional ruler's palace, its high archways opening into grand rooms and sandy courtyards. When Fannami got out of the truck, it was dark -- all he could see were more people, all of them marching into a great hall, where they sat. They tried to be quiet, but there were whispers.

''This room is hot-o.''

''We are hungry.''

''They want to kill us and you're talking of such things?''

A young man next to Mustapha whispered to him: ''Don't you think these people want to kill us?''

''If they wanted to kill us,'' Mustapha whispered back, ''they would have killed us over there. Why would they suffer to bring us here?''

Flashlight beams illuminated drawings, dark shapes on the walls. Geometric decorations aren't uncommon on the walls of traditional palaces, but here Mustapha saw guns. Guns on the walls, guns on the insurgents.

The boys remember different greetings to their new life:

Zanna saw a big man with a turban who addressed them in Arabic. One abductee said they didn't understand the language, and the big man cocked his gun, but instead of shooting, he laughed loudly. ''You people will know your mistakes,'' he said. ''You have come to where you will enjoy your life.''

''It is God that chose you to be part of us to do the work of Allah,'' Fannami heard. ''So if you cooperate, we work together. If you don't cooperate, whatever happens is left to you. We will train and equip you to go and kill pagans.'' The people around him shouted, ''Allahu akbar!'' But Fannami didn't join in. He was thinking of his mother, who would have been at home when the violence started -- was she still alive?

''I am warning you people,'' Mustapha was told, ''anybody who disobeys any law here, we will slaughter him like a ram.''

Mustapha watched an older man rise to his feet. ''What you people did was wrong!'' he said.

The big man was silent. A younger insurgent strode over to him. ''You're the one who wants to drag with the authority?'' he asked and brought out his knife. He pierced the old man's stomach and sliced his throat. The elder's body fell heavily on those seated around him. The insurgent ordered two others to remove the head.

The boys sat in the hall all night. The insurgents passed out handfuls of dates and some water. Maybe the food and drink were charmed, for no one could sleep. Mallams back in Baga charmed water by writing a bit of the Quran on a wooden board and washing the ink into a bowl for people to drink. The next morning, the insurgents crammed the boys into the palace rooms, 30 to 50 in each. It was hot inside, and they were not allowed to open the windows. All they had were a few straw mats scattered on the floor. Boko Haram fed them a plate of rice once a day. They were told nothing, left alone with their fear and their whispers.

A week later, the insurgents opened the doors and told the boys they should get moving. Weapons training was starting. They were taken in trucks through Malam Fatori -- a commercial town on the border with Niger ringed by smaller villages, some 50 miles from Baga. They noticed that houses here were separated by farmland and trees, not packed together like back home. When the boys looked out, they could make out villages even half a mile away. At a primary school, the insurgents divided them into three groups and distributed turbans and guns.

When he first got to Malam Fatori, Zanna saw an abductee shout the name of someone he recognized. The insurgents shot the man he called to. ''Anybody that identifies anybody, we're going to kill that one who is identified,'' they told them. So the boys became deaf and mute. They learned to communicate with their eyes.

The instructors taught them how to shoot an AK-47, load ammunition and aim at targets. They learned that if they wanted to kill the enemy instantly, they should shoot the head, chest or stomach, but if they wanted to bring him to the camp and dismember him, they should shoot the hands or the legs. They were better fed during training. Three times a day female captives prepared food for them like biski, a local dish of ground cornmeal, with meat or vegetable soup. They were also given dates and water. The water was murky. So the boys continued to wonder if it was charmed. Otherwise, why would they start feeling so strange after they drank it? They became seriously interested in learning how to be like those people.

Zanna felt so strong he imagined he could lift the big man and throw him.

Mustapha wasn't sure he felt anything at all.

At first, those in Mustapha's group shot bags of sand, but later, the insurgents marched out eight or nine people they had sentenced to death. They told Mustapha's group to form a U around them. The group raised their guns. Mustapha took aim at one of the men; he was light in complexion, tall and slim. When the instructors said, ''Shoot!'' Mustapha fired. He moved his gun to a second man and shot him too, then he trained his gun on the third. He was sure he was the one who killed the first man, but he didn't know if he killed the second. Today, when Mustapha thinks of all the men he has killed, he cannot remember. He can only recall the ones he started with.

The eight-year conflict between Boko Haram and the Nigerian state has killed more than 20,000 and displaced millions. The people have slipped out of Boko Haram's control quietly by night or trudged en masse from a large-scale attack to the Borno state capital, Maiduguri. It was not until parents started pouring into the city that aid workers realized a new dimension of the problem. They saw the crowds of women and girls coming in and wondered: Where are the boys? No one knows exactly how many boys have been taken, though estimates number up to 10,000 -- a stolen generation. ''If we want to go back and try to maybe compute the demographics before Boko Haram, I am sure that we can arrive at some reasonable estimate,'' Geoffrey Ijumba, Unicef's chief field officer in Maiduguri, told me. ''But that will only be an assumption -- this is not factual. The only thing that is factual is that the boys are missing.''

Like many armed groups, Boko Haram uses a variety of methods aimed at changing an abducted child's identity and breaking their bonds to home, making any return to their old life extraordinarily difficult. This is an intellectual and emotional separation that surpasses the physical one. As the group steadily escalates a child's participation in violence, they are resocializing them. Training breaks a child's will, and the first kill is a kind of baptism. Ritual becomes important. Charms and magic reduce guilt. Killing becomes normalized. The more gratuitous the violence -- gang rape, ceremonial sacrifice, mutilating and murdering neighbors or family members -- the harder it becomes to contemplate returning home.

''Over time, this strains the children's ability to cope and to stay true to their civilian identity,'' says Michael Wessells, a professor in the Program on Forced Migration and Health at Columbia University. ''Many children engage in this strategy of splitting -- technically the term would be 'disassociation.' '' Disassociation is akin to being torn in half -- children see or feel the atrocities they commit like surreal dreams. This allows them to exist in a state somewhere between their previous selves and the reality of their new life.

''There is not much choice,'' Helle Harnisch, a Ph.D. fellow at Dignity, the Danish Institute Against Torture, told me. ''They have to change their ways, or they will get killed.'' Harnisch has spent five years researching the Lord's Resistance Army in Uganda -- one of the more infamous groups to use child soldiers. ''It is simple: Either I do this, or I die.''

Over three weeks this winter, I spoke with 25 children across Borno State. And while it's true that the world of a child combatant is a powerless one, the children all made small calculations in how to go about surviving. They stole moments of agency. I met one 16-year-old girl who was forcibly married three times. When her second ''husband'' told her he was going to Bama, the town she was from, she made a snap decision to pretend she was in love with him. She smiled at him for the first time and asked him to pass a message to her mother. He did so twice until he was killed.

Some boys lived in two dozen tarpaulin tents in the bush, others in entire occupied towns, like Malam Fatori. Some were kept inside houses for the whole of their abduction and lectured on Boko Haram's ideology. Others were given jobs, from logistical to tactical. One boy was given a bicycle to deliver tea around the camp all day. Some looted, loading trucks with pilfered village goods, searching dead bodies for jewelry and cash. A boy who had finished the fifth grade was called by the top emir of his camp to be his personal satellite-phone assistant. The emir was illiterate, so the boy was responsible for saving numbers and reading the caller ID aloud. Another drove a motorcycle to and from wells, bringing water back to the camp. Abuar, who told me he was 16 though he looked no older than 13, was given the job of feeding an antiaircraft gun mounted on the back of a Toyota HiLux pickup truck. At times, Abuar had to trail behind fighters with a bag of spare magazines, throwing them cartridges once they expended their ammunition. Another boy I spoke to carried petrol drums for militants to raze villages.

Abuar told me about a strategy that his commander employed: When facing the military, small boys in his unit, called ''new catch,'' were ordered to lead the advance, shooting wildly. Behind them marched captured herdsmen, driving their cows and rams. Senior insurgents, moving on foot or in vehicles, brought up the rear. The insurgents noted the number of dead animals as they passed. ''The number of animals dying determined the strength of the military's shooting and whether the insurgents would continue to come with us or they would run back,'' Abuar explained. I asked why they counted the dead animals and not the dead children. ''They don't count our corpses,'' he explained, ''because the belief is human beings may dodge or may hide to avoid bullets, but animals are just moving. They're easier killed.'' At the end of the operation, he told me, the insurgents ''would gather the dead animals along with the corpses of the new catch, set them ablaze and go away.'' A pile of dead cattle and small boys on fire.

After the training ended, the boys were taken back to the palace in Malam Fatori. The largest building was used as the private quarters of the leader, or babban emir, but there were other structures, too -- a labyrinth of spaces for purposes the boys did not know. Gathered in the sandy courtyard, the babban emir stood before them with his two subordinates, whom the boys called the second emir and the third emir. Tall and mature, the babban emir wore a traditional white jalabiya and cap. Mustapha wasn't sure how old he was, no more than 30. The babban emir divided the assembled boys. Kolomi was sorted into the third emir's unit and told to get up and follow his new leader. Mustapha and Zanna, bigger and stronger, were assigned to guard the babban emir's palace.

Zanna took a post at the back side of the palace with 20 others. He tried not to talk to anyone -- it wasn't safe. Every day, from the time of his abduction through his training, he prayed in his heart for a chance to escape. Mustapha, too, was afraid, but more, he was confused. This was a problem with no solution. No help was coming. What to do?

The rhythm of camp life enveloped the new abductees. Activity was concentrated around the palace, everyone working to fortify the heart of the base against the Nigerian military, which periodically probed their defenses, trying to retake Malam Fatori. Boko Haram had declared itself a caliphate and pledged its alliance to ISIS. A tug of war for the arid earth had ensued. Every morning, the deputy emirs, whose units lived in the surrounding villages to protect the center, would come to greet the babban emir, entering his building for a private audience. Directives from Shekau may have been conveyed by satellite phone. There was coordination with the other babban emirs as well, but the boys of Malam Fatori never interacted with neighboring fiefs. Though Boko Haram was hierarchal, it was also fragmented, each division preoccupied with ensuring its own survival.

In the morning, groups set out on patrol in their trucks, checking the areas around Malam Fatori for traces of movement overnight -- new tire prints, footsteps or animal tracks. Mustapha would quietly accompany the insurgents on patrol. He wanted to see how everything worked. Throughout the day, women who had been captured from nearby towns cooked food, which the insurgents ate from communal troughs. At night, the boys could sleep in any room in the palace compound, so long as it wasn't in a room where women were kept. They barely prayed, and no one knew what day it was -- only Fridays stood out, because on that day, they were fed rice with meat stew.

Mustapha again drew close to those who whispered. This was not a place to isolate yourself. He noticed the senior insurgents didn't like people who didn't have action. Those without action are lazy. When they talk, they cannot command, so they cannot send fear into someone. Men of action, however, were free to go where they wanted: to the market, to the tarred road outside the camp, even to other Boko Haram-controlled villages, where they could stay overnight.

One night after dinner, Mustapha was sitting in a room with the guards, reflecting on his problem. Boys chatted lazily by torchlight. There was no solution. No help was coming. What to do? If you do not put in effort, they will not draw you close. You will just be among those that they could do without. He turned it over again. What to do? Look, Mustapha told himself, if I want to get out of this place, let me obey whatever they say. Let me do as they want. Is it not by cooperating with them that I can get my freedom? If I want to survive here, let me just be doing what they like. When they notice that, they will trust me. No, more, let me do what will earn me commendation.

Mustapha started looking for his chance.

After weapons training, Fannami was taken to a village on the outskirts of Malam Fatori to join his unit. Their leader, the second emir, was fat and well kept, his house cooled by an air-conditioner powered by a generator. He told his new recruits that they were the Special Forces, a strike force for dangerous missions. Fannami learned his group did not accept anyone older than 15. They didn't want people who would be thinking about their family. ''We want people who when they are determined to do something, they will just go ahead and do it,'' their emir told them.

A second round of training began. The boys in his unit were taught how to climb trees and lay ambush on soldiers, how to counter military attacks, how to use a rocket launcher. They now learned to work different types of bombs -- heavy ones that could be exploded by remote control, others they threw by hand and some they buried in the ground for vehicles.

Training took place every day in an open field. As they practiced, instructors circled them in a kiriku, a small armored tank not much bigger than a car. The kiriku dropped bombs on the ground, unleashing heavy booms. The explosions initially scared Fannami, but he grew used to the sound. They learned to drive the kiriku, as well as cars and motorcycles. They were taught how to arrange themselves in the trucks for operations: The front seat was for those people who killed without a second mind; the rest piled into the back.

At the end of the training, the insurgents returned them to the emir's palace, where Fannami found some uniformed persons -- military or police -- tied to a stake. ''Shoot and kill,'' the instructors commanded. If a boy was not able to kill, the men would take the boy away and beat him seriously, then bring him back another day to shoot and kill. So it was then that Fannami learned to kill human beings. Fannami knew the insurgents were always watching. He learned that if they were to go out on operation, they would identify those who performed excellently and reward them. They could promote them to the front seat of a truck, or let them go and friend a girl from the two rooms where abducted women were kept. The boys would be killed if the magic dates or charmed water failed and a person returned to his senses, making unguarded statements about wanting to go home or that what they were doing there was wrong -- saying so many things.

At night, the boys would sleep in the village's deserted houses in shifts. Some rooms held up to 10 boys. They didn't have mattresses, they didn't even have mats. There were so many mosquitoes. When the wind blew, it got cold. Fannami would squeeze himself into his clothes -- all he had was what he was abducted in, a red T-shirt and black trousers, and his new turban. Sometimes, the cold entered his body while he slept, and he would wake up and remember Baga. There, if it was cold, he would wake to find himself covered in a cloth. In the morning, he would ask his mother, and she would say she was the one who covered him. If there were many mosquitoes, his mother would come and use a cloth to drive them away and light a mosquito coil in his room. All those things -- anytime Fannami woke up, he would realize he was missing them.

It was after Mustapha's first raid on a village -- after they'd killed many people and returned to find their men rejoicing and were fed a great celebratory feast of jollof rice with fish. It was after he was ordered to shoot an elderly man for an offense -- he didn't know what. It was after he was asked to go with five insurgents to a village for ''a small thing,'' which turned out to be a beheading, and where Mustapha, being the newest of the group, was told to do it. It was after he killed a man on a motorcycle just to commandeer the shiny bike. (When Mustapha thinks of it now, this is the one he mourns. ''The first two, I killed them on instruction,'' he explains. ''The last one, nobody asked me to kill him.'') It was after all these attempts to gain Boko Haram's trust that one day, some weeks after training ended, he volunteered to go and find two fellow insurgents who had been arrested and detained by the authorities.

Mustapha tracked them to a nearby police station. When he arrived, playing the part of a local villager, the police stopped him and inquired what he was doing. He asked if there was anything he could help them with but was sent away. Back in Malam Fatori, he collected a few others and led them to the station, where they opened fire. The group killed six policemen. They abducted two girls and freed the insurgents.

When the babban emir heard of this, he gathered the men of the camp and addressed Mustapha. ''You went,'' he said. ''You rescued these two without any injury. You killed those policemen. You took their vehicle and brought it to us. You are definitely going to be very useful to us. I'm proud of you.''

''I thank you so much,'' Mustapha responded and presented the babban emir with the girls they abducted. ''I dash you these ones.''

''You are now the second emir of the camp,'' the babban emir told Mustapha, and gave him a new name. The other emirs were demoted to third and fourth in the camp. Everyone cheered ''Allahu akbar!'' and shot their guns into the air. The babban emir divided those assembled before him again and led Mustapha to his new base -- an abandoned village on the side of town. They inspected the terrain together. The babban emir told the second emir which house should be his. Mustapha's new home had a master bedroom with a bed and a mattresses and, what Mustapha liked most, a sitting room with a big rug, two wooden chairs and enough windows to allow a gentle cross breeze. He now had three trucks at his disposal, though he did not know how to drive.

The second emir's men -- 60 of them, of all ages -- carried things from the babban emir's stores: food, women and ammunition. Mustapha told them where everything should go. He let his people select the best houses in the village. That night, all those earlier confusions vanished. Mustapha had found his solution. I will go all out to execute the babban emir's instructions, he decided, rightly or wrongly.

The night the third emir announced the operation, Fannami had trouble sleeping. Before morning prayer, he readied himself, tucking his shirt into his trousers, tying on his turban and putting on the big green military helmet snatched from a dead soldier. Fannami never found a uniform to fit his scrawny frame. The boys stuffed handfuls of dates into their pockets and climbed into the backs of the trucks, eating as the convoy moved.

The trucks stopped in an open field. Hopping down, they saw that the senior insurgents were standing near thick bundles of grass that concealed holes in the earth: entrances to tunnels. The insurgents had honeycombed the area around their base. The most experienced knew which tunnel would take them beneath the soldiers and which one could turn you into a target. ''Go into that one!'' they commanded. ''Go around. Go to that side!'' Fannami bent down and walked through one for a long time. When he emerged, he found himself directly behind a large group of uniformed soldiers.

The insurgents were still organizing when the fighting began. They had not expected such a large enemy force. These soldiers were not like usual Nigerian military units, who spent more time shooting into the air and running back and forth, uselessly. They were organized and immovable. (Later, Fannami learned they were from the Multinational Joint Task Force -- special forces from Nigeria, Niger, Benin, Chad and Cameroon.) Fannami knew he was supposed to be at the front, leading the attack: The insurgents had told him the soldiers didn't like killing young ones. But he hated it there; he always tried to go to the middle or even to the back. He scanned for somewhere to take cover. As he looked ahead, he realized how many in the front had been killed. His mind cut, and his heart thrummed. His legs were too weak to carry him. Others must have felt the same, because many were turning back, so Fannami tried to run, but he tripped and fell. Something metal pierced his flip-flop.

Fannami watched as a boy running past him stopped. He threw his gun to the ground and heaved Fannami onto his back. There was so much blood. As the boy ran, Fannami's blood trickled down the boy's pants. When the boy tired, he put Fannami down.

''Thank you,'' Fannami said.

''I was afraid, but I couldn't leave you there,'' the boy replied. ''I had to carry you.'' His name was Sale. It was then that Fannami decided this boy would be his friend.

Fannami and Sale began finding each other at meals. They liked to take the individual plates they were served and mix them into one big pile to share. Sale told Fannami his mother died when he was born. Fannami told Sale his father died when he was small, but he still remembered him. He talked about his kind mother. They wished over and over again that they could go home.

''Don't worry,'' Sale told him, ''by the special grace of God, sooner or later, we shall leave here. God will not leave us in this place.''

''That is true,'' Fannami replied. ''We shall surely leave, by the will of God.''

They repeated these words to each other cautiously, aware that if insurgents realized you were fond of spending time with someone, they would also suspect you might be planning an escape. So Fannami and Sale mixed their food only once every three days. When they did, they made sure not to sit together for more than an hour. If they really wanted to stay in each other's company, they would go into the bush and pretend to hunt.

One night Fannami dreamed that the insurgents told them that the war was over, that they had conquered Nigeria. ''Everybody go back home!'' they said. When Fannami returned, his mother saw him and was crying: ''Where have you gone? You have spoiled yourself. You have carried a lot of sins.'' She put him in a room, bathed him and changed his clothes. In his dream, he was happy.

Fannami's mother had taught him not to fight, even when people insulted him. It was a sin to do so. But in the bush, Fannami saw everyone's bad habits were magnified. Those who were bad now had the opportunity to be worse, and they were. Now that I have found myself where I should not be, Fannami told himself, I should not make my situation worse by fighting people. The best thing is, let me be showing gratitude to God by exhibiting good habits.

But there were times when he, too, would get carried away. During an operation, he would be shooting -- the heavy gun shaking his body and making a sweet, satisfying noise. People would be running away from him, hiding behind a building, and Fannami would be running toward them. Then he would start to wonder: What has this person ever done to me? What is happening to me? He would drop the idea. So many things like that happened.

Fannami's unit once went to raid a village, unaware that the military was stationed there. The soldiers killed many of their people, but in the end, the insurgents drove them away. The boys were told to go back and remove the corpses of their fallen heroes. When Fannami arrived, he saw so many bodies. Children even younger than himself. He didn't know their names, but he'd seen some of their faces. Fannami helped carry them to a shallow grave. I could also be killed, Fannami thought, and this is how they are going to pick up my corpse and bury it. After they finished, he found a tree and climbed it. He didn't know what else to do. Alone in the branches, he cried. After the small bodies were buried, the insurgents gave the village a long time to forget that Boko Haram had ever visited them. Then they went back and killed every young man there. They abducted the women and children and even the old men. The village's offense was housing the soldiers. To Fannami it felt like justice.

Mustapha now had no restrictions except the customary morning visit to the palace, where he greeted the babban emir and took his instructions. If there were none, Mustapha could tell him he wanted to go on patrol, and the babban emir would nod. Back at the base, Mustapha was in charge. Minor infractions, punishable by flogging, rarely came to him, but any decision for execution rested with him. He dealt with these about once a month, but they did not weigh on him -- everyone knew the rules. The guilty were never shot; they were slaughtered with knives.

Among those in his camp were men whose job it was to collect the blood from executions, put it in a black plastic bucket and keep it for when the insurgents returned from war so they could wash their hands in it. Mustapha did not know why they did this, just that the insurgents had been washing their hands with blood when he arrived, and so after returning from battle he, too, washed his hands with blood, sinking them deep in the bucket, lifting them out and rubbing his palms together.

Mustapha found he enjoyed his new life so much he did not even want to remember having been a fisherman. Each morning, he woke early and took his breakfast. Boys brought him water in which to bathe, and his bathroom was always stocked with soap and cream. The women working in his house asked what he wanted for dinner and washed his clothes. He found himself eating often with a young man in his early 20s named Mubarak. Mubarak gave Mustapha good advice and was thoughtful. Mustapha never told Mubarak something and heard it later from someone else. He reminded him of his friend Abba back in Baga. He had the same quiet laugh and the same walk, a slow drag of his legs as if they were too heavy to lift off the earth.

Mustapha now had a dozen outfits to chose from, including a camouflage vest reserved for emirs. By 7 a.m., he would go to his base and dispatch his people for patrol, then spend the day sitting with his men, listening to their chatter. Mustapha was young, so he adopted a strategy: He didn't harass those under him needlessly. He never ordered people to go bring him things. He did everything himself. He rarely spoke. That way, when he did command his men, in his soft, low voice, they would know he was serious.

Mustapha knew it was important to remain light. He had noticed the great changes in himself. Back in Baga, if he saw a dead body being conveyed to the cemetery, that day was a problem for him. He would leave his room and spend the night among his half brothers out of fear. But since he got to Malam Fatori, Mustapha sometimes caught himself wondering: Am I the same person? Myself, who doesn't want to see corpses, I can now just cross over them and go back to a sound sleep? There were drugs in camp, sold by people who brought them from outside villages. Mustapha got his free. He took a pill called Desert 200, which he had also taken back in Baga to help him forget anything that disturbed him. Now he moved about with it in his pocket all the time; he hardly did anything serious without taking it.

When Mustapha felt inclined, he could go into the special rooms at the emir's palace or at his own base and pick a girl to friend. On entering, he would always spot the one he liked, no matter how many were there. When he called them, most girls would oblige. Some of the girls he pointed to would be shedding tears, but they did not make any effort to stop him. He was sure they knew what was about to happen. Perhaps they were only feigning reluctance modestly. They would make it look as if they didn't want to, but when he took one home, she would cooperate. ''Oh, I don't like it,'' some said, even when it was just the two of them. But as she was saying ''Oh, I don't like it,'' she would be undressing.

When he first brought Bintu home, she was not free with him. She was very angry and so worried. ''Look, better relax your mind,'' Mustapha told her. ''There's nothing you can do. Relax your mind. It will be better for you.'' Afterward, Mustapha did not order her to return to the rooms. A short time later, when he got malaria, Bintu was the one who cooked for him and took care of his feverish sweats. He did not send her away after he recovered. She slept in his bed, and Mustapha didn't friend anyone else. Often when he looked at Bintu, he felt like laughing, and she would ask him, ''Why are you looking at me and laughing?'' And Mustapha would say, ''O.K., if you don't want me to, lower your face.'' So Bintu would look down, and then she, too, would laugh. Sometimes Bintu would start: ''When I look at you ... '' and Mustapha would finish ''I feel like laughing.'' They would laugh together.

Whenever a woman at Mustapha's base delivered a son, he reported the birth to the babban emir. The other emirs did the same. One month after the birth, a man from the palace would come to collect the baby, and everyone would know. In the palace courtyard, the baby would be put on a special table with a hole in the middle. Anybody could watch as they lay the baby flat, neck over the hole. The emir from the unit would be given a special knife -- sharp, double-edged with a black handle. He would use it to slaughter the baby. The blood would drain through the hole and into a bucket. That was how the insurgents slaughtered their sons. Mustapha couldn't ask questions. He slaughtered four babies this way. It was just something that needed doing.

Sometimes reinforcements from the babban emir's guard would come to assist Kolomi's unit. When they heard the boys complaining about the fourth emir, they would say: ''Ah-ha, your emir is better. His own problem is just women. If you meet the second emir, that's when you know that you have seen a wicked person.'' Kolomi didn't often think about Baga. But one day he was in the kitchen collecting his food when he saw the pot. It was the same kind they used at the riverside to cook pepper soup from the fish they caught. From then on, Kolomi didn't like going to the kitchen. Each time, he would see the pot and say to himself: Oh, this life, it is not reliable. Look at me, here I am doing what I did not bargain for.

Fannami had also heard the rumors about Mustapha: The second emir was the most wicked emir, who easily ordered executions.

Zanna heard no such thing. He knew Mustapha was fearless, but he did not think him wicked. In Baga, he had seen Mustapha fight only when someone touched something that belonged to him.

Whenever the deputy emirs were going on an operation, they could come to the palace and choose reinforcements. Zanna's body shook when he saw an emir walking the perimeter. He would sweat, even when the weather was not hot. He would pray again and again in his heart that they not pick him. But when the second emir came, Zanna felt more at ease. Zanna was sure Mustapha recognized him, even if their eyes never met. Mustapha didn't pick him to go on an operation. He came to the palace three times and never chose Zanna. This is how Zanna knew Mustapha was protecting him. God has joined my blood and his blood, Zanna told himself.

The fourth time, the babban emir escorted Mustapha and pointed at Zanna's post. ''You go and join him,'' the babban emir said. Zanna got up and followed Mustapha. The babban emir turned back to look at Mustapha. ''You look angry,'' he said. ''Is there a problem?''

''No, nothing,'' Mustapha responded.

Zanna could tell that Mustapha was angry. Mustapha doesn't want me to go to war, Zanna thought. Before battle, Mustapha shook hands with all of his reinforcements and told them to be careful during the operation. They prayed for success and set off. Mustapha assigned Zanna to the group in the back and went ahead. When the battle started, Zanna dropped his gun and escaped. This is how Zanna is sure the second emir saved his life and wasn't wicked at all.

Mustapha was sitting on the floor of his bedroom one evening when the question came to mind. He could hear people talking outside. Leaning against the wall, he rested his gun between his legs. We are always using blood to wash our hands. Blood of children or adults who are going to school. And that system may never stop. He turned it over and over in his mind. It may never stop. He thought about it for a long time, then drifted off to sleep.

The next morning, something in him had changed. He lost interest in that place. He tried to keep up appearances. He went out on patrol and sat with his men, but he stayed away from the babban emir. After four days, the babban emir sent a message for Mustapha to come to the palace.

''I hope all is well,'' he said. ''I have not seen you for some time.''

''I am not feeling very fine,'' Mustapha told him.

''Why didn't you tell anybody? And you're still going out on patrol?''

''Yes,'' Mustapha said.

''Stay behind. Don't be going out until you recover fully,'' the babban emir advised.

''Thank you,'' Mustapha said, and was dismissed.

So Mustapha stuck to his daily routine. He continued raiding and warring. Afterward, like everyone else, he would wash his hands in blood. But now he didn't dip his hands all the way, just his fingertips.

A few weeks later, Mustapha was in one of his trucks, on his way to the big tarred road about an hour's drive from camp to attack vehicles passing with goods. His friend Mubarak was at the wheel. Mustapha sat quietly in the passenger seat, smoking his Benson & Hedges. There were two boys in the back seat, and five standing in the back.

''Look, this type of thing we are doing,'' Mustapha told Mubarak suddenly. ''I'm sure there are some of us that do not want to do it. They are just doing it because they have no alternative. I'm sure if some of them get the opportunity to escape, they wouldn't mind escaping.''

Mubarak laughed his soft way and said nothing.

''Look, I'm serious,'' Mustapha said. ''I'm not joking.''

''Ah, I thought you just wanted to hear what people would say,'' Mubarak ventured cautiously. ''I didn't know you were serious. No problem, then: By the will of God, God will create a situation for us where we can escape.''

Mustapha was silent. Mubarak kept driving.

They pulled up under a large acacia tree where the insurgents usually waited until the afternoon traffic reached its peak. Mustapha's boys got out of the car and stood under the shade, waiting. Mustapha opened his door, but stayed in the car, facing them. He turned to Mubarak again. ''Mubarak, it's just like what I told you. This job, a lot of people are tired of it. If they see the chance, they don't mind escaping.'' He had everyone's attention. ''Look, gentlemen, see what I said in the vehicle, how do you people see it?''

''You are our leader: Anything you decide, we are ready for it,'' someone said, as others in the circle nodded.

Another, older than Mustapha, took care to look anywhere but at his emir. ''No,'' he said, ''we are doing the work of God. We cannot say we should stop and go. How can you be talking like that? The best thing is we should endure. The work of God is always hard.''

A debate began, some saying what they would do if they had their chance. One said he didn't know where he would run, because he had no relatives. Others seemed buoyed by the prospect of going home. Mustapha smoked silently in the car. In the end, there were three who said they did not want to go.

''Shoot them,'' Mustapha said. The others fired.

Mustapha finished his cigarette and got out of the car and looked at his remaining boys. ''O.K.,'' he said. ''Let's go.'' They decided to head to a junction they had heard about with easy roads leading to Niger and Maiduguri. Along the way, Mustapha's mind refused to settle. Could some of our people go out on patrol and discover those corpses? Could they scout our vehicle and try to block us? Will soldiers find us?

It was early evening when they arrived at the junction and found a nearby ditch to push their truck into. They stashed their guns, knives and turbans in the truck and covered it in grass. Mustapha turned to his men to issue his final command: ''We should all move individually, because moving in a group, even if it is a group of two, can raise suspicion. All of you should be careful. Don't show as if you are from the bush. When you see water, wash your body, look clean.'' Everyone raised their arms, fists clenched, a farewell salute. Then each one turned and started walking in his own direction.

Mustapha walked for a few miles in his military boots before tossing one behind and one ahead. He knew people feared unknown faces, so he always pretended as if he came from a neighboring town. At night, he would look for the lights of a village, a lantern or a fire. He would sleep in the local market, after people had left their stalls. Early in the morning he would leave. It took Mustapha five days to reach Maiduguri. The city rose from the sands, crammed with people, cars, market stalls and auto-rickshaws. While Mustapha had been in the bush, Boko Haram continued to fight for territory. Refugee camps mushroomed -- 12 at last count. Fewer than a quarter of the new arrivals settled in the camps; the rest squatted or lived with relatives. Mustapha went immediately to seek news of Baga. He had been gone for more than a year and a half.

Fannami was captured by soldiers. They tied his hands and put him in the back of a truck. He was more scared at that moment then he had been during the initial abduction. He was no longer innocent. When the truck broke down, Fannami ran into the darkness and dropped down, crawling until he reached a bush where he spent the night. Kolomi was also captured by soldiers. When his truck stopped, he asked if he could relieve himself and slipped away, too. Given the chance, they scattered like children of birds.

When Fannami got to Maiduguri, he asked for an area where he remembered his relatives had lived. When he arrived there, he asked for their house. He found his mother. She stood up, came to him and held him. They sat down together and started crying. Fannami was unkempt, he was hungry and in his heart he knew he had sinned. Fannami's mother told him to go and take a bath. She brought him new clothes to wear, and she fed him chicken. It was just as he'd dreamed.

Fannami's mother told him that many villagers from Baga had escaped and made their way to Maiduguri. But she cautioned him not to tell anyone what had happened to him. All the boys had to be wary of the military and the Civilian Joint Task Force, a vigilante group the government authorized in 2013 to fight Boko Haram. Any involvement with insurgents was treated as abetting. Adults and children with any association with Boko Haram are taken to the notorious Giwa Barracks, where they are detained indefinitely in squalid conditions. Boys whom I interviewed told me they had been crammed in cells with between 50 and 100 other children, forbidden to speak to one another and unable to contact their families until the military decided, seemingly at random, to release them. Human rights groups speak of extrajudicial killings by the Civilian J.T.F. as an open secret.

Once children were released from Giwa, the Nigerian government considered them ''cleared.'' If they moved into an official camp, there were free schools and sporadic psychosocial support programs, but the need far outpaced the response. For former abductees who moved into the community, there were even fewer options. Children were essentially left to fend for themselves. Aid agencies descended to assist with famine, acute malnutrition, education and peer-to-peer counseling, but none of these efforts had reached the boys I spoke to. When I asked, they said they didn't even want the help. They thought they'd be turned over to the military and to Giwa Barracks. They had reason to fear. The Nigerian government has been keeping the Chibok girls who were rescued from captivity in custody for the past eight months.

For those who avoided Giwa, life became uncertain. Fannami didn't know what to do with himself when he returned. ''In the morning, I would quickly come out of the house as if I'm going to do something important. But what really used to bring me out was to watch children going to school. Then I would look at the road. I would see people of different ages, including young men, driving cars. I would say, Have I lost out? Can I ever be like these people? Is the opportunity still there? Why did I make this mistake? If I had left the whole of this area when insurgency started, before I was abducted, wouldn't it have been better?'' Fannami, more than anything, wanted to go to school.

During Eid al-Adha, the feast of the sacrifice, Fannami ate chicken for the second time and went to the zoo. He was entranced by the lion. He is seeing us like meat, but he has no right to come out of his cage and catch us, he thought. On his way out, he passed Kolomi. The boy with the dogs! He went back and introduced himself. When they pieced together that they had both been in Malam Fatori at the same time, Kolomi felt relieved that someone else had passed through this trouble. Fannami was angry. If he'd been around people from home, perhaps he could have escaped sooner. Kolomi was living with his older sister and going to school. He had forgotten many details about his time in Malam Fatori and didn't know why. It was as if someone had scrawled an eraser through his memory at random.

Fannami later saw Zanna at the barber shop where he worked sweeping the floor. ''I know you from Baga!'' Fannami said. ''Yes, it's true,'' Zanna said. Fannami also saw Mustapha on the street, but he never spoke to him. Mustapha looked the same in and out of the bush -- his eyes hadn't changed. Fannami did not want anything to do with him.

When Mustapha arrived in Maiduguri, he waited a week before going to find his grandmother. It took two more days for him to see his older sister. He told them that Boko Haram detained him in a house for a month, until soldiers had liberated them. ''I know how society is,'' he explained. ''I know how they are treating the parents of children that joined Boko Haram. Why should I put my relations in that situation?'' He moved out of his grandmother's house as soon as he could -- he did not feel free there -- and started washing cars and three-wheeled auto-rickshaws, called keke Napep. The owners left their keys so the washers could park the vehicles when they were done, and so Mustapha finally learned to drive. Mustapha decided to hang around the drivers, pulling shifts, and soon he got a vehicle from someone with a fleet and started driving full time. Sometimes, without warning, he remembers, and he is back in Malam Fatori. If he's carrying passengers, they will notice and ask: ''What is wrong? You look so worried, you have changed.'' He will tell them, ''It's nothing.'' But when they are gone, he will park on the side of the road and pretend to be repairing something until he comes back fully to his senses.

I met these boys in hotel rooms that felt in turn like safe houses and prisons. None of the boys know their exact age. Fannami and Zanna estimate they are now 15, Kolomi says he is 14 and Mustapha thinks he is around 18, but looks younger. They all chose the names that were used in this article. Day after day, they returned to tell me about things they had all tried to forget. They came before or after work, between jobs, after school, on the weekends. I began to wonder why. Unlike the abduction of the Chibok girls, which briefly turned into a global sympathy saga, no one seemed to care about the boys from Baga. These children walked out of hell into a world that didn't seem to want them. The stories they told me about rituals like infant slaughter and bathing your hands in blood have not been previously reported as part of life under Boko Haram. But their stories were consistent, and rumors of such acts have circulated around northeast Nigeria.

While the rest of the boys would come to the hotel and drape themselves over the furniture, their teenage frames straining with muscles and hormones (they closed their eyes midinterview, crinkled plastic soda bottles, cracked their knuckles, burped and laughed), Mustapha always sat straight and still. He was always on time. Unlike the other boys, he asked me nothing about myself. He made wry rhetorical jokes, like when I asked him if during his abduction, from the back of the truck, he could see the stars. ''How could I pay attention to the sky?'' he told me, laughing. ''It didn't come to my mind. I didn't know there was something like sky existing.''

I asked him to draw me the layout of the emir's palace. When I handed him my pen, he looked at it bemused, asking the translator what he was supposed to do with it. ''I have never handled a pen,'' he remarked. When he was done, he told the translator he thought his drawing was terrible. ''Do you see how the lines I drew bent?'' he asked us. I told him things bend in real life.

A few months before I spoke to him, Mustapha leased his own vehicle. In a few more months, he will own it. I asked Mustapha if he ever contrasted any of the luxuries of life as the second emir to his new life as a driver. Sitting on the carpet floor, he leaned back on an armchair with his legs stretched out and spoke slowly. ''If you look at what I told you, I started as someone washing other people's vehicles. I came to be driving as a second driver to the main driver. Then I became a driver. Now I'm driving my own. So there is improvement,'' he said. ''I never in my life contemplate that the other life was better. That life was life as an abductee, life as a slave. This one is life in freedom.'' He has a girlfriend now who had been a passenger; he thinks he may marry her one day. ''If I'm angry, I go to her, and she knows how to talk to me. We end up laughing, and I will forget I was angry.'' He will never tell her his story. If she asks, he says, he will tell her, ''There was a time they drove us away, and we ran.''

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

This story was created with support from the Pulitzer Center.

Sarah A. Topol is a writer based in Istanbul. She has written for The Atlantic, GQ, Harper's, The New Republic, Outside and more. She won the Kurt Schork Award for her coverage of the civil war in Libya. Glenna Gordon is a photographer and has worked regularly throughout Africa since 2006.

Fannami was a 13-year-old fisherman when he was captured by Boko Haram. (MM42-MM43); ABOVE: Custom House, a camp on the outskirts of Maiduguri, Nigeria, for people displaced by the conflict with Boko Haram, has more than 9,000 residents. (MM44-MM45); Kolomi was 12 when he and his friends were herded by Boko Haram into trucks and forced to become soldiers. (MM46); ABOVE: Ali was kept alive by Boko Haram for his farming skills but severely beaten and burned when he refused to go to a training camp. After he escaped, he was held in the Army's infamous Giwa Barracks for months. (MM51); The remains of a primary school in Maiduguri bombed by Boko Haram in 2014. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GLENNA GORDON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM52-MM53) 

Document NYTF000020170625ed6p0007a



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Strikes Kill Top Figures in  ISIS , but the Most Notorious Target Remains Elusive

By HELENE COOPER 
727 words
24 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- On the same day the Pentagon announced it had killed yet another Islamic State leader that few Americans have heard of, Fawaz Muhammad Jubayr Al-Rawi, American officials also said they do not know if the Islamic State's most well-known name, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , is still alive.

Officials cautioned that they have no evidence that Mr. Baghdadi is dead. But the dueling narratives illustrate the plodding nature of the Defense Department 's fight against the militant Sunni Islamic extremist group, which is, after almost three years of airstrikes, on the back foot in both Iraq and Syria.

Every couple of weeks, the United States Central Command, which oversees combat operations in the Middle East, announces the death of an Islamic State leader who has been killed in airstrikes. On Tuesday, it was Turki al-Bin'ali, whom the American-led coalition called the ''self-proclaimed grand mufti or chief cleric'' of the Islamic State, killed in a May 31 airstrike in Mayadin, Syria. Two weeks before that, it was Samir Idris, whom the Defense Department said was a ''key'' Islamic State financier of attacks around the world, also killed near Mayadin.

On Friday, it was Mr. Rawi, a Syrian labeled by the Pentagon ''an experienced terrorist financial facilitator,'' who moved millions of dollars for the Islamic State's attack and logistics network.

Mr. Rawi owned a currency exchange that he used, along with a network of global financial contacts, ''to move money into and out of ISIS-controlled territory and across borders,'' a Defense Department statement said, using an acronym for the Islamic State. The Treasury Department had imposed sanctions on Mr. Rawi and his company in December.

As for Mr. Baghdadi, the Defense Department has no concrete evidence of whether he is still alive, Col. Ryan Dillon, a spokesman for the American-led coalition that is fighting the Islamic State, told reporters on Friday from Baghdad.

''That said, we don't have any concrete evidence on whether or not he's dead, either,'' Colonel Dillon said of Mr. Baghdadi, who has been the subject of a three-year manhunt.

Since the American-led bombing campaign against the Islamic State began in August 2014, reports of Mr. Baghdadi's death have repeatedly surfaced. None have turned out to be true.

The latest foray into figuring out whether the Islamic State leader is dead or alive began June 16, when Russia's military -- which is also bombing the Islamic State in Syria -- said it was looking into whether one of its airstrikes in the Syrian desert had killed Mr. Baghdadi, the self-declared caliph of the Islamic State. In a statement, the Defense Ministry said the Russian Air Force had struck a meeting of Islamic State leaders on May 28 outside Raqqa, Syria, the group's de facto capital, possibly killing Mr. Baghdadi.

This week, Russia upgraded its assessment, as the deputy foreign minister, Oleg V. Syromolotov, said that Moscow was increasingly certain that Russian warplanes had killed Mr. Baghdadi three weeks ago.

Throughout it all, American defense officials have maintained that they have no proof that the Islamic State leader is dead. They said they were reviewing reports from May 28 and subsequent days for clues, but pointed out that Mr. Baghdadi has not been heard from publicly since November, when the Islamic State released a blistering audio recording in which he urged forces to remain firm in the face of the American-backed Iraqi offensive in Mosul. So the fact that he has not popped up publicly since May 28 does not necessarily mean he has been killed.

But on Friday, Colonel Dillon seemed to inch -- ever so slightly -- in the direction that Mr. Baghdadi may be dead. ''We certainly know that if he is still alive, we expect that he is not being able to influence what is currently happening in Raqqa or Mosul or over all,'' he told a Pentagon briefing, ''as they continue to lose their physical caliphate.''

Military officials insisted they did not mind whether the Russians killed him and not the American-backed coalition. If, that is, he actually is dead.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170624ed6o0004l



World; Asia Pacific
Australia to Send Spy Planes to Help Philippines Recapture Marawi

By JACQUELINE WILLIAMS and FELIPE VILLAMOR 
904 words
23 June 2017
16:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

SYDNEY, Australia —he Australian government said on Friday that it would send spy planes to help the Philippine armed forces who are fighting to recapture the southern city of Marawi, where the military was battling Islamic-linked militants for control.

Two militants believed to have backed a siege of the city have been killed in the fighting, Philippine officials said on Friday, citing intelligence information. Extremists from the Abu Sayyaf and Maute groups seized part of the city last month, beginning a wave of violence and displacing tens of thousands of residents. Troops have yet to reach the areas to try to corroborate the reports.

Two military planes from Australia will provide surveillance support to the Philippine armed forces, said the Australian minister of defense, Marise Payne.

“he regional threat from terrorism, in particular from Daesh and foreign fighters, is a direct threat to Australia and our interests,”s. Payne said, using the Arabic acronym for Islamic State. “ustralia will continue to work with our partners in Southeast Asia to counter it.”

The AP-3C Orion aircraft will operate over the southern region of the island Mindanao, where Marawi is situated.

The planes are configured to look for people on the ground, said Peter Jennings, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, a think tank.

“ormally they’e maritime surveillance aircraft, but we use them very effectively in the counterinsurgency operation in Afghanistan,”r. Jennings said. “his will be about helping to locate targets of training camps, individual insurgent fighters. It’l be quite a serious commitment.”

Australia has offered support to Southeast Asia in the past, Mr. Jennings said. In the 2000s, Australia provided river boats to the Philippines to aid in the fight against insurgency in the south. It has given intelligence support to Indonesia as well as offered some special forces training; armed forces in Thailand have received protective clothing for the removal of improvised explosive devices.

Intelligence information suggested that a Malaysian militant believed to have bankrolled a siege of Marawi, and a Filipino brother accused of plotting the attack, were killed in the clashes in the city.

The military said the Malaysian, identified as Mahmud Ahmad, was wounded and later died. Troops had yet to recover his body.

Intelligence counterparts in Malaysia said Mr. Mahmud had wired more than half a million dollars in Islamic State funds to the Abu Sayyaf and the Maute groups in the Philippines to carry out the attacks.

Brig. Gen. Gilbert Gapay, commander of military forces in eastern Mindanao, said Mr. Mahmud, a former university professor who had trained in Afghanistan, was among at least 40 foreign terrorists to have entered the Philippines through its borders in the south.

In a video recovered by the military last month, he was shown planning the assault in Marawi with several militants including Isnilon Hapilon, the acknowledged leader of the Islamic State in the Philippines and the leader of Abu Sayyaf .

Lt. Col. Jo-ar Herrera, a spokesman for the Philippine military, said it had also received intelligence reports that Omarkhayam Maute, one of two brothers who led the Maute group, had been killed.

But he said this could not be independently confirmed because troops had yet to advance in the four villages in Marawi into which the insurgents had been pushed.

“e can’ say what day he was killed, what firearm had killed him or where his cadaver was buried,”e said, noting that strong evidence pointed to his death.

If the deaths are confirmed, it would mean a significant blow to the militants. The death toll in the clashes has exceeded 300 people, including 26 civilians and 69 soldiers and police officers.

The Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia agreed on Thursday to closely coordinate in combating terrorism. There had been fears that the Islamic State was moving to establish a regional base in Marawi, and officials and security analysts said there was a need for a more concerted effort to address the rise of the militants.

The military said the insurgents have been cornered in a small section of Marawi. But the rebels have strongly resisted, using snipers, bomb and rocket-propelled grenades from positions they control.

“he focus of the military operations remains,” presidential spokesman, Ernesto Abella, said, adding that the militants “ontinue to pose pockets of resistance to the advancing troops.”

He said the gunmen had been torching houses and establishments as well as using an undetermined number of civilians as shields as they hide in areas, like mosques, where the military could not advance.

Jacqueline Williams reported from Sydney, Australia, and Felipe Villamor from Manila.

* Militants’iege of Philippine Elementary School Ends After 12 Hours 

* Hiding Christians in the Basement: Fear and Heroism in a Philippine War Zone 

* U.S. Troops in Besieged City of Marawi, Philippine Military Says 

* Destroying a Philippine City to Save It From \b ISIS\b0  Allies 

* Philippine Forces Struggle to Retake City Held by Islamist Militants 

Philippine troops continued their assault on Friday against insurgents from the Maute group, who have taken over parts of Marawi. | Romeo Ranoco/Reuters | A Royal Australian Air Force AP-3C Orion in 2014. Australian military spy planes will start flying missions over the southern Philippines to help in the fight against Islamic militants in Marawi. | Rob Griffith/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170623ed6n004bm



World; Middle East
As U.S. Kills  ISIS  Leaders, a Notorious One Remains Elusive

By HELENE COOPER 
726 words
23 June 2017
23:04
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —n the same day the Pentagon announced it had killed yet another Islamic State leader that few Americans have heard of, Fawaz Muhammad Jubayr Al-Rawi, American officials also said they do not know if the Islamic State’ most well-known name, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , is still alive either.

Officials cautioned that they have no evidence that Mr. Baghdadi is dead. But the dueling narratives illustrate the plodding nature of the Defense Department ’ fight against the militant Sunni Islamic extremist group, which is, after almost three years of airstrikes, on the back foot in both Iraq and Syria.

Every couple of weeks, the United States Central Command, which oversees combat operations in the Middle East, announces the death of another Islamic State leader who has been killed in airstrikes. On Tuesday, it was Turki al-Bin’li, whom the American-led coalition called the “elf-proclaimed grand mufti or chief cleric”f the Islamic State, killed in a May 31 airstrike in Mayadin, Syria. Two weeks before that, it was Samir Idris, whom the Defense Department said was a “ey”slamic State financier of attacks around the world, also killed near Mayadin.

On Friday, it was Mr. Rawi, a Syrian labeled by the Pentagon as “n experienced terrorist financial facilitator,”ho moved millions of dollars for the Islamic State’ attack and logistics network.

Mr. Rawi owned a currency exchange that he used, along with a network of global financial contacts, “o move money into and out of \b ISIS\b0 -controlled territory and across borders,” Defense statement said, using an acronym for the Islamic State. The Treasury Department had imposed sanctions on Mr. Rawi and his company in December.

As for Mr. Baghdadi, the Defense Department has no concrete evidence of whether he is still alive, Col. Ryan Dillon, spokesman for the American-led coalition that is fighting the Islamic State, told reporters on Friday from Baghdad

“hat said, we don’ have any concrete evidence on whether or not he’ dead either,”olonel Dillon said of Mr. Baghdadi, who has been the subject of a three-year-long manhunt.

Since the American-led bombing campaign against the Islamic State began in August of 2014, reports of Mr. Baghdadi’ death have repeatedly surfaced. None have turned out to be true.

The latest foray into figuring out whether the Islamic State leader is dead or alive began on June 16, when Russia’ military —hich is bombing the Islamic State in Syria as well —aid it was looking into whether one of its airstrikes in the Syrian desert had killed Mr. Baghdadi, the self-declared caliph of the Islamic State. In a statement, the Defense Ministry said the Russian Air Force had struck a meeting of Islamic State leaders on May 28 outside Raqqa, Syria, the group’ de facto capital, possibly killing Mr. Baghdadi.

This week, Russia upgraded its assessment, as the deputy foreign minister, Oleg V. Syromolotov, said that Moscow was increasingly certain that Russian warplanes had killed Mr. Baghdadi three weeks ago.

Throughout it all, American defense officials have maintained that they have no proof that the Islamic State leader is dead. They said they were reviewing reports from May 28 and subsequent days for clues but pointed out that Mr. Baghdadi has not been heard from publicly since November, when the Islamic State released a blistering audio recording in which he urged forces to remain firm in the face of the American-backed Iraqi offensive in Mosul. So the fact that he has not popped up publicly since May 28 does not necessarily mean he has been killed.

But on Friday, Colonel Dillon seemed to inch —ver so slightly —n the direction that Mr. Baghdadi may be dead. “e certainly know that if he is still alive, we expect that he is not being able to influence what is currently happening in Raqqa or Mosul or overall,”e told a Pentagon briefing, “s they continue to lose their physical caliphate.”

Military officials insisted they did not mind whether the Russians killed him and not the American-backed coalition. If, that is, he actually is dead.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter  and in the Morning Briefing newsletter .

Document NYTFEED020170623ed6n009ex



world
Loose Definition of Terrorism Upends a Syrian Asylum Seeker’ Life

By SOMINI SENGUPTA 
1,562 words
23 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

A prominent Syrian dissident has been told he cannot get political asylum in the United States because he organized a conference with Syrian opposition groups —ven though the American government has supported members of those same groups in the Syrian civil war.

The case of the dissident, Radwan Ziadeh, 41, who lives in a suburb of Washington, reveals a stark gap between American immigration law and foreign policy.

Ever since counterterrorism provisions were expanded after the Sept. 11 attacks, the United States government has considered many armed opposition groups around the world, including some that it backs diplomatically or financially, to be “ndesignated terrorist organizations.”nyone who provides “aterial support”o those groups can be disqualified from receiving immigration papers.

Mr. Ziadeh is a prominent political opponent of the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad. He has received fellowships at Harvard, Georgetown and the United States Institute of Peace, which is funded by Congress. He has testified in Congress, written books and served briefly as a spokesman for the Syrian opposition umbrella group that the American government supported.

But early this month, Mr. Ziadeh was informed that he would be denied political asylum in the United States. In a 12-page letter laying out the government’ “ntent to deny”is asylum claim, Citizenship and Immigration Services explained that he had provided “aterial support”o Syrian groups that the government considered undesignated terrorist organizations.

Mr. Ziadeh said he was shocked. He and his wife have lived in the United States for 10 years on a series of temporary permits, the latest of which expires next spring. Their children were born here.

“ight now, I can’ even plan for the future,”e said. “hat will happen? I have three American kids. I love, actually, the U.S. I visited all 50 states, even U.S. territories. I visited all the presidential libraries.”

Going back to Syria is not an option. The government there has a warrant out for his arrest; the Islamic State has him on a list of Syrians it wants dead.

At issue, specifically, is that Mr. Ziadeh organized a series of conferences from November 2012 to May 2013 to discuss a democratic transition in Syria.

Among those invited to the workshops, held in Istanbul, were self-described commanders in a loose confederation of rebel groups called the Free Syrian Army, as well as political leaders affiliated with the Syrian Muslim Brotherhood.

Both groups are well known to the American government. For years, the Central Intelligence Agency and its counterparts in Turkey, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and other countries have provided some Free Syrian Army factions with salaries, arms and other supplies. The State Department has also provided aid.

The Syrian Muslim Brotherhood’ members also had central roles in the Syrian National Council, the political umbrella group that the United States supported.

Robert S. Ford, a former American ambassador to Syria, said in an email that the American government did not consider either of the groups that Mr. Ziadeh invited to the workshops to be a terrorist organization.

The Syrian Muslim Brotherhood, Mr. Ford added, has no “dministrative connection”o Muslim Brotherhood factions in other countries. (President Trump’ advisers have debated but not decided whether to designate the Muslim Brotherhood as a terrorist group.)

Moreover, Mr. Ford said, both Hillary Clinton and John Kerry, as secretaries of state, met with opposition delegations that included Brotherhood members.

“he U.S. administration, myself included, regularly spoke with members of the Syrian Muslim Brotherhood who were themselves members of Syrian opposition coalitions and delegations,”e wrote.

In its letter to Mr. Ziadeh, Citizenship and Immigration Services said he had provided “aterial support”o members of the groups when his organization, the Syrian Center for Political and Strategic Studies, paid for their airfare and hotel bills in Istanbul, using money from the Canadian government.

“s both the FSA and the Syrian Muslim Brotherhood used weapons with the intent to endanger the safety of Syrian government officials, both groups have engaged in terrorist activity such that they met the definition of an undesignated terrorist organization (Tier III) at the time you provided material support,”he letter states.

“ou have therefore ‘ngaged in terrorist activity,’”t went on to say.

Mr. Ziadeh is appealing the government’ decision.

His lawyer, Steven H. Schulman, said that inviting members of opposition groups to a conference to discuss the political future of Syria should not be seen as promoting the groups’gendas or providing them with material support.

“ find it offensive, because no reasonable person would sit down and say Radwan Ziadeh is a terrorist,”r. Schulman said. “here are real terrorists out there. We all know that. Somehow, we are unable to distinguish between people who actually engage in terrorist activity and who do not engage in terrorist activity.”

The label “ndesignated terrorist organization”as been in place since the aftermath of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. Many organizations that have engaged in violence, whether or not the United States supported them, have fallen under that term, said Anwen Hughes, a lawyer who specializes in asylum cases at Human Rights First, an advocacy group.

Providing “aterial support”o those groups can mean anything from fighting alongside them to paying them ransom. In 2008, an Iraqi man who worked as an interpreter for American forces in Iraq was denied a green card because he had belonged to a Kurdish group seeking to oust Saddam Hussein.

Ms. Hughes said one of her former clients had been denied asylum because he paid a ransom to an armed group in order to release a kidnapped family member. “t’ a fairly widespread problem that’ not limited to Syrians,”he said.

Eric Schwartz, a former Obama administration official and now the president of Refugees International, called the provision in immigration law “ product of the post 9/11 environment”—ne that government officials had subsequently recognized was so broad that it caught all kinds of people in its net. “ou had legislation that broadly expanded the definition of terrorist activity, captured people who could have been coerced into terrorist activity and created this Tier III catchall category,”e said.

Mary A. Cabrera, a spokeswoman for Citizenship and Immigration Services, said the agency did not keep a set list of undesignated terrorist organizations, but made case-by-case determinations. Ms. Cabrera said she could not comment on an individual case.

Mr. Ziadeh chronicled his experience in an affidavit as part of his original asylum application. He said in the affidavit that he had been repeatedly called in for interrogation by the secret police in Syria. He edited a political magazine that was shut down by the government, founded the Damascus Center for Human Rights Studies and visited the United States in 2006 at the invitation of the State Department’ international visitor program.

He returned to Syria only to be summoned for interrogation by the authorities and then banned from traveling abroad. In 2007, on the pretext of getting medicine for his sick father, he obtained permission to go to neighboring Jordan for a day and secretly procured a visa from the American Embassy in Damascus. As soon as he reached Jordan, he and his wife boarded a flight to the United States.

The next year, the Syrian government issued a warrant for his arrest and barred his mother and siblings from leaving the country. When the Syrian uprising began in 2011, he received a frightening email telling him to be “areful”bout his mother, still in Syria.

Later that year, his brother, who was not politically active, was arrested; Mr. Ziadeh believes it was payback for his activism. His cousin was killed in what he called a massacre in the family’ hometown, Daraya. His mother and siblings slipped out of the country as soon as they could. They are scattered across Jordan, Turkey and Saudi Arabia.

Mr. Ziadeh and his lawyer said he had been interviewed by immigration officers four times.

The immigration agency said it found that Mr. Ziadeh had faced persecution because of his political beliefs, which would make him eligible for political asylum. “our testimony was detailed, consistent and plausible,”t said in a June 2 letter. “herefore, it is found credible.”

But the letter explains that his support for the two groups is grounds for denying his asylum claim.

Mr. Ziadeh contends that many Syrians will see a bigger political message in the rejection.

“t gives you a sense how much the U.S. government abandoned the Syrians,”e said.

Follow Somini Sengupta on Twitter @SominiSengupta.

Correction: June 23, 2017, Friday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to the United States Institute of Peace. It is funded wholly, not just partly, by Congress

PHOTO: Radwan Ziadeh, a prominent political opponent of Syria’ president, has received fellowships at Harvard and Georgetown. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JUSTIN T. GELLERSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

* U.S. Sends Civilian Team to Syria to Help the Displaced Return Home

* Russia Warns U.S. After Downing of Syrian Warplane

* Beyond Raqqa, an Even Bigger Battle to Defeat \b ISIS\b0  and Control Syria Looms

* Appeals Court Will Not Reinstate Trump’ Revised Travel Ban

Document INHT000020170623ed6n0000a



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Bronx Man Is Charged With Trying To Join  ISIS 

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
536 words
23 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
24
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The Bronx man said he had quit his job and paid off his debts, all in preparation for flying to Europe and making his way to Syria to join the Islamic State, the authorities said on Thursday.

But the man, Saddam Mohamed Raishani, did not make his flight: He was arrested at Kennedy International Airport on Wednesday night, the authorities said, after passing through security and attempting to board a flight to Lisbon, from where he was to fly to Istanbul.

Mr. Raishani, 30, was charged with one count of attempting to provide material support to a terrorist organization and was detained pending further proceedings in Federal District Court in Manhattan.

Mr. Raishani, a trained nurse who once worked in a hospital and until recently worked for a home care provider, told one person that ''while it would be difficult leaving his wife and child to join the Islamic State, he knew that he was making the right choice,'' according to a criminal complaint filed by the office of Joon H. Kim, the acting United States attorney in Manhattan.

Unbeknown to Mr. Raishani, the person he was speaking to was a paid government informant who, with an undercover New York City police detective, was integral to building the case against him, the complaint says.

In January, Mr. Raishani called the informant, whom he knew, and asked to meet, which they did the next day inside the informant's car in Queens, the complaint says. They discussed the history of Islam and the informant saw an image on Mr. Raishani's cellphone of a black flag associated with the Islamic State, or ISIS.

Mr. Raishani told the informant, named only as CS, that some time ago a friend of his had left New York to join ISIS, and that he had helped the friend shop for supplies and given the friend money and a ride to Kennedy Airport, the complaint says.

Mr. Raishani told the informant that he had communicated with an Islamic State member overseas to arrange for his friend's travel, and ''that he felt humiliated for not having traveled'' with the friend to join ISIS, according to the complaint, which was signed by William Slattery, an F.B.I. special agent.

In their conversation, Mr. Raishani also expressed anger that the daughter of Anwar al-Awlaki, an American imam who joined Al Qaeda in Yemen and became the terror network's leading English-language propagandist, had reportedly been killed by United States forces in Yemen. Mr. Awlaki was killed in a United States drone strike in 2011.

The informant eventually introduced Mr. Raishani to the undercover detective, having described him as a ''true brother.'' The detective posed as someone who wanted to travel abroad to fight for ISIS, and this month, according to the complaint, the detective shopped with Mr. Raishani for clothing and boots Mr. Raishani would need.

Sarah Baumgartel, a lawyer for Mr. Raishani, declined to comment on Thursday. Mr. Raishani's arrest comes just weeks after prosecutors, in an apparently unrelated case, announced the arrest of another Bronx man, Ali Kourani, on charges of supporting Hezbollah.

Document NYTF000020170623ed6n0006r



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Sends Civilians to Stabilize Recaptured Syrian Areas

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,312 words
23 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration is sending a civilian team into Syria to try to bring stability to areas that American-backed forces have retaken from the Islamic State and to avert a humanitarian crisis, according to United States officials.

The team consists of only seven members, State Department officials and security personnel, several of whom have already arrived in Syria. Their mission, which has not been made public, is not to rebuild damaged cities and towns but to help Syrians return home by organizing efforts to clear roadside bombs left behind by the Islamic State and to restore electricity and access to clean water, in part to prevent the areas from becoming breeding grounds for militants.

The minimal footprint reflects President Trump's opposition to nation-building and a war-weary public's desire to minimize huge reconstruction projects after more than a decade of rebuilding in Iraq at a cost of over $60 billion.

Sending in such a small group, however, leaves open the question of whether the effort will be sufficient to deal with the daunting task of restoring normal life for millions of Syrians and solve wrenching problems, such as ensuring that the local governments are representative, restoring a functioning judicial system and preventing revenge killings.

''It is a minimalist approach that should be adequate to get them through the first few weeks, but beyond that, there are going to be problems that may require a more substantial effort,'' said James F. Dobbins, who served as a special envoy to Afghanistan, Somalia, Haiti and the Balkans.

The decision to send the team into the combat zone followed extensive deliberations in the American government about security, with memories still fresh about the 2012 attack on the United States diplomatic compound in Benghazi, Libya, an attack that led to the deaths of the United States ambassador, J. Christopher Stevens, and three other Americans. The roughly 1,000 American troops already in Syria will help protect the civilian team against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

''Our efforts in post-ISIS areas will be strictly focused on stabilization and thus meeting the immediate needs of civilians in order to enable them to return home and to prevent the return of ISIS,'' the State Department said in a statement on Thursday in response to a request for comment. ''The efforts are limited to the provision of humanitarian assistance, clearing explosive remnants of war, and the restoration of essential services.''

Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, pointed to the need for a broader civilian mission, suggesting in remarks this week that it include ''an ongoing effort, led by the State Department, to put together a governance body so that as soon as Raqqa is seized, there is effective local governance.''

Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, in testimony last week before Congress, said the administration did not yet have ''a fully fleshed out'' strategy for maintaining stability in Syria and Iraq after the Islamic State is defeated.

Mr. Mattis said he was consulting with Secretary of State Rex Tillerson on a larger strategy that includes both diplomatic and military components. ''His diplomats are literally serving alongside us in Syria right now with our officers who are in that fight,'' Mr. Mattis told the House Armed Services Committee. ''So I am confident it's being put together. It's not complete yet.''

A State Department officer has rotated through Syria over the past 18 months, reporting on the political situation in the accompanying United States Special Operations forces who are advising American-backed Syrian Arab and Kurdish fighters combating the Islamic State. As those militias have reclaimed towns and villages in eastern Syria in recent months, and are now poised to recapture Raqqa, the Islamic State's self-declared capital, in the coming months, a sense of urgency has grown about addressing post-conflict priorities, including ensuring governance and providing aid to more than 400,000 civilians in the Raqqa province that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has cited as in need.

The looming problems in Syria are daunting. Unlike in Iraq, there is no functioning government or security force in the predominantly Arab areas that the American-backed fighters are about to take back from the Islamic State.

''In Iraq, you have got a police force and court system, which are not perfect but at least exist,'' Mr. Dobbins said. ''In Syria, there is no comparable authority to whom you can hand off these problems.''

Adding to the challenge, neither the United States nor other nations are eager to commit significant funds to reconstructing a Syria that is run by President Bashar al-Assad. Nor is the United States interested in remaining as an occupying power as it did for years in Iraq.

Another consideration, said Linda Robinson, a senior international policy analyst at the RAND Corporation, is that a major civilian American presence to advise on the governing of newly liberated area might provoke a backlash.

''That is not a country that we control,'' she said. ''This is stabilization light. We do not have, nor do we intend to get, control of the place, which would enable us to move and do these state-building activities.

''What is also very important to understand is what is the tolerance of the Syrian government for the U.S. to go in and do these activities,'' Ms. Robinson continued. ''There have been increasing tensions with the regime, with the Iranians and with the Russians and the possibility that we are backing into a war with the Assad government and its backers.''

Yet the United States and its allies also do not want Raqqa to fall into chaos that the Islamic State and other militants could exploit.

''The vital question is whether law and order will be re-established because if it isn't, ISIS will be back in some form,'' said Daniel Serwer, a professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, who has experience in Iraq and the Balkans.

''It is terribly small,'' Mr. Serwer said of the State Department deployment of specialists. ''You need more than that just to talk with people, never mind do things. It is at least a recognition that there are civilian tasks that have to be fulfilled after you liberate the place. To be vital for success, it will have to grow.''

American officials said the team will include experts from the Agency for International Development as well as the political officer who has been with Special Operations forces. It will draw on hundreds of millions that have been appropriated to support programs in Syria.

One immediate focus for the group will be removing improvised explosive devices, tasks that will be carried out by contractors who will also train local Syrians. But the team will also organize efforts to restore services and provide humanitarian assistance.

The State Department will not have the mission of training and advising the local police, as it did after the American invasion of Iraq. Syrians trained and vetted by the American military will serve as a transitional security force.

To maintain a small American civilian footprint in a war zone, contractors funded by the United States government will not be allowed to have American citizens working inside Syria.

American officials said they would welcome similar civilian efforts by foreign nations and are exploring the possibility.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Graduates of a police force trained by the United States. They are expected to be deployed in Raqqa when it is retaken.; A Kurdish fighter opens fire in Raqqa. Militias are poised to take the city from the Islamic State. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GORAN TOMASEVIC/REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020170623ed6n0004h



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Fears Grow That U.S. Is Inching Toward Bigger Role in Syria War

By HELENE COOPER 
1,109 words
23 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- To hear the Pentagon tell it, the United States still has no intention of getting involved in Syria's six-year civil war; the American presence there is solely to help its allies defeat the Islamic State.

But a recent spate of incidents have raised alarm from diplomats and national security officials that the United States may be inadvertently sliding into a far bigger role in the Syrian civil war than it intended.

''We don't seek conflict with anyone other than ISIS,'' Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said on Wednesday, using an acronym for the militant Sunni extremist group that is rooted in Syria and Iraq.

This month alone, the United States has shot down a Syrian warplane, come close to shooting another and downed two Iranian-made drones that were nearing American-backed troops on the ground.

Russia has retaliated by threatening to treat American planes as targets; in a dramatic ''Top Gun''-style maneuver on Monday, one of Moscow's jets buzzed within five feet of an American spy plane.

None of these encounters involved the Islamic State. The contradiction opens a larger question, national security experts say, of what kind of broader strategy the Trump administration plans once the Islamic State -- now on the defensive -- is defeated in Syria.

With each episode, ''we own more of the conflict in Syria without articulating a strategy,'' said Vali Nasr, dean of the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies. ''We are sleepwalking into a much broader military mandate, without saying what we plan to do afterward.''

American military gains in Syria have far outpaced any diplomacy toward a political settlement of the Syrian civil war.

When President Barack Obama first began airstrikes against Islamic State targets in Syria three years ago, the instructions to the Pentagon seemed clear: Defeat the Islamic State through alliances with Syrians who oppose the brutal extremist group, but do not help them fight President Bashar al-Assad.

The Islamic State is now reeling in Syria. It has been battered by strikes from a host of enemies, from the United States and its regional allies to the Syrian government that is backed by Russia and Iran. It no longer holds one-third of the country, according to American officials who say that the group has lost around half of the territory it once controlled.

In past years, the Pentagon and its allies could stay out of the Syrian government's way -- and that of Mr. Assad's backers in Russia and Iran -- as all fought the Islamic State. Now, all sides are converging on a smaller piece of territory, resulting in competing forces increasingly turning on one another, in addition to the common enemy.

Captain Davis, at the Pentagon, noted that when American-backed ground troops are confronted by ''armed drones, that leaves us with no choice but to defend ourselves and our partners.''

He said that the downing of an Iranian-made drone this week was done in self-defense. Defense officials insist that does not amount to a greater United States involvement in the broader war.

But privately, American military officials acknowledge that they are quickly running out of space in Syria to stay out of Mr. Assad's way -- not to mention Russia's and Iran's.

In Europe, the new president of France, Emmanuel Macron, announced that he would be taking a distinctly different tack on Syria than his predecessor. Mr. Macron said that getting rid of Mr. Assad was no longer a top priority.

Instead, Mr. Macron said, getting rid of terrorists is more important -- and he is prepared to work with anyone toward that end, including Moscow.

''The real change I've made on this question is that I haven't said the deposing of Bashar al-Assad is a prerequisite for everything,'' Mr. Macron said in an interview with European newspapers, according to Agence France-Presse.

''My line is clear: One, a total fight against terrorist groups. They are our enemies... We need the cooperation of everyone to eradicate them, particularly Russia,'' Mr. Macron said. ''Two, stability in Syria, because I don't want a failed state.''

He also said he was looking for a ''political and diplomatic road map'' but did not mention the United States or the United Nations.

That suggested that he would like to see the leading European Union countries play a larger role -- not on the ground, but in diplomacy and the effort to disentangle the warring parties.

But at the moment there are no continuing talks among the major parties over what to do once the Islamic State is defeated in Syria.

And with the fight now intensifying in eastern Syria's Euphrates River Valley -- home to oil reserves and water -- defense officials say that they are bracing for Mr. Assad and his backers to go all-out to reclaim that territory from the Islamic State.

Iran, in particular, does not want American-backed forces to take that ground for concern it would complicate Tehran's supply line to Shiite allies in neighboring Iraq and Lebanon.

''The Obama administration's policy, which was to focus solely on ISIS, kept the harder question about what to do about Russia and Iran and Assad off the table for a long time,'' said Eric Robinson, a research programmer and analyst with the RAND Corporation. ''That was doable in the beginning.''

But he added that ''as ISIS is pushed out of northern Syria and Raqqa, and things are pushed into the middle Euphrates River Valley, we will see everyone focusing their attention on the same area.''

That, he said, will increase the chances of more episodes like the ones of the past month.

In turn, that could spur a larger conflict, particularly given that Russia has never been shy about escalation, and Mr. Trump is widely viewed as quicker to act than his predecessor.

''One of the last things Obama wanted was to get into a shooting war with Russia over Syria,'' said Derek Chollet, Mr. Obama's assistant secretary of defense for international affairs. ''The risk of escalation with Russia was a constant factor in the administration's planning and management of the military campaign.''

A big challenge, he said, is that Moscow likes ''escalation dominance.'' He characterized that as Russia's willingness to risk more, even to its own detriment, to save Mr. Assad than the United States is willing to risk to take him out.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170623ed6n0004f



World; Middle East
Fears Grow That U.S. Is Inching Toward Bigger Role in Syria War

By HELENE COOPER 
1,216 words
23 June 2017
02:09
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —o hear the Pentagon tell it, the United States still has no intention of getting involved in Syria’ six-year civil war; the American presence there is solely to help its allies defeat the Islamic State.

But a recent spate of incidents have sparked alarm from diplomats and national security officials that the United States may be inadvertently sliding into a far bigger role in the Syrian civil war than it intended.

“e don’ seek conflict with anyone other than \b ISIS\b0 ,”apt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said on Wednesday, using an acronym for the militant Sunni extremist group that is rooted in Syria and Iraq.

This month alone, the United States has shot down a Syrian warplane, came close to shooting another and downed two Iranian-made drones that were nearing American-backed troops on the ground.

Russia has retaliated by threatening to treat American planes as targets; in a dramatic Top-Gun style maneuver on Monday, one of Moscow’ jets buzzed within five feet of an American spy plane.

None of these encounters involved the Islamic State. The contradiction opens a larger question, national security experts say, of what kind of broader strategy the Trump administration plans once the Islamic State —ow on the defensive —s defeated in Syria.

With each episode, “e own more of the conflict in Syria without articulating a strategy,”aid Vali Nasr, dean of the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies. “e are sleepwalking into a much broader military mandate, without saying what we plan to do afterward.”

American military gains in Syria have far outpaced any diplomacy toward a political settlement of the Syrian civil war.

When President Barack Obama first began airstrikes against Islamic State targets in Syria three years ago, the instructions to the Pentagon seemed clear: Defeat the Islamic State through alliances with Syrians who oppose the brutal extremist group, but don’ help them fight President Bashar al-Assad.

The Islamic State is now reeling in Syria. It has been battered by strikes from a host of enemies, from the United States and its regional allies to the Syrian government that is backed by Russia and Iran. It no longer holds one-third of the country, according to American officials who say that the group has lost around half of the territory it once controlled.

In past years, the Pentagon and its allies could stay out of the Syrian government’ way —nd that of Mr. Assad’ backers in Russia and Iran —s all fought the Islamic State. Now, all sides are converging on a smaller piece of territory, resulting in competing forces increasingly turning on one another, in addition to the common enemy.

Captain Davis, at the Pentagon, noted that when American-backed ground troops are confronted by “rmed drones, that leaves us with no choice but to defend ourselves and our partners.”

He said that the downing of an Iranian-made drone this week was done in self-defense. Defense officials insist that doesn’ amount to a greater United States involvement in the broader war.

But privately, American military officials acknowledge that they are quickly running out of space in Syria to stay out of Mr. Assad’ way —ot to mention Russia and Iran.

In Europe, the new president of France announced he would be taking a distinctly different tack on Syria than his predecessor. Emmanuel Macron said that getting rid of Mr. Assad was no longer a top priority.

Instead, Mr. Macron said, getting rid of terrorists is more important —nd he is prepared to work with anyone toward that end, including Moscow.

“he real change I’e made on this question is that I haven’ said the deposing of Bashar al-Assad is a prerequisite for everything,”r. Macron said in an interview with European newspapers, according to Agence France-Presse.

“y line is clear: One, a total fight against terrorist groups. They are our enemies ... We need the cooperation of everyone to eradicate them, particularly Russia,”r. Macron said. “wo, stability in Syria, because I don’ want a failed state.”

He also said he was looking for a “olitical and diplomatic road map”ut did not mention the United States or the United Nations.

That suggested that he would like to see the leading European Union countries play a larger role —ot on the ground, but in diplomacy and the effort to to disentangle the warring parties.

But at the moment there are no ongoing talks among the major parties over what to do once the Islamic State is defeated in Syria.

And with the fight now intensifying in eastern Syria’ Euphrates River Valley —ome to oil reserves and water —efense officials say that they are bracing for Mr. Assad and his backers to go all-out to reclaim that territory from the Islamic State.

Iran, in particular, does not want American-backed forces to take that ground for concern it would complicate Tehran’ supply line to Shiite allies in neighboring Iraq and Lebanon.

“he Obama administration’ policy, which was to focus solely on ISIS, kept the harder question about what to do about Russia and Iran and Assad off the table for a long time,”aid Eric Robinson, a research programmer and analyst with the RAND Corporation. “hat was doable in the beginning.”

But, he added that “s ISIS is pushed out of northern Syria and Raqqa, and things are pushed into the middle Euphrates River Valley, we will see everyone focusing their attention on the same area.”

That, he said, will increase the chances of more episodes like the ones of the past month.

In turn, that could spark a larger conflict, particularly given that Russia has never been shy about escalation, and Mr. Trump is widely viewed as more quick to act than his predecessor.

“ne of the last things Obama wanted was to get into a shooting war with Russia over Syria,”aid Derek Chollet, Mr. Obama’ assistant secretary of defense for international affairs. “he risk of escalation with Russia was a constant factor in the administration’ planning and management of the military campaign.”

A big challenge, he said, is that Moscow likes “scalation dominance.”e characterized that as Russia’ willingness to risk more, even to its own detriment, to save Mr. Assad than the United States is willing to risk to take him out.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* Trump Gives Mattis Authority to Send More Troops to Afghanistan

* American Warplane Shoots Down Iranian-Made Drone Over Syria

A fighter jet landing on the U.S.S. George H.W. Bush aircraft carrier in the Mediterranean Sea on Thursday. This month alone, the United States has shot down a Syrian warplane, came close to shooting another and downed two Iranian-made drones that were nearing American-backed troops on the ground. | Bram Janssen/Associated Press | Ben C. Solomon, a Times video journalist, tells the story of Major Sajjad al-Hour as he leads 150 men through the war-torn streets of Mosul. | By BEN C. SOLOMON and TAIGE JENSEN 

Document NYTFEED020170623ed6n0002t



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Destroys Medieval Mosque, Another Loss for Mosul

By FALIH HASSAN and TIM ARANGO; Falih Hassan reported from Baghdad, and Tim Arango from Istanbul. Rukmini Callimachi contributed reporting from New York, and Eric Schmitt from Washington. 
1,222 words
22 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- As the bloody battle to retake Mosul from the Islamic State ground on for months, with losses in lives and infrastructure piling up, soldiers and civilians kept in their minds an image of what victory would look like: capturing the historic, and symbolic, Al Nuri Grand Mosque and its distinctive leaning minaret.

It was there, in the summer of 2014, that the Islamic State leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , ascended a pulpit and declared a caliphate after his fighters took control of Mosul and swept through other parts of northern Iraq and Syria. It was the last time Mr. Baghdadi was seen in public.

On Wednesday night, with the terrorist group on the cusp of losing control of Mosul and with it its claim to a caliphate straddling the border of Iraq and Syria, Islamic State fighters packed the building with explosives and took it down.

The destruction of the mosque and minaret -- which has dominated Mosul's skyline for centuries and is pictured on Iraq's 10,000 dinar bank note -- is another blow to the city's rich cultural heritage and its plethora of ancient sites that have been damaged or destroyed during three years of Islamic State rule.

For residents of Mosul and those who care about Iraq's history, the destruction was yet another painful loss, after so many years of the Islamic State violently erasing a region's history. Before the Islamic State took control of Mosul, Unesco had begun an effort to protect and rehabilitate the minaret, known as Al Hadba, or the hunchback.

''You can find it on money notes, you can find it in scrapbooks,'' said Rasha Al Aqeedi, who grew up in Mosul and is now a research fellow at the Al-Mesbar Studies and Research Center in Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates. ''It's everywhere. I don't know how to put it into words. It's just something people always identified with because it was always there.''

Ali al-Nashmi, a prominent Iraqi historian, said, referring to the terrorists: ''These dogs, they are the worst of what God has created. I swear to God I cannot imagine Mosul without Al Hadba.''

The long campaign for control of Mosul was closing in on the part of the Old City where Al Hadba beckoned, thrusting toward the sky. Capturing the mosque, built by Nur al-Din Mahmoud Zangi, a ruler who in the 12th century unified Arab forces against crusaders from Europe, would have provided an important symbolic moment for the Iraqi security forces, who have taken heavy casualties in day after day of street battles and ambushes by the Islamic State.

''Imagine the Iraqi flag on this mosque, and everyone taking selfies,'' Ms. Aqeedi said, envisioning what might have been.

Earlier Wednesday evening, Iraqi officers had indicated that on Thursday they planned to begin an assault on the mosque.

Shortly after the Iraqi military issued a statement announcing that the Islamic State had destroyed the mosque, the terrorist group used its news agency to claim that the mosque had actually been destroyed by an American airstrike.

Col. Ryan Dillon, an American military spokesman in Baghdad, said that the coalition had confirmed, through drone surveillance footage, that the mosque had been destroyed. ''We don't know how,'' said Colonel Dillon, who added that the coalition was investigating.

But shortly after, the United States Central Command issued a statement bluntly accusing the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, of destroying the mosque. ''As our Iraqi Security Force partners closed in on the Al Nuri mosque, ISIS destroyed one of Mosul and Iraq's great treasures,'' Maj. Gen. Joseph Martin, the American commander for the operation, said in the statement. ''This is a crime against the people of Mosul and all of Iraq, and is an example of why this brutal organization must be annihilated.''

In denying the Iraqi forces a moment of victory -- many had anticipated that recapturing the mosque would become an iconic visual image of the battle for Mosul -- the Islamic State sought to claim a propaganda victory for itself, by blaming the destruction on the coalition.

Many Sunni Arabs in the Middle East, who have suffered under the Islamic State, believe that the terrorist group is a tool of their enemies -- Shiite Iran, the West or Israel. And the loss of such a famous mosque is likely to only inflame those conspiracy theories.

''This is my worst fear,'' Ms. Aqeedi said. ''It has strategic implications for the long term, if there's the perception that the west is involved in the destruction.''

Many Mosul residents see the Islamic State in such conspiratorial terms. ''My message to ISIS, who were sent to erase the history of this city, is I tell them don't be happy about your outrageous action,'' Ahmed al-Mallah, 45, said. ''Mosul people built Al Hadba minaret. And we will build a thousand minarets after kicking out ISIS, who were sent to us to carry out agendas that attempt to eradicate the Sunnis and erase them from this city.''

Almost from the beginning of its rule, the Islamic State systematically destroyed or damaged one important monument or shrine after another: the tomb of the biblical prophet Jonah, the Mosul Museum, the ancient city of Nimrud. In Mosul's library, militants burned thousands of old books and manuscripts.

In doing so, the extremist group justified the destruction on religious grounds -- that its harsh brand of Islamic law deems such things heretical. But in destroying an important mosque, especially the one in which the group's leader, Mr. Baghdadi, made his famous declaration, the Islamic State simply seemed intent on erasing what was soon, once the city falls, to become a symbol of the failed caliphate.

Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq called the leveling of the mosque a final act of depravity for the group. It was, he said, the ''official announcement of their defeat.''

In 2014, after the Islamic State had destroyed many shrines and monuments, residents of Mosul, fearing the minaret might be next, gathered at the site in protest. It was one of the few times that civilians ever confronted Islamic State fighters in the city.

Throughout the territory it controls, the Islamic State has routinely used mosques for battlefield purposes. New York Times reporters have visited mosques whose minarets were used as sniper nests, whose prayer halls were turned into bomb-making factories and whose courtyards were used to store weapons.

For Mosul's people, the erasure of the mosque and minaret from their city's skyline only added to their growing ledger of losses.

''We have lost everything, our money and our things,'' said Abdullah Ahmed, 33, who fled Mosul and hopes to return soon, after the battles finish. ''ISIS destroyed everything. My life, and the life of my family. There is no longer anything important to me.''

Al Nuri Grand Mosque's minaret in Mosul, Iraq, on Monday. Two days later, the Islamic State leveled the mosque and minaret. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MOHAMED EL-SHAHED/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170622ed6m0005v



World; Middle East
 ISIS  Destroys Al Nuri Mosque, Another Loss for Mosul

By FALIH HASSAN and TIM ARANGO 
1,244 words
21 June 2017
21:54
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD —s the bloody battle to retake Mosul  from the Islamic State ground on for months, with losses in lives and infrastructure piling up, soldiers and civilians kept in their minds an image of what victory would look like: capturing the historic, and symbolic, Al Nuri Grand Mosque and its distinctive leaning minaret.

It was there, in the summer of 2014, that the Islamic State leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , ascended a pulpit and declared a caliphate  after his fighters took control of Mosul and swept through other parts of northern Iraq and Syria. It was the last time Mr. Baghdadi was seen in public.

On Wednesday night, with the terrorist group on the cusp of losing control of Mosul and with it its claim to a caliphate straddling the border of Iraq and Syria, Islamic State fighters packed the building with explosives and took it down.

The destruction of the mosque and minaret —hich has dominated Mosul’ skyline for centuries and is pictured on Iraq’ 10,000 dinar bank note —s another blow to the city’ rich cultural heritage and its plethora of ancient sites that have been damaged or destroyed during three years of Islamic State rule.

For residents of Mosul and those who care about Iraq’ history, the destruction was yet another painful loss, after so many years of the Islamic State violently erasing a region’ history. Before the Islamic State took control of Mosul, Unesco had begun an effort to protect and rehabilitate the minaret, known as Al Hadba, or the hunchback.

“ou can find it on money notes, you can find it in scrapbooks,”aid Rasha Al Aqeedi, who grew up in Mosul and is now a research fellow at the Al-Mesbar Studies and Research Center in Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates. “t’ everywhere. I don’ know how to put it into words. It’ just something people always identified with because it was always there.”

Ali al-Nashmi, a prominent Iraqi historian, said, referring to the terrorists: “hese dogs, they are the worst of what God has created. I swear to God I cannot imagine Mosul without Al Hadba.”

The long campaign for control of Mosul  was closing in on the part of the Old City where Al Hadba beckoned, thrusting toward the sky. Capturing the mosque, built by Nur al-Din Mahmoud Zangi, a ruler who in the 12th century unified Arab forces against crusaders from Europe, would have provided an important symbolic moment for the Iraqi security forces, who have taken heavy casualties in day after day of street battles and ambushes by the Islamic State.

“magine the Iraqi flag on this mosque, and everyone taking selfies,”s. Aqeedi said, envisioning what might have been.

Earlier Wednesday evening, Iraqi officers had indicated that on Thursday they planned to begin an assault on the mosque.

Shortly after the Iraqi military issued a statement announcing that the Islamic State had destroyed the mosque, the terrorist group used its news agency to claim that the mosque had actually been destroyed by an American airstrike.

Col. Ryan Dillon, an American military spokesman in Baghdad, said that the coalition had confirmed, through drone surveillance footage, that the mosque had been destroyed. “e don’ know how,”aid Colonel Dillon, who added that the coalition was investigating.

But shortly after, the United States Central Command issued a statement bluntly accusing the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL, of destroying the mosque. “s our Iraqi Security Force partners closed in on the Al Nuri mosque, ISIS destroyed one of Mosul and Iraq’ great treasures,”aj. Gen. Joseph Martin, the American commander for the operation, said in the statement. “his is a crime against the people of Mosul and all of Iraq, and is an example of why this brutal organization must be annihilated.”

In denying the Iraqi forces a moment of victory —any had anticipated that recapturing the mosque would become an iconic visual image of the battle for Mosul —he Islamic State sought to claim a propaganda victory for itself, by blaming the destruction on the coalition.

Many Sunni Arabs in the Middle East, who have suffered under the Islamic State, believe that the terrorist group is a tool of their enemies —hiite Iran, the West or Israel. And the loss of such a famous mosque is likely to only inflame those conspiracy theories.

“his is my worst fear,”s. Aqeedi said. “t has strategic implications for the long term, if there’ the perception that the west is involved in the destruction.”

Many Mosul residents see the Islamic State in such conspiratorial terms. “y message to ISIS, who were sent to erase the history of this city, is I tell them don’ be happy about your outrageous action,”hmed al-Mallah, 45, said. “osul people built Al Hadba minaret. And we will build a thousand minarets after kicking out ISIS, who were sent to us to carry out agendas that attempt to eradicate the Sunnis and erase them from this city.”

Almost from the beginning of its rule, the Islamic State systematically destroyed or damaged one important monument or shrine after another: the tomb of the biblical prophet Jonah , the Mosul Museum , the ancient city of Nimrud . In Mosul’ library, militants burned thousands of old books and manuscripts.

In doing so, the extremist group justified the destruction on religious grounds —hat its harsh brand of Islamic law deems such things heretical. But in destroying an important mosque, especially the one in which the group’ leader, Mr. Baghdadi, made his famous declaration, the Islamic State simply seemed intent on erasing what was soon, once the city falls, to become a symbol of the failed caliphate.

Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq called the leveling of the mosque a final act of depravity for the group. It was, he said, the “fficial announcement of their defeat.”

In 2014, after the Islamic State had destroyed many shrines and monuments, residents of Mosul, fearing the minaret might be next, gathered at the site in protest. It was one of the few times that civilians ever confronted Islamic State fighters in the city.

Throughout the territory it controls, the Islamic State has routinely used mosques for battlefield purposes. New York Times reporters have visited mosques whose minarets were used as sniper nests, whose prayer halls were turned into bomb-making factories and whose courtyards were used to store weapons.

For Mosul’ people, the erasure of the mosque and minaret from their city’ skyline only added to their growing ledger of losses.

“e have lost everything, our money and our things,”aid Abdullah Ahmed, 33, who fled Mosul and hopes to return soon, after the battles finish. “ISIS destroyed everything. My life, and the life of my family. There is no longer anything important to me.”

Falih Hassan reported from Baghdad, and Tim Arango from Istanbul. Rukmini Callimachi contributed reporting from New York, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.

* Journalist’ Notebook: Into the Battle of Mosul, Armed With a Camera 

* \b ISIS\b0  Has Killed Hundreds of Civilians in Mosul, U.N. Says 

* Weakened Militarily, \b ISIS\b0  Still Has Power to Sow Deadly Mayhem 

The leaning minaret of Al Nuri Grand Mosque in Mosul on Monday. | Mohamed El-Shahed/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170621ed6l0083p



world
 ISIS  Destroys Al Nuri Mosque, Another Loss for Mosul

By FALIH HASSAN and TIM ARANGO 
1,255 words
21 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD —s the bloody battle to retake Mosul  from the Islamic State ground on for months, with losses in lives and infrastructure piling up, soldiers and civilians kept in their minds an image of what victory would look like: capturing the historic, and symbolic, Al Nuri Grand Mosque and its distinctive leaning minaret.

It was there, in the summer of 2014, that the Islamic State leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , ascended a pulpit and declared a caliphate  after his fighters took control of Mosul and swept through other parts of northern Iraq and Syria. It was the last time Mr. Baghdadi was seen in public.

On Wednesday night, with the terrorist group on the cusp of losing control of Mosul and with it its claim to a caliphate straddling the border of Iraq and Syria, Islamic State fighters packed the building with explosives and took it down.

The destruction of the mosque and minaret —hich has dominated Mosul’ skyline for centuries and is pictured on Iraq’ 10,000 dinar bank note —s another blow to the city’ rich cultural heritage and its plethora of ancient sites that have been damaged or destroyed during three years of Islamic State rule.

For residents of Mosul and those who care about Iraq’ history, the destruction was yet another painful loss, after so many years of the Islamic State violently erasing a region’ history. Before the Islamic State took control of Mosul, Unesco had begun an effort to protect and rehabilitate the minaret, known as Al Hadba, or the hunchback.

“ou can find it on money notes, you can find it in scrapbooks,”aid Rasha Al Aqeedi, who grew up in Mosul and is now a research fellow at the Al-Mesbar Studies and Research Center in Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates. “t’ everywhere. I don’ know how to put it into words. It’ just something people always identified with because it was always there.”

Ali al-Nashmi, a prominent Iraqi historian, said, referring to the terrorists: “hese dogs, they are the worst of what God has created. I swear to God I cannot imagine Mosul without Al Hadba.”

The long campaign for control of Mosul  was closing in on the part of the Old City where Al Hadba beckoned, thrusting toward the sky. Capturing the mosque, built by Nur al-Din Mahmoud Zangi, a ruler who in the 12th century unified Arab forces against crusaders from Europe, would have provided an important symbolic moment for the Iraqi security forces, who have taken heavy casualties in day after day of street battles and ambushes by the Islamic State.

“magine the Iraqi flag on this mosque, and everyone taking selfies,”s. Aqeedi said, envisioning what might have been.

Earlier Wednesday evening, Iraqi officers had indicated that on Thursday they planned to begin an assault on the mosque.

Shortly after the Iraqi military issued a statement announcing that the Islamic State had destroyed the mosque, the terrorist group used its news agency to claim that the mosque had actually been destroyed by an American airstrike.

Col. Ryan Dillon, an American military spokesman in Baghdad, said that the coalition had confirmed, through drone surveillance footage, that the mosque had been destroyed. “e don’ know how,”aid Colonel Dillon, who added that the coalition was investigating.

But shortly after, the United States Central Command issued a statement bluntly accusing the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL, of destroying the mosque. “s our Iraqi Security Force partners closed in on the Al Nuri mosque, ISIS destroyed one of Mosul and Iraq’ great treasures,”aj. Gen. Joseph Martin, the American commander for the operation, said in the statement. “his is a crime against the people of Mosul and all of Iraq, and is an example of why this brutal organization must be annihilated.”

In denying the Iraqi forces a moment of victory —any had anticipated that recapturing the mosque would become an iconic visual image of the battle for Mosul —he Islamic State sought to claim a propaganda victory for itself, by blaming the destruction on the coalition.

Many Sunni Arabs in the Middle East, who have suffered under the Islamic State, believe that the terrorist group is a tool of their enemies —hiite Iran, the West or Israel. And the loss of such a famous mosque is likely to only inflame those conspiracy theories.

“his is my worst fear,”s. Aqeedi said. “t has strategic implications for the long term, if there’ the perception that the west is involved in the destruction.”

Many Mosul residents see the Islamic State in such conspiratorial terms. “y message to ISIS, who were sent to erase the history of this city, is I tell them don’ be happy about your outrageous action,”hmed al-Mallah, 45, said. “osul people built Al Hadba minaret. And we will build a thousand minarets after kicking out ISIS, who were sent to us to carry out agendas that attempt to eradicate the Sunnis and erase them from this city.”

Almost from the beginning of its rule, the Islamic State systematically destroyed or damaged one important monument or shrine after another: the tomb of the biblical prophet Jonah , the Mosul Museum , the ancient city of Nimrud . In Mosul’ library, militants burned thousands of old books and manuscripts.

In doing so, the extremist group justified the destruction on religious grounds —hat its harsh brand of Islamic law deems such things heretical. But in destroying an important mosque, especially the one in which the group’ leader, Mr. Baghdadi, made his famous declaration, the Islamic State simply seemed intent on erasing what was soon, once the city falls, to become a symbol of the failed caliphate.

Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq called the leveling of the mosque a final act of depravity for the group. It was, he said, the “fficial announcement of their defeat.”

In 2014, after the Islamic State had destroyed many shrines and monuments, residents of Mosul, fearing the minaret might be next, gathered at the site in protest. It was one of the few times that civilians ever confronted Islamic State fighters in the city.

Throughout the territory it controls, the Islamic State has routinely used mosques for battlefield purposes. New York Times reporters have visited mosques whose minarets were used as sniper nests, whose prayer halls were turned into bomb-making factories and whose courtyards were used to store weapons.

For Mosul’ people, the erasure of the mosque and minaret from their city’ skyline only added to their growing ledger of losses.

“e have lost everything, our money and our things,”aid Abdullah Ahmed, 33, who fled Mosul and hopes to return soon, after the battles finish. “ISIS destroyed everything. My life, and the life of my family. There is no longer anything important to me.”

Falih Hassan reported from Baghdad, and Tim Arango from Istanbul. Rukmini Callimachi contributed reporting from New York, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.

PHOTO: Al Nuri Grand Mosque’ minaret in Mosul, Iraq, on Monday. Two days later, the Islamic State leveled the mosque and minaret. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MOHAMED EL-SHAHED/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE —ETTY IMAGES)

* Journalist’ Notebook: Into the Battle of Mosul, Armed With a Camera 

* \b ISIS\b0  Has Killed Hundreds of Civilians in Mosul, U.N. Says 

* Weakened Militarily, \b ISIS\b0  Still Has Power to Sow Deadly Mayhem 

Document INHT000020170622ed6l0000i



World; Europe
Brussels Train Station Bomber Was an  ISIS  Sympathizer

By MILAN SCHREUER and DAN BILEFSKY 
1,052 words
21 June 2017
11:19
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BRUSSELS — man wielding a hammer at Notre-Dame cathedral. A motorist who rammed a Renault into a police convoy on the Champs-Éysés. And now a bomber at Central Station in Brussels.

Three times in the last two weeks, followers of the Islamic State have sowed fear in major European cities. In each case, they failed to execute their plot, and —s in previous failed attacks by its sympathizers —he Islamic State has not embraced them as martyrs and has instead remained silent.

In the latest example, a 36-year-old citizen of Morocco assembled a bomb at his home in the working-class Molenbeek section of Brussels, according to the authorities.

The man —dentified only as Oussama Z. —ntered Brussels Central Station at 8:39 p.m. on Tuesday, went downstairs from the main ticket hall and began shouting near a group of passengers, according to Eric Van der Sijpt, a spokesman for the federal prosecutor’ office.

The suspect was carrying a suitcase bomb that contained nails and gas bottles, Mr. Van der Sijpt said, and set off a partial and relatively harmless explosion.

He then left the bag behind while he went in pursuit of a station master, Mr. Van der Sijpt said, and it “xploded a second time, more violently.”

After the second explosion, the man went back upstairs, approached a soldier and shouted “od is great”n Arabic. The soldier opened fire, killing him. Initial reports that the man might have been wearing an explosive belt proved to be unfounded.

While the attack was successfully averted —nd Belgian authorities praised the soldier for his quick response —t once again shined a spotlight on Belgium, a linguisticallydivided and politically fragmented country that has been used as a base by many jihadists. Some developed extremist views in Belgium; others traveled to Syria or Iraq and joined the Islamic State.

Militants based in Brussels have been linked to the deadly attacks in and around Paris in November 2015, and the bombings at Brussels Airport and a subway station in March 2016. More than 160 people died in those sets of attacks, for which the Islamic State claimed responsibility.

A number of militants involved in those earlier attacks had roots in Morocco, including Abdelhamid Abaaoud, a ringleader of the Paris attacks; the brothers Salah and Ibrahim Abdeslam, who were among the Paris attackers; Mohamed Abrini, who accompanied two suicide bombers in the airport attack; Najim Laachraoui, a bomb maker who blew himself up at the airport; and the brothers Ibrahim and Khalid el-Bakraoui, who died in the Brussels bombings. Salah Abdeslam and Mr. Abrini are being held while awaiting trial.

In addition, two of the three men who carried out an attack on and around London Bridge earlier this month were Moroccan.

About 100,000 people with Moroccan citizenship live in Belgium, which has a population of 11 million. Moroccan-Belgians are the country’ largest minority group with roots outside the European Union.

Many Moroccan men were recruited in the 1960s to work in Belgium’ mines and factories on temporary contracts but stayed on, eventually joined by their families. Many then became Belgian citizens, and it is often their children or grandchildren —lbeit only a tiny fraction of the population —ho have been drawn to jihadist ideology.

Often, according to experts who have studied the phenomenon, future militants start with petty crime and then search for an identity as a way to frame their illicit activity, or to atone for past misdeeds.

Islamic State supporters come from many backgrounds: the hammer attacker at Notre-Dame was an Algerian, and the man who rammed into the police convoy on the Champs-Éysés was a French citizen.

Oussama Z., born in 1981, had lived for several years in Molenbeek neighborhood connected to the Paris and Brussels attackers.

“e probably made the bomb there,”he prosecutor’ office said after his home was raided. “oth possible chemical substances and materials were found that could serve to make explosives.”

The authorities said the man was known to police for sexual misconduct but not for terrorism.

The failed attack on Tuesday occurred on the eve of a summit meeting in Brussels at which European leaders, including Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President Emmanuel Macron of France, were to discuss military and security issues, among other topics.

Jan Jambon, the Belgian interior minister, said in an interview with VRT News on Wednesday that several homes had been raided overnight, and prosecutors said the suspect’ home in Molenbeek was among them.

“he modus operandi of I.S. keeps changing,”e said of the Islamic State. “t’ a game of the poacher and the forest ranger —henever the forest ranger approaches, the poacher goes elsewhere and finds new ways.”

While he added that it was essential to be vigilant in the face of security threats, he warned against an overreaction. “f you protect yourself everywhere against anything, in the end we will end up in a police state,”e said.

After a national security council meeting, Prime Minister Charles Michel said that although there was no indication that another attack was imminent, security would nonetheless be intensified.

“e will not let ourselves be intimidated by terrorists,”e said. “ust recently we saw with the attacks in Great Britain that our absolute basic values, our freedom and democracy, are threatened. We need to remain vigilant for that, we need to continue our lives as normally as possible.”

Brussels Central Station was temporarily closed, but it reopened Wednesday morning, at which point trains and subways were running on time.

The nearby Grand Place, an imposing square and tourist destination, was partly evacuated after the attack but it, too, has fully reopened.

Milan Schreuer reported from Brussels, and Dan Bilefsky reported from London. Alissa J. Rubin contributed reporting from Paris.

* Brussels Attacks Underscore Vulnerability of an Open European Society

* Brussels Commemorates Attack Anniversary With Both Silence and Noise

* Cousin of Brussels Bombers Is Charged With Ties to Terrorist Network

Painters on Wednesday repairing an area inside a cordon at the Central Station in Brussels where an explosive device went off the previous evening. | Virginia Mayo/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170621ed6l00335



Notebook
Magazine
Riding With the Nigerian Soldiers Fighting Boko Haram

Photographs and Text by GLENNA GORDON 
2,094 words
21 June 2017
18:58
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

This year, I spent most of the month of January in northeastern Nigeria on a reporting trip for The Times Magazine with the writer Sarah Topol to tell the story of boys abducted by Boko Haram and forced to become child soldiers. During this time, I was also able to photograph parts of the conflict that are rarely seen, including a night patrol with Nigerian soldiers and a road that was attacked by Boko Haram the day before.

The war against Boko Haram is one of the biggest and most underreported conflicts raging in our world. Around three million displaced people have fled the conflict between the Nigerian government and Boko Haram. These images tell the story of the high human cost and the geopolitical stakes in the battle against Islamic extremism in Africa.

In our first few days in Maiduguri, the center of the conflict in the region and capital of Borno State, Sarah spent hour after hour interviewing children who had been abducted by Boko Haram in dark, anonymous hotel rooms, which we used for the children’ protection. The generators would cut in and out, and with them, the lights and air-conditioning. I would arrange to photograph the children after Sarah was finished with interviews. We would explain to the subjects that I was going to take a picture of them without revealing their identity. Most agreed; a few didn’.

In order to be able to photograph what was happening with the continuing conflict, I worked on getting the correct paperwork from the military to take photographs in Maiduguri and elsewhere — process Sarah and I began in the Nigerian capital, Abuja, a week earlier. I spent days greeting military officials, shuffling among a few different military outposts.

I finally received my permission letter, and a few days later, a military official invited me to accompany soldiers on a night mission.

Every night after the evening curfew, soldiers go on patrol throughout the city. As we were pulling out of the military compound on the night I joined them, the officer in charge of the mission received a call on his radio that a suicide bomber had just exploded near a checkpoint. We immediately rerouted and went to the scene.

Maiduguri is surrounded by a security perimeter and checkpoints. Would-be suicide bombers come from the countryside and try to sneak into the city at night to blow themselves up in a crowded place in the morning.

That night, a soldier at a checkpoint spotted something moving in the brush. The soldier fired at the movement, which turned out to be a suicide bomber who was then blown apart when the gunfire hit the explosives strapped to his torso.

Some of the soldiers spread out and searched the field while the others gathered around the severed head and examined it, referring to the decapitated man as an infidel. I looked at his face, his eyes wide open with only the whites showing. He didn’ look more than 20 years old.

I stayed near the convoy of vehicles and kept low to the ground, trying to frame images in the darkness. I balanced my camera on my knee for a long exposure to capture the soldiers moving around the clearing, the stars bright above them.

The soldiers later searched the surrounding neighborhood, and we began going door-to-door. They were looking for money, weapons or materials for bomb making. The soldiers banged on doors loudly and demanded entry as women rushed to cover themselves and men obediently opened drawers and lifted mattresses to prove they weren’ hiding anything.

While we were on the search, we heard two more explosions. I learned later that two other suicide bombers had also been seen and shot.

A few days after the night patrol, an officer drove me out of Maiduguri to where a convoy was leaving for the town of Damboa. It’ difficult for civilians to safely travel through Borno, so they usually queue up for a convoy that is escorted by the military.

Boko Haram often attacks vehicles, and the roads are considered extremely dangerous.

In addition to the military, many convoys are accompanied by the Civilian Joint Task Force (J.T.F.), a mix of men of all ages, including this group which is from Maiduguri and the surrounding area, who volunteer to fight Boko Haram. Many people in the Army are from different parts of the country and often do not speak Hausa, the local language, or know the area well. As a result, they rely on the J.T.F. for translation services and more.

On this same stretch of road just the day before, Boko Haram attacked the day’ convoy, killing more than 12 people, injuring many others and overpowering the military and the J.T.F., who fled. Boko Haram then took their vehicles.

On this day, I watched civilians drive off along the dusty road, guided by Nigerian military vehicles and soldiers, heading to a home that wasn’ secure.

After the convoy drove away, I visited Maiduguri’ largest hospital, looking for people who had been in the convoy that was attacked the day before.

Makinta Dima, 20, was asleep by a hospital window. He had been shot in the leg and the arm by Boko Haram during the attack on his convoy. He lives in Damboa and was traveling to Maiduguri to buy goats, he told me. Another victim of the attack, Modu Dule, had been shot in the arm. He said that there were more than 200 insurgents with guns on motorcycles, and that the attack lasted about 30 minutes.

One day, I visited an almajiri — traditional school for poor or orphaned children where they study the Quran and often must beg on the streets to cover their upkeep. At this school, named after their teacher Mallam Idris Muhammad, most of the boys were between 8 and 12 years old, but a few of the boys were as young as 2 or 3.

The room was hot and packed with boys intent on their prayers. The smell was overpowering. I was drenched in sweat within minutes; It was over 100 degrees outside, and even hotter inside. The boys must recite the Quran, or they are beaten. Sometimes they are beaten anyway. The teacher often carries a whip while giving his lessons.

While many almaji ris do not teach radical Islam, some have been a source of young men ready to be radicalized and have played a role in the conflict. Schools like these, as well as the lack of opportunity for young men, contribute to Boko Haram’ ease of recruitment in the region. The process of regulating almajiris only began recently and has not reached many of the schools.

Another day, we visited Bama, one of the most strategically important towns previously held by Boko Haram and recently retaken by the Nigerian military. Though Bama is only an hour’ drive from Maiduguri, the roads are so unsafe that we traveled there by helicopter. Once we arrived, we were given an unofficial tour around the abandoned town by military officials. All the residents had fled or were living in the camp for internally displaced people in the middle of town.

The destruction was complete: Boko Haram set most of the buildings it had occupied on fire as they fled, but some outposts survived the flames and had evidence of the insurgents’arkings. Boko Haram teach Muslim extremism in its training camps and is known to oppose Western styles of learning. In March 2015, it publicly declared an affiliation to ISIS, and symbols of that affiliation were visible throughout the town.

At times, I felt as if I were grasping at straws with my pictures, looking for anything to emotionally translate this conflict. One day, Sarah told me the story of Fatima, a young girl she had interviewed who was abducted by Boko Haram but later escaped with a few other captives. She told Sarah that traveling with the other escapees would have drawn suspicion, so on the day of their escape, they scattered into the night like “hildren of birds.”

Fatima’ story and her words stayed with me. I couldn’ take a complete portrait of Fatima because it might put her at risk. I couldn’ photograph her captors —hose big men who detained her and their wives who beat her. There were so many constraints on what I could photograph that everywhere I went and every chance I got, I went looking for birds. I found them above neem trees and above refugee camps. I saw them above a near-vanished lake at the edge of town, suspended midair below our helicopter and above the ground.

One evening, as we rushed back to the hotel before nightfall and our agreed-upon curfew with the Times security team, I followed a flock of birds with my camera from the car window. They flew over the checkpoint manned by soldiers, over the walls of Bakassi —ne of the biggest camps for internally displaced people in Maiduguri —nd on into the dusk. I made it safely back to the hotel that night, and Sarah and I finished our trip and have moved on to other stories and other assignments. But the Baga Boys are still there in Maiduguri, along with Fatima, the kids at the almaji ri, the soldiers conscripted into this conflict and Boko Haram, lurking in the brush, waiting on the outskirts of town, continuing to fight.

Glenna Gordon is a photographer and has worked regularly throughout Africa since 2006.This story was created with support from the Pulitzer Center.

* The Boys From Baga

A boy carrying leaves to feed animals at an informal settlement for displaced people on the outskirts of Maiduguri, capital of Borno State in northern Nigeria. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | Aisha, who is in her late teens, escaped from Boko Haram while pregnant with the child of a man who raped her in the bush. She returned home briefly to Maiduguri, but left before her family could find out she was pregnant. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | A military vehicle heading out to follow up on a suicide-bombing attempt on the outskirts of Maiduguri. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | Soldiers on patrol after a suicide-bombing attempt. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | Soldiers examining the remains of a suicide bomber. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | Soldiers on patrol. Suicide bombings are a primary tactic used by Boko Haram. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | Soldiers performing a nighttime house-to-house check for insurgents, weapons or other illicit goods after a suicide bombing on the outskirts of Maiduguri. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | A convoy lining up just outside Maiduguri before departing under military escort for Damboa, a small town a few hours away. Travel through Borno State is extremely dangerous. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | Volunteers with the Civilian Joint Task Force, which assists the military in the struggle against Boko Haram. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | The daily convoy from Maiduguri to Damboa. Despite its military escort, Boko Haram periodically attacks the convoy, abducting and killing travelers and stealing vehicles. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | Traveling by bus, rather than in the back of a truck, is a more expensive but more comfortable way to make the risky convoy trip. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | Makinta Dima, left, and Modu Dule, right, were shot by Boko Haram during a 30-minute attack on the Maiduguri-to-Damboa convoy that left more than 12 people dead. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | Young boys at an almajiri, a school for poor or orphaned children where they study the Quran and often must beg on the streets to cover their upkeep. Mallam Idris Muhammad, standing, is their teacher. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | The Nigerian military retook Bama, a large town in northeastern Nigeria, from Boko Haram in 2015. The insurgents burned many buildings as they fled, but some that still stand display markings that show Boko Haram’ affiliation with ISIS. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times | A soldier at dusk near a camp for displaced Nigerians on the edges of Maiduguri. | Glenna Gordon for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170621ed6l006el



World; Asia Pacific
Militants’iege of Philippine Elementary School Ends After 12 Hours

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
599 words
21 June 2017
11:01
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA —slamist militants seized an elementary school in the restive southern Philippines on Wednesday, holding 31 hostages, including students, for about 12 hours before escaping into a vast marshland area, the military said.

The militants, from a splinter group called the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, seized Malagakit Elementary School in the town of Pigcawayan as they were retreating from a nearby government outpost they had attacked, the military said.

Capt. Arvin Encinas, a military spokesman, said the gunmen took over the school at dawn on Wednesday, triggering skirmishes and the evacuation of about 1,000 residents in the area.

They took hostages, including six students, to prevent troops from advancing. Two pro-government militiamen were wounded in the firefight, the military said.

The standoff lasted until sundown, Captain Encinas said, adding that the guerrillas “ventually withdrew and released all hostages.”

“s of now, they no longer have captives,”e said. “t around six o’lock in the evening, while our troops were preparing to assault the place, they escaped, leaving behind these civilians.”

“ursuit operations are ongoing,”e added.

Pigcawayan is about 50 miles south of the city of Marawi, where the military has spent weeks fighting militants who have declared allegiance to the Islamic State. A spokesman for the Bangsamoro group, Abu Misri Mama, said its “actical offensive”n Pigcawayan had nothing to do with the Marawi offensive, though he said he welcomed the “truggle”f fellow Muslims on the southern island of Mindanao.

“his is our offensive, not the Maute or Abu Sayyaf’,”e said, referring to two groups fighting in Marawi.

A Manila-based spokesman for the military, Brig. Gen. Restituto Padilla, called the attack “pportunistic,”uggesting that the group had struck now because the military was busy in Marawi.

General Padilla said as many as 200 guerrillas from the Bangsamoro group had attacked the government outpost in Pigcawayan early Wednesday, before being driven away and seizing the school. General Padilla played down the attack as “arassment”nd said the fighting was nearly over.

The Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters broke away from the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the country’ largest Muslim rebel force, after the latter group signed a peace deal with the government in 2014, giving up its fight for a separate homeland in the Muslim-majority south. The rest of the Philippines is mostly Catholic.

The Bangsamoro group said it had split with the Moro organization to continue fighting for independence, though the military has said that much of its activity is simple banditry. General Padilla said Wednesday that the group may have attacked Pigcawayan to “roject that they’e still existing.”

On Monday, the Philippine government included the Bangsamoro group on a list of 20 armed organizations said to be allied with the Islamic State, along with Abu Sayyaf and the Maute group. The list was part of a memorandum filed to the Supreme Court in support of President Rodrigo Duterte’ recent declaration of martial law on Mindanao, in response to the Islamist takeover of Marawi. The Bangsamoro group is not known to have made any public declaration of allegiance to the Islamic State, unlike Abu Sayyaf and the Maute group.

* U.S. Troops in Besieged City of Marawi, Philippine Military Says

* Destroying a Philippine City to Save It From \b ISIS\b0  Allies

* Duterte, Focused on Drug Users in Philippines, Ignored Rise of \b ISIS\b0 

Residents of Pigcawayan, the Philippines, prepared to evacuate on Wednesday after militants seized an elementary school. | Mark Navales/European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170621ed6l002va



U.S.; Politics
Senators Wrestle With Updating Law Authorizing War on Terrorist Groups

By CHARLIE SAVAGE 
1,063 words
20 June 2017
23:56
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —enators from both parties agreed on Tuesday that it was long past time for Congress to enact a new law authorizing the evolving war against Islamist terrorist groups, while also raising questions about the legal basis  for the Trump administration’ escalating direct military confrontations with Syrian government forces.

But over the course of a 90-minute hearing  before the Foreign Relations Committee, it was clear that policy disagreements that thwarted previous efforts to update the authorization to use military force against the perpetrators of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks — law that three presidents have used to justify combat against foes and in countries far beyond Al Qaeda in Afghanistan —emain daunting.

“ome members of Congress will use this debate for the singular purpose of imposing limitations on our president —t’ just a fact,”aid Senator Bob Corker , Republican of Tennessee, the chairman of the committee. “thers may refuse to limit a president at war in any way. That’ a fact. And that is a wide gap to bridge.”

The hearing was the latest in a yearslong series  of congressional debates over what, if anything, to do about the open-ended Sept. 11 war authorization. The executive branch has stretched the law to encompass war against enemies with only tenuous links to the original Al Qaeda, which has proved controversial, and senators disagreed Tuesday about whether it covered the Islamic State, as the Obama administration first claimed .

The hearing was the first since President Trump took office, and it comes at a time of new urgency over the legal uncertainty regarding the scope and limits of what it covers. On Sunday, the United States shot down a Syrian government fighter jet  because it was said to be menacing a rebel militia the United States is supporting. The downing prompted Russia, a Syrian government ally that has also intervened in the complex civil war, to threaten  to target American and allied aircraft that fly west of the Euphrates River.

Asked at a luncheon on Monday at the National Press Club in Washington what legal basis the United States had to attack Syrian government forces, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., claimed the authority stemmed from the 2001 law because the American military presence in Syria was predicated on fighting Al Qaeda and the Islamic State there.

But on Tuesday, the ranking Democrat on the Senate committee, Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, said, “he most recent use of this, in regards to activities in Syria, certainly had nothing to do with the attack on our country on September the 11th.”

And a witness, John B. Bellinger III , who was the Bush administration’ top lawyer at the National Security Council and then at the State Department, testified that he was “uzzled”y the suggestion that the 2001 war authorization covered military operations against Syrian government forces. He suggested the executive branch might be able to cite Mr. Trump’ constitutional powers as commander in chief as a basis for them, however.

Most of the hearing focused on how operations against Islamist militants have evolved since 2001. It circled through questions that have derailed previous attempts to reach a consensus on updating the war authorization, including whether a replacement should have an expiration date, constrain the use of ground forces and limit the war’ geographic scope, and how broadly it should extend to other militant groups merely associated  with major enemies.

“t’ hard to craft an authorization against nonstate actors,”aid Senator Tim Kaine, Democrat of Virginia, who, with fellow a committee member, Senator Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona, has pushed Congress for years to enact a new war authorization.

Still, in an interview after the hearing, Mr. Kaine expressed hope that political headwinds may be easing.

“n my discussions with Republicans and Democrats, I do think they do feel the need to impose more structure on the White House,”r. Kaine said, noting that Mr. Trump has outsourced a decision about troop levels in Afghanistan to the Pentagon and had yet to articulate a clear Middle East strategy. “ think the worry about mercurial surprises is prompting Congress, including Republicans, to want to exercise our powers a little more.”

The bill  proposed by Mr. Kaine and Mr. Flake would authorize force against Al Qaeda, the Taliban and the Islamic State for five years. It also would set up a process for presidents to declare that other Islamist militant groups had become “ssociated forces”overed by the war authorization, while giving Congress a way to reject that designation.

One of several alternative bills , proposed by Senator Todd Young, Republican of Indiana, contains no end date or mechanism for Congress to override an executive branch decision about expanding the war to an associated force. His bill  also contains explicit permission to hold terrorism suspects, including from the Islamic State, in indefinite law-of-war detention, bolstering court rulings that wartime detention powers are an implied as part of congressional authorization to use military force.

Under questioning by Mr. Young, Mr. Bellinger warned that because it is not clear that the 2001 war authorization covers the Islamic State, if the Trump administration were to bring an Islamic State suspect to the military prison at Guantáamo Bay, Cuba , courts might potentially order the prisoner freed in a habeas corpus lawsuit.

Mr. Young said he was willing to compromise to get a new authorization enacted, arguing that Congress had a constitutional duty to set the parameters of the war.

“e can’ outsource our responsibilities, as difficult as it may be to come to terms on some of these issues,”e said.

Follow Charlie Savage on Twitter@charlie_savage .

Jennifer Steinhauer contributed reporting.

* Watchdog Group Sues Trump Administration, Seeking Legal Rationale Behind Syria Strike 

* Russia Warns U.S. After Downing of Syrian Warplane 

* Debating the Legal Basis for the War on Terror 

* \b ISIS\b0  Detainees May Be Held at Guantáamo, Document Shows 

* Is the U.S. Now at War With the Shabab? Not Exactly  

* Suit Calling War on \b ISIS\b0  Illegal Is Rejected 

Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee and the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, spoke to reporters on Tuesday at the Capitol. | Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170620ed6k007sl



Times Insider
Journalist’ Notebook: Into the Battle of Mosul, Armed With a Camera

By BEN C. SOLOMON 
928 words
20 June 2017
18:09
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

When I met Major Sajjad al-Hour, he and his men were preparing a large fish dinner.

Masgouf, as it’ called in Iraq, is a whole carp, grilled until black, covered with lemons and doused in spices. The carp had been pulled hours earlier from the Tigris River. But on the outskirts of Mosul, approaching the river can mean risking your life to incoming sniper fire. So how did the major fish out these carp?

“e throw grenades in the river and then pick them with a net,”aid Sajjad, with smirk.

This technique isn’ out of the ordinary for many Iraqis; it’ just part of life. War has become a near constant since the 1980s. Many of the soldiers there have lived in a state of war since the day they were born.

When I set out to cover the battle in Mosul, I wanted to focus on these soldiers who were fighting ISIS and show how the violence has changed them over the years.

Sajjad was the perfect subject. Young, brave, experienced and fearless. At 33 he has eight kids and has been shot five times. I would end up spending three weeks embedded with Sajjad and his men.

Sajjad was the son of a soldier. His father had fought in the Iran-Iraq war. And though his father attempted to dissuade his sons from joining the military, Sajjad didn’ listen. The day after graduating high school, Sajjad was already signed up for military academy. From 2004 to 2010, he trained and fought beside American soldiers.

“ certainly miss them,”e would say in many of our interviews, remembering his U.S. counterparts fondly. (We spoke through a translator; him in Arabic, me in English.)

Perhaps this is why we got along so well. After eating our fish dinner (delicious, by the way), he spoke at length about how much he missed the camaraderie of Americans. I am no soldier, but I’ spent a few months covering Iraq in 2016, when I made a VR film covering the fight for Falluja . Sajjad had watched and appreciated it. I explained that I wanted to find someone to film who could exemplify what it meant to be a soldier in Iraq. He said, “ know just the man.”

And so my embed with Sajjad’ unit of the Emergency Response Division began.

I spent nights living with Sajjad and the 150 soldiers under his command inside the city of Mosul. The soldiers would move into an abandoned house near the front line, use generators to supply power, and bunk on the floors wherever they could find space. Every few days, they would pack up, move to a new house and begin again.

What they did, my team and I did.

Each night, the four of us — translator, a driver, a security adviser and me —ould unroll our sleeping bags and find a spot on the floor to rest. While many journalists would make day trips from the Kurdish city of Erbil, spending multiple days with the soldiers helped us gain the their trust.

They began to share jokes with us, show us pictures of their girlfriends and wives back home and invite us to share every meal.

The days were intense. In February and March, the soldiers made their first push into the western part of the city. The Islamic State, also known as ISIS, was well prepared. Consumer drones would fly overhead and drop grenades. Suicide car bombers, well equipped with armor and homemade explosives, would come at full speed toward the unit multiple times a day. Improvised explosive devices hidden in the dirt and rubble were around every corner. Each day we spent out with the unit was incredibly dangerous. We would ride along inside the armored Humvees of Sajjad’ convoy, filming when we could.

The soldiers’ork was grueling, but freeing besieged civilians made it worthwhile. People who had been under Islamic State rule lived in great fear. Many had hidden in the basements of their homes for weeks to hide from bombing strikes and ISIS attacks.

Sajjad took great pleasure at being the liberator. On one day, a family named their newborn son “ajjad”nd made tea for the unit as the soldiers rested in their living room.

The unit’ work is not without controversy. Last month, an Iraqi journalist on a similar assignment to mine released footage and photos of a different division within the same battalion as Sajjad’, showing soldiers torturing and executing civilians in Mosul to extract confessions of working with the Islamic State.

In my time with the soldiers, I saw no such treatment. Sajjad assured me he had no relation to this battalion, which worked and fought on the east side of the city; he and his men fought on the western side. It’ hard to tell, however. Would I have seen a different story if I were not a foreigner? Would they have been more open with me?

This week, the Iraqi forces started the most important and complicated part of the fight: retaking the old city.

This battle will surely be brutal and harsh.

Ben C. Solomon in Mosul | Ben C. Solomon, a Times video journalist, embedded with an Iraqi unit. He tells the story of Major Sajjad al-Hour as he leads 150 men through the war-torn streets of Mosul. | By BEN C. SOLOMON and TAIGE JENSEN 

Document NYTFEED020170620ed6k0050l



The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
‘he Daily’ A Major in Mosul

By CAITLIN DICKERSON 
641 words
20 June 2017
11:51
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device : On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

The battle for the Iraqi city of Mosul is entering its final and most challenging phase. While the United States leads airstrikes on Mosul’ old city, Iraqi forces are engaged on the ground there, in the most intensive urban warfare since World War II.

On today’ episode:

•en C. Solomon, a Times video journalist, embedded with one Iraqi unit. He tells the story of Maj. Sajjad al-Hour as he commands 150 men through the streets of Mosul.

•he Supreme Court makes a rare decision to get involved in politics. We check in with Adam Liptak, who covers the court, about whether partisan gerrymandering violates the Constitution.

Background reading and watching:

•r. Solomon’ video about Major Hour:

•r. Liptak on the Supreme Court’ decision to hear a case on partisan gerrymandering, potentially setting the stage for a ruling that could impose limits on a practice that has helped define American politics for centuries.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @itscaitlinhd. I’ your host while Michael Barbaro is on vacation. He’l be back next week.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

On your iPhone or iPad:

Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “he Daily.”

Once you’e on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “ubscribe”utton to have new episodes sent to your phone free.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

On your Android phone or tablet:

You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, senior producer; Andy Mills, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director; Pedro Rosado, studio manager.

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

Major Sajjad al-Hour, who leads the Iraqi unit with which a Times journalist recently embedded. | Ben C. Solomon/The New York Times | A short film following Major Sajjad al-Hour as he commands 150 men through the war-torn streets of Mosul in an attempt to eradicate ISIS. “od willing, Iraq will be their graveyard,”e said. | By BEN C. SOLOMON and TAIGE JENSEN 

Document NYTFEED020170620ed6k002s1



Foreign Desk; SECTA
As Taliban Splinters, Afghan Government Quietly Aids a Breakaway Faction

By TAIMOOR SHAH, ROD NORDLAND and JAWAD SUKHANYAR; Taimoor Shah reported from Kandahar, and Rod Nordland and Jawad Sukhanyar from Kabul, Afghanistan. 
1,274 words
20 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KANDAHAR, Afghanistan -- It was a particularly bitter fight in the heavily contested district of Gereshk in Helmand Province. The adversaries deployed suicide attackers, roadside explosives and a magnetic bomb stuck to the undercarriage of a commander's car, amid pitched firefights that went on for several days last week.

When it was over, at least 21 people were dead on both sides -- and all were members of the Taliban.

As a result, Gereshk remained one of the few places in the province still mostly under the Afghan government's control, thanks to a breakaway Taliban faction that has become a de facto ally of the government.

Infighting among the Taliban is nothing new. But Afghan officials have now chosen sides, with a policy that amounts to ''If you can't beat them, at least help their enemies do so.''

In recent months, the government has quietly provided the breakaway faction -- popularly known as the Renouncers -- with weapons, safe passage and intelligence support in their fight against the mainstream Taliban. The result has been a series of successes in areas where the government has otherwise suffered repeated defeats, particularly in Helmand, a southern province where the mainstream Taliban still control 90 percent of the territory.

The Renouncers are followers of Mullah Mohammad Rasoul, who split with the main Taliban group after revelations in 2015 that the former Taliban leader, Mullah Muhammad Omar, had long been dead. Mullah Rasoul and his followers were angered that Mullah Omar's replacement, Mullah Akhtar Muhammad Mansour, had kept the death a secret.

After Mullah Mansour was killed in an American airstrike last year, his successor, Mawlawi Haibatullah Akhundzada, antagonized the Rasoul faction even more, especially by choosing a hard-line member of the Taliban's Haqqani wing, Sirajuddin Haqqani, as deputy leader in charge of military operations.

While they have been most active in Helmand Province, other Renouncer factions have engaged in bitter fights with the mainstream Taliban in Shindand District of Herat Province, in the northwest, and in the western provinces of Farah and Ghor.

The fighting last week began when the mainstream Taliban attacked a Renouncer base in Gereshk, one of the few areas outside Helmand's provincial capital, Lashkar Gah, that are not under Taliban control. The base, near an Afghan Army base, was struck by a pickup truck loaded with explosives and driven by a suicide bomber, killing 11 of their fighters, according to Hamidullah Afghan, a local police official. He said the authorities helped evacuate those Renouncers who were wounded to a hospital in Lashkar Gah.

In retaliation, the Renouncers began their own suicide attack against the Taliban at a bazaar in the district, according to Abdul Salam Afghan, a spokesman for the Helmand police. In all, 11 of the Renouncers and 10 of the mainstream Taliban were killed in the fighting, which was still flaring this week in the area of the bazaar, in Seminar Dasht village.

Qari Yousuf Ahmadi, the spokesman for the mainstream Taliban in southern Afghanistan, said the group they had attacked in Gereshk was a unit trained and equipped by the National Directorate of Security, the Afghan intelligence agency. He said it had no affiliation with the Taliban.

Mullah Abdul Manan Niazi, the spokesman for the Renouncer faction, denied that the group was government-supported, saying that it was a popular movement spurred by resentment toward the mainstream Taliban.

''The reason they targeted us with a car bomber is the Taliban are afraid of us, because we are enhancing our influence in Helmand and the people realize now the Taliban are getting financial support from Iran and Russia,'' Mullah Niazi said. ''They have lost touch with the grass roots.''

He said the group had also fought against the Taliban in Ghor and Farah provinces. ''We have told the residents not to allow Taliban to stay in their villages, and if anyone is found giving shelter to the Taliban, their homes will be burned to ashes,'' Mullah Niazi said.

Government officials in Helmand publicly deny any support for the Renouncer faction. But several police officials there confirmed that the government had helped transfer wounded Renouncers to the hospital after the fighting last week. And a border police official, who spoke only on the condition of anonymity, said that among the units guarding the entrances to Lashkar Gah is a Renouncer unit trained and equipped by the National Directorate of Security.

The intelligence agency pays the fighters salaries equivalent to $150 to $300 a month, and supplies them with food, weapons and vehicles, the official said.

The mainstream Taliban are worried that the Renouncers, who dress and look like other Taliban, have been infiltrating their ranks. In May, they claimed to have arrested 90 such infiltrators in Helmand, who they said were involved in assassination plots against the mainstream group.

Further complicating the picture in Helmand are groups known as the Sangorians, after a popular television drama that depicts a hero wandering the mountains and fighting evildoers, disguised in local garb. These groups, according to local officials, are recruited and trained by the intelligence agency, but dress as Taliban and infiltrate into Taliban-controlled areas to fight behind their lines.

Far to the north in Herat Province, the Taliban has made its most serious inroads in Shindand District. There the Taliban shadow governor, Mullah Samad, brought in reinforcements from other provinces to fight against Nangyal, the local leader of the breakaway faction. (Like many Afghans, Nangyal uses only one name).

Nangyal was defeated and surrendered to the government, which then helped him reorganize his forces as a Renouncer group aligned to Mullah Rasoul, and return to the fight against the mainstream Taliban, according to Abdul Hameed Noor, a former governor of Shindand.

''Rasoul's group are supported by the government forces, they operate very freely in government controlled areas,'' said Haji Ajab Gul, another former governor of the district. ''They can come to the main town of Shindand and target people they dislike.''

Last month, the Afghan Army detected a buildup of mainstream Taliban forces planning an attack on followers of Mullah Rasoul in another part of Herat Province, and government forces thwarted the assault with a pre-emptive strike, according to Lal Muhammad Omarzay, the governor of Adraskan District, where the clash took place.

''We do not have any direct contacts with Mullah Rasoul's group, but we do not fight them either,'' Mr. Omarzay said. ''They do not face us, and we do not face them either.''

In several parts of the country, the Taliban also have to contend against the Islamic State in Khorasan, followers of the extremists in Iraq and Syria. The group, also known as ISIS or ISIL, is particularly strong in parts of eastern Nangarhar Province, but it also has had a presence in Ghor, Farah and other areas. Most of those elements began as Taliban factions that turned against the mainstream group.

Last week, the Islamic State scored a symbolic victory against the Taliban by taking control of the Tora Bora cave and tunnel complex, once used by Osama bin Laden as a hide-out. The Afghan military said on Sunday that it was in the process of ousting the militants from the area.

Afghan security officials last week patrolled the site of a bombing in Gereshk, a district in Helmand Province that saw fighting between the mainstream Taliban and a breakaway faction. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WATAN YAR/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) 

Document NYTF000020170620ed6k0005x



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Saudis Say They Seized 3 Iranians

By THOMAS ERDBRINK and RICK GLADSTONE; Thomas Erdbrink reported from Tehran, and Rick Gladstone from New York. 
610 words
20 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

TEHRAN -- Saudi Arabia said on Monday that its navy had seized three members of Iran's Revolutionary Guards piloting a boat loaded with explosives toward a Saudi offshore oil drilling rig.

The claim was not confirmed but threatened to further fray relations between the rival powers, which have accused each other of fomenting terrorism and instability against a growing backdrop of tensions roiling the Middle East.

Iran denied the Saudi claim and accused the Saudi Navy of having shot at boats belonging to ''simple fishermen'' from Iran's southern Persian Gulf port of Bushehr in an unprovoked attack that had left one Iranian dead.

About the only thing both sides appeared to agree on was that the episode happened on Friday, when Iran's state media first reported its version of events.

The Saudis said over the weekend that their navy had fired warning shots at three small boats and two had escaped, but it reported nothing about arrests made or explosives found. Why the Saudis amended their side of the story on Monday was not made clear.

The Saudi Information and Culture Ministry said in a statement quoted by Agence France-Presse that three captured Iranians, identified as members of the Revolutionary Guards Corps, had been caught late Friday as their boat approached the Saudi-owned Marjan oil field in the Gulf. The ministry said the captives were ''being questioned by Saudi authorities.''

The ministry said the boat's cargo had made it ''clear this was intended to be a terrorist act in Saudi territorial waters designed to cause severe damage to people and property.''

In Iran, the Interior Ministry director general for border affairs, Majid Aqababai, said ''Saudi Arabia's claim on the arrest of Iranian military personnel is not true because the individuals who were confronted were simple fishermen on a fishing boat.''

In remarks quoted by Iranian news services, Mr. Aqababai also reiterated the Iranian contention that ''Saudi Arabia shot at two Iranian fishing boats and killed one of the fishermen.''

Relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia, which compete for influence in the Middle East, have been increasingly strained over the opposite sides they have taken in the Syria and Yemen conflicts.

But the tensions have been particularly aggravated in the month since President Trump's visit to Saudi Arabia, when he emphatically embraced its Sunni rulers. They signed a $110 billion weapons deal with the United States and extolled Mr. Trump's denunciations of Iran.

Apparently emboldened by Mr. Trump, the Saudis moved quickly to isolate Qatar, one of the few Persian Gulf nations that maintains good relations with Iran, a shift that has aggravated political tensions among them and left the United States in an awkward position because Qatar hosts the largest American air base in the Middle East.

Then on June 7, two prominent sites in Tehran were hit in deadly terrorist attacks that were claimed by the Islamic State, the militant group also known as ISIS. Iran said they had been encouraged by Saudi Arabia.

On Sunday, Iran fired missiles into Syria, claiming it was hitting Islamic State targets in retaliation.

''The wood is very dry in the Gulf, it's dangerous,'' said Cliff Kupchan, chairman of the Eurasia Group, a political risk consultancy that follows Iran. ''When Iran looks at ISIS it sees Saudi Arabia.''

Mr. Kupchan said he did not expect a Saudi-Iranian war, ''but we're going to have to live with an increased level of destabilizing incidents for a long time.''

Document NYTF000020170620ed6k0005p



Foreign Desk; SECT
London Attack Near Mosque Investigated as Terrorism

By DAN BILEFSKY; Reporting was contributed by Michael J. de la Merced, Iliana Magra, Stephen Castle, Michael Wolgelenter and Camilla Schick. 
1,672 words
20 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON -- The authorities in Britain said on Monday that they were treating an early morning attack near a mosque in London as an act of terrorism against Muslims, amid fears of retaliation for several recent assaults in the country attributed to Islamist extremists.

Shortly after midnight, a van rammed into a group of pedestrians near the Finsbury Park Mosque, in North London, and the imam of a nearby community center was credited with preventing an angry mob from attacking the driver after worshipers subdued him.

One person died at the scene and at least 10 were wounded, but the authorities said it was not immediately clear if the death was caused by the attack. The assailant was identified by the authorities as Darren Osborne, a 47-year-old man from Cardiff, Wales.

Little was immediately known about Mr. Osborne or his motives. Jo Stevens, the member of Parliament for the Cardiff Central constituency, issued an appeal to the public for any information about him but also urged people to refrain from online speculation.

Seeking to capture the mood of a wounded but unbowed capital, Prime Minister Theresa May acknowledged ''a difficult time in the life of the city.'' The attack drew condemnation from a broad array of political and religious figures.

Some Muslims and others were asking whether the authorities and the news media had been quick enough to describe the assault on Monday as an act of terrorism -- although Mrs. May said it had been declared terrorism within eight minutes.

Speaking in front of her offices at 10 Downing Street, Mrs. May denounced the assault as an act of ''hatred'' and ''evil'' against innocent civilians during the holy month of Ramadan, and she said security at mosques would be bolstered.

Mrs. May said that London was an ''extraordinary city'' of ''extraordinary people,'' and that British values of freedom of speech and freedom of religion would prevail. Calling the attack a ''sickening attempt'' to destroy those freedoms, she noted that extremism and hatred could take many forms. But she said the country would never give in.

Harun Khan, secretary general of the Muslim Council of Britain, said he recognized that many Muslims would be angry about the attack, and he appealed for calm, but he also warned of a rising tide of anti-Islamic sentiment.

''During the night, ordinary British citizens were set upon while they were going about their lives, completing their night worship,'' Mr. Khan said. ''Over the past weeks and months, Muslims have endured many incidents of Islamophobia, and this is the most violent manifestation to date.''

Deputy Assistant Commissioner Neil Basu of the Metropolitan Police, the senior national coordinator for counterterrorism, praised bystanders who had intervened to detain the suspect, and he urged residents to remain calm and vigilant.

''No matter what the motivation proves to be, and we are keeping an open mind, this is being treated as a terrorist attack and the Counter Terrorism Command is investigating,'' he said, adding that more officers had been deployed across London.

Britain has been shaken by a series of deadly attacks in London and Manchester recently, and there has been widespread anger after a fire tore through Grenfell Tower, a 24-story building, killing at least 79 people.

In another indication of the anxieties, the East London Mosque, another major house of worship, reported on Monday afternoon that had it had received a threat by telephone. Police officers and staff members swept the building. The mosque said the threat appeared to be a hoax, but it urged vigilance.

Residents of London, a multicultural city with a large Muslim population and a Muslim mayor, Sadiq Khan, have predominantly responded with equanimity, solidarity and tolerance toward Muslims after recent attacks perpetrated by extremists. On Monday, a similar sense of unity prevailed.

''We want to recognize this as an incident the same as other incidents,'' said Deb Hermer, a 20-year resident of Finsbury Park who left a bouquet of flowers at the gate of the mosque. ''This is no less important than other incidents.''

But Muslim leaders and rights advocates have warned that some could try to use recent terrorist attacks to try to stir hostility against Muslims, and to foster the notion of a culture war between Islam and the West.

According to the office of the mayor of London, in the six days after the terrorist attack at London Bridge and Borough Market on June 3, the Metropolitan Police reported 120 Islamophobic events, compared with 36 the previous week. It added that hate crimes in general had been growing.

On Monday, the Muslim Association of Britain condemned the assault in Finsbury Park as an ''evil terror attack.'' The association also called for the police to protect mosques and asked the government to fight hate crimes against Muslims.

''We call on politicians to treat this major incident no less than a terrorist attack,'' the organization said in a statement. ''We call on the government to do more to tackle this hateful evil ideology, which has spread over these past years and resulted in an increase of Islamophobic attacks and division of our society, as well as spreading of hate.''

Brendan Cox, whose wife, Jo Cox, a member of Parliament, was shot and killed last year in the north of England by a right-wing extremist, said it was imperative to battle hateful ideology against Muslims, just as it was necessary to fight Islamist hate preachers.

''When islamist terrorists attack we rightly seek out hate preachers who spur them on,'' Mr. Cox wrote on Twitter. ''We must do the same to those who peddle Islamophobia.''

Shiraz Maher, deputy director of the International Center for the Study of Radicalization, at King's College London, said that some supporters of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, were already seeking to exploit the attack by framing it as a part of a larger war between Muslims and non-Muslims, and by calling for retaliation.

''ISIS has long held the idea of wanting to provoke the West, not just by provoking governments but also by creating pressure on society so that people are driven toward the extremes,'' he said.

He said the authorities needed to be vigilant for assaults against Muslims, as the Finsbury Park assailant appeared to have co-opted an Islamic State tactic -- using a vehicle to attack civilians.

Mrs. May, under fierce criticism for her reaction to the Grenfell Tower fire and for her initial failure to meet those wounded there, quickly condemned the Finsbury Park attack and visited the mosque.

After her gamble in calling a general election backfired, leaving her without a parliamentary majority, Mrs. May's position is weak, and she is scrambling to assemble a deal with the Democratic Unionist Party of Northern Ireland to stay in power.

The driver of the van on Monday was arrested after bystanders prevented him from fleeing, the police said in a statement. Commissioner Basu of the Metropolitan Police praised those who had intervened, saying they had responded quickly and calmly despite being shaken, scared or angry.

He said that the police had received a number of calls reporting that a van had rammed into pedestrians, and that officers in the area had responded instantly.

Aweys Sheikh, 45, said that he was walking home from the Muslim Welfare House, a community center on nearby Seven Sisters Road, shortly after midnight when he heard a noise and people screaming. ''Then I saw the back of the van,'' he said, and he ran to help.

''I saw the man who came out of the van, he tried to escape, so I held him down with two more boys,'' he said.

Another witness, Boubou Sougou, 23, said, ''I saw the attacker attempting to run away, but people from the mosque held him back.''

''Some of them wanted to beat him up but were stopped by the ones that were holding him until the police came,'' he added.

Mohammed Mahmoud, the 30-year-old imam of the Muslim Welfare House, was praised for helping to form a protective ring around the suspect after he was apprehended by a group of worshipers.

Mr. Mahmoud told the BBC that the attack happened five minutes after the end of evening prayers and that the van had rammed into a crowd that had been helping an ailing man, dragging two people underneath the vehicle.

He said 10 to 15 people had been at the scene of the attack, some trying to resuscitate the victim and three others holding the assailant, who, he said, had appeared calm. Mr. Mahmoud added that after the attack, the man had said, ''I did my bit.''

There were reports that other people had fled from the van after the attack, but Commissioner Basu seemed to discount that theory, saying there were no other suspects.

By midmorning, police officers had cordoned off a corner of Seven Sisters Road, and news cameras were swarming nearby. Police vans that had been on site began to leave, though traffic on a nearby major thoroughfare, Blackstock Road, was restricted.

Forensics officers were analyzing the van used by the attacker, which British news reports said was rented from Pontyclun Van Hire, in the Welsh village of Pontyclun, near Cardiff. The company said it was fully cooperating with the police.

The Finsbury Park Mosque, a major house of worship in North London, opened in 1994 and became a hotbed of Islamist militants, but it was reconstituted in 2005 with a ''new ethos,'' according to its website, and on Monday, Christian ministers gathered there to show solidarity.

''There are very good friendships between the Christian and Muslim communities here,'' said the Rev. Daniel Sandham of St. John the Evangelist, a nearby church. ''It has sought to be a beacon for the community.''

Follow Dan Bilefsky on Twitter @DanBilefsky .

Document NYTF000020170620ed6k00058



briefing
London, Portugal, France: Your Monday Briefing; Europe Edition

By PATRICK BOEHLER 
1,219 words
19 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up .)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•ondon, again.

A vehicle drove into pedestrians early this morning near a mosque in Finsbury Park, an immigrant neighborhood, killing one person and wounding 10 others .

London’ mayor called the episode a “orrific terrorist attack.”he police said a man believed to have been the driver had been arrested. Check back for updates.

It is, at minimum, another blow to the fragile government  of Prime Minister Theresa May , just as “rexit”egotiations begin today. The death toll from last week’ inferno at a public housing project, rose to 79 .

_____

• forest fire in Portugal killed more than 60 people , many of them drivers who became trapped in their cars.

The country declared three days of mourning as firefighters continue to battle the blaze.

It is “he worst tragedy in terms of human lives that we’e known in recent years,”rime Minister Antóio Costa said.

_____

•n France, voters gave President Emmanuel Macron and his allies a decisive majority . A record number of women  have been elected to an overall younger and more diverse legislature.

Mr. Macron now “as all the power,”aid Jean-Christophe Cambadéis, who resigned as head of the largely diminished Socialist Party. Jean-Luc Méenchon and Marine Le Pen , the far-left and far-right leaders, secured seats, as did, for the first time, Corsican nationalists .

The high abstention rate  suggests that Mr. Macron could face opposition to his promised overhaul of labor laws on the streets, rather than in Parliament .

_____

•n American fighter jet for the first time shot down a Syrian warplane  on Sunday, after the Syrians struck insurgents allied with the U.S.

On the same day, Iran’ Revolutionary Guards Corps launched missiles against Islamic State targets in Syria.

Meanwhile, Iraqi armed forces have begun their assault on the ISIS-held old-city area of Mosul . American commanders described the fight as one of the toughest in urban warfare since World War II. Above, Iraqi soldiers in Mosul.

_____

•ore conflicting signalsemerged from the Trump administration.

A member of President Trump’ legal team made the rounds on Sunday morning talk shows, insisting that Mr. Trump is not under investigation over Russian meddling  in the 2016 election, contradicting a Twitter post by Mr. Trump.

It can be tough keeping track of the three congressional inquiries into the matter. Here’ our rundown , with what’ ahead this week.

_____

•“ great German, and a great European.”

That is how Chancellor Angela Merkel described Helmut Kohl, her mentor, reacting to his death on Friday at 87 .

Mr. Kohl, Germany’ longest-serving chancellor since Bismarck, resolutely steered the nation through its reunification. He was an unwavering proponent of European integration and global dialogue .

But his legacy was clouded by missteps that were often amplified by his tenacity.

_____

Business

•orway, one of the world’ biggest producers of petroleum, wants to wean its citizens off fossil fuels .

•Amazon ’ $13.4 billion deal to buy Whole Foods  and Walmart ’ $310 million purchase of Bonobos , a men’ clothing company, hint at the future of retail .

•ore disrupter news: Airbnb is trying to upgrade  its crash-on-my-couch ethos, and Arianna Huffington is gaining influence at troubled Uber .

•viation expertssay a slowdown in commercial aircraft sales is likely to be a major topic at the International Paris Air Show this week. Here’ a look what else could move the markets .

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets .

In the News

•ore than 65 million people, the most ever, were displaced from their homes in 2016, the U.N . said. [ The New York Times ]

•n Mali, four gunmen stormed a camping resort outside Bamako, the capital, killing at least two people before escaping in a shootout with soldiers. [ The New York Times ]

• Spanish bullfighter died after falling and being gored by a bull in France. [ The Guardian / El Paí ]

•NATO forces for the first time carried out war games simulating a Russian blockade of the Baltic states. [ Reuters ]

•ussia granted extensions to six trademarks for President Trump’ businesses last year, four of them on Election Day in the U.S. [ The New York Times ]

•fter a sexual assault case against Bill Cosby ended in a mistrial, our critic asked if it was “till possible to laugh at his comedy.”he date for a new trial should be set within months. [ The New York Times ]

Smarter Living

•ecipe of the day: A butterflied chicken  cooks evenly in less than an hour.

•ryto use Google less: Your brain will thank you .

Noteworthy

•ur music critic picks the best sets  at the Sóar festival in Barcelona.

•onfederations Cup:The title contenders Portugal and Mexico fought to a 2-2 draw . Russia, the soccer cup’ host nation, beat New Zealand , and Chile defeated Cameroon .

•Porschewon the 24 Hours of Le Mans  for the third year in a row. The race has been a breeding ground for technologies  that drivers take for granted, like fog lights, seatbelts and windshield wipers.

•t men’ fashion week in Milan, Donatella Versace discussed how the internet has changed the relationship between designers and consumers . “t’ the millennials who decide what’ going to happen,”he said.

•an animalsreally anticipate natural disasters?  A German scientist working in Italy is using technology to find out —nd is trying to avoid being dismissed as crazy.

• huge bloom of phytoplankton has illuminated the Black Sea with beautiful swirls of milky blue-green  that can even be seen from space.

Back Story

Yesterday was Father’ Day in many countries. While we may think of it as a commercialized holiday , its roots stretch as far as the Middle Ages.

Its modern beginnings date to 1910. Sonora Smart Dodd  of Spokane, Wash., is thought to have hosted the first Father’ Day celebration to honor her father, a Civil War veteran who raised her and her five siblings after their mother died.

In France, Father’ Day was introduced in 1950 by a manufacturer of cigarette lighters as part of an effort to lift sales  during the slow summer season. Germany celebrates on Ascension Day, the Thursday 39 days after Easter, and men traditionally hike together  while pulling a small wagon filled with wine or beer. In Thailand, it is typically observed on Dec. 5, the birthday of the former king.

In the U.S., the third Sunday in June has been officially reserved for dads since 1972, when President Richard Nixon , the father of two daughters, signed it into law.

“n fatherhood we know the elemental magic and joy of humanity,”Nixon wrote in his proclamation . “t is a rich patrimony, one for which adequate thanks can hardly be offered in a lifetime, let alone a single day.”

Remy Tumin contributed reporting.

_____

This briefing was prepared for the European morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian  and American  mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here  .

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com .

Document INHT000020170619ed6j000gt



Europe Edition
Briefing
London, Portugal, France: Your Monday Briefing

By PATRICK BOEHLER 
1,302 words
19 June 2017
06:09
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up .)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•ondon, again.

A vehicle drove into pedestrians early this morning near a mosque in Finsbury Park, an immigrant neighborhood, killing one person and wounding 10 others .

London’ mayor called the episode a “orrific terrorist attack.”he police said a man believed to have been the driver had been arrested. Check back for updates.

It is, at minimum, another blow to the fragile government  of Prime Minister Theresa May , just as “rexit”egotiations begin today. The death toll from last week’ inferno at a public housing project, rose to 79 .

_____

• forest fire in Portugal killed more than 60 people , many of them drivers who became trapped in their cars.

The country declared three days of mourning as firefighters continue to battle the blaze.

It is “he worst tragedy in terms of human lives that we’e known in recent years,”rime Minister Antóio Costa said.

_____

•n France, voters gave President Emmanuel Macron and his allies a decisive majority . A record number of women  have been elected to an overall younger and more diverse legislature.

Mr. Macron now “as all the power,”aid Jean-Christophe Cambadéis, who resigned as head of the largely diminished Socialist Party. Jean-Luc Méenchon and Marine Le Pen , the far-left and far-right leaders, secured seats, as did, for the first time, Corsican nationalists .

The high abstention rate  suggests that Mr. Macron could face opposition to his promised overhaul of labor laws on the streets, rather than in Parliament .

_____

•n American fighter jet for the first time shot down a Syrian warplane  on Sunday, after the Syrians struck insurgents allied with the U.S.

On the same day, Iran’ Revolutionary Guards Corps launched missiles against Islamic State targets in Syria.

Meanwhile, Iraqi armed forces have begun their assault on the ISIS-held old-city area of Mosul . American commanders described the fight as one of the toughest in urban warfare since World War II. Above, Iraqi soldiers in Mosul.

_____

•ore conflicting signals emerged from the Trump administration.

A member of President Trump’ legal team made the rounds on Sunday morning talk shows, insisting that Mr. Trump is not under investigation over Russian meddling  in the 2016 election, contradicting a Twitter post by Mr. Trump.

It can be tough keeping track of the three congressional inquiries into the matter. Here’ our rundown , with what’ ahead this week.

_____

•“ great German, and a great European.”

That is how Chancellor Angela Merkel described Helmut Kohl, her mentor, reacting to his death on Friday at 87 .

Mr. Kohl, Germany’ longest-serving chancellor since Bismarck, resolutely steered the nation through its reunification. He was an unwavering proponent of European integration and global dialogue .

But his legacy was clouded by missteps that were often amplified by his tenacity.

_____

Business

•orway, one of the world’ biggest producers of petroleum, wants to wean its citizens off fossil fuels .

•Amazon ’ $13.4 billion deal to buy Whole Foods  and Walmart ’ $310 million purchase of Bonobos , a men’ clothing company, hint at the future of retail .

•ore disrupter news: Airbnb is trying to upgrade  its crash-on-my-couch ethos, and Arianna Huffington is gaining influence at troubled Uber .

•viation experts say a slowdown in commercial aircraft sales is likely to be a major topic at the International Paris Air Show this week. Here’ a look what else could move the markets .

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets .

In the News

•ore than 65 million people, the most ever, were displaced from their homes in 2016, the U.N . said. [ The New York Times ]

•n Mali, four gunmen stormed a camping resort outside Bamako, the capital, killing at least two people before escaping in a shootout with soldiers. [ The New York Times ]

• Spanish bullfighter died after falling and being gored by a bull in France. [ The Guardian / El Paí ]

•NATO forces for the first time carried out war games simulating a Russian blockade of the Baltic states. [ Reuters ]

•ussia granted extensions to six trademarks for President Trump’ businesses last year, four of them on Election Day in the U.S. [ The New York Times ]

•fter a sexual assault case against Bill Cosby ended in a mistrial, our critic asked if it was “till possible to laugh at his comedy.”he date for a new trial should be set within months. [ The New York Times ]

Smarter Living

•ecipe of the day: A butterflied chicken  cooks evenly in less than an hour.

•ry to use Google less: Your brain will thank you .

Noteworthy

•ur music critic picks the best sets  at the Sóar festival in Barcelona.

•onfederations Cup: The title contenders Portugal and Mexico fought to a 2-2 draw . Russia, the soccer cup’ host nation, beat New Zealand , and Chile defeated Cameroon .

•Porschewon the 24 Hours of Le Mans  for the third year in a row. The race has been a breeding ground for technologies  that drivers take for granted, like fog lights, seatbelts and windshield wipers.

•t men’ fashion week in Milan, Donatella Versace discussed how the internet has changed the relationship between designers and consumers . “t’ the millennials who decide what’ going to happen,”he said.

•an animals really anticipate natural disasters?  A German scientist working in Italy is using technology to find out —nd is trying to avoid being dismissed as crazy.

• huge bloom of phytoplankton has illuminated the Black Sea with beautiful swirls of milky blue-green  that can even be seen from space.

Back Story

Yesterday was Father’ Day in many countries. While we may think of it as a commercialized holiday , its roots stretch as far as the Middle Ages.

Its modern beginnings date to 1910. Sonora Smart Dodd  of Spokane, Wash., is thought to have hosted the first Father’ Day celebration to honor her father, a Civil War veteran who raised her and her five siblings after their mother died.

In France, Father’ Day was introduced in 1950 by a manufacturer of cigarette lighters as part of an effort to lift sales  during the slow summer season. Germany celebrates on Ascension Day, the Thursday 39 days after Easter, and men traditionally hike together  while pulling a small wagon filled with wine or beer. In Thailand, it is typically observed on Dec. 5, the birthday of the former king.

In the U.S., the third Sunday in June has been officially reserved for dads since 1972, when President Richard Nixon , the father of two daughters, signed it into law.

“n fatherhood we know the elemental magic and joy of humanity,”Nixon wrote in his proclamation . “t is a rich patrimony, one for which adequate thanks can hardly be offered in a lifetime, let alone a single day.”

Remy Tumin contributed reporting.

_____

This briefing was prepared for the European morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian  and American  mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here  .

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com .

Yui Mok/Press Association, via Associated Press | Paulo Novais/European Pressphoto Agency | Francois Mori/Associated Press | Ahmad Al-Rubaye/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Al Drago/The New York Times | Hannibal Hanschke/Reuters | Thomas Haugersveen for The New York Times | Tyler Hicks/The New York Times | Stefano Buonamici for The New York Times | John Rous/Associated Press | This method, sometimes called butterflying, ensures a more evenly cooked chicken with crisp skin and a juicy interior. | By ALEC COHEN and MELISSA CLARK 

Document NYTFEED020170619ed6j001kn



opinion
Fighting, While Funding, Extremists; Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
1,031 words
19 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Even sophisticated observers admit to confusion and consternation about the Middle East, where rivalries and jealousies among nations have reached new levels of complication. Saudi Arabia and some of its neighbors decide to punish Qatar and some of its citizens, ostensibly for fostering and financing Islamist terrorism. But Saudi Arabia itself has been accused of underwriting extremists. No matter: President Trump, captivated by Saudi royalty, sides with the Saudis —ven though the United States has two important bases in Qatar.

Baffling, right? But here is one clear bottom line: The biggest loser in all this may turn out to be the fight against the Islamic State. Nobody likes ISIS. Yet the idea of a united front among Gulf states against the terrorist group has all but evaporated, and hypocrisies and contradictions abound. Here’ a primer on some of the main players.

QATAR This tiny but exceedingly wealthy country definitely has a mixed record. But is it a colossal threat? Last week, the United States agreed to sell it $12 billion worth of F-15 jets and two Navy vessels arrived there for joint military exercises. If Qatar were seen as a serious terrorism threat, that wouldn’ be happening.

True, Qatar has long been accused of funneling money to the Muslim Brotherhood, a loose and influential political network. The Brotherhood has officially forsworn violence. Yet Saudi Arabia, whose royal rulers fear Islamist populism, still brands it a terrorist outfit.

Qatar has also supported radicals in Syria —ike the Qaeda offshoot Al Nusra —nd groups in Libya and other Arab nations. But the Saudis have long aided competing rebel groups in those countries, including extremists. Aiming to play a regional mediating role, Qatar has also angered the Saudis by fostering ties with other hostile groups, including the Afghan Taliban, Hezbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in the Gaza Strip, giving the leaders of some of them airtime on its freewheeling TV network, Al Jazeera.

The Saudis are also annoyed that Qatar talks to Iran, their chief rival, but it’ hardly surprising since the two nations jointly manage a major offshore natural gas reserve.

American judgments about Qatar’ activities have been as mixed as Qatar’ record. In 2014 the State Department branded Qatar a “ermissive jurisdiction”or terrorist financing, but has since praised its efforts to prevent such financing and to stop terrorists from crossing its borders as evidence of a “trong partnership.”n February, Daniel Glaser, a former Treasury official, praised Qatar for a “ood job”n trying to prevent terrorist financing through controls on its financial sector and local charities and in prosecuting people for illegal transactions. Even so, he complained that terrorist financiers are “operating openly and notoriously”n Qatar and Kuwait, and he urged the two governments to shut down such activities.

SAUDI ARABIA Since the Sept 11 attacks, staged mainly by Saudi-born hijackers, and a series of attacks by Al Qaeda and ISIS against the kingdom, Saudi Arabia has become more serious about extremism; some experts regard it as the top counterterrorism partner in the region. It has taken a zero-tolerance approach to ISIS and joined the American-led coalition fighting the group. Even so, American government reports say financial support for terrorism from Saudis “emains a threat to the kingdom and the international community.”nd while this has been ignored by Mr. Trump, Saudi Arabia undermines whatever good work it does by continuing to spend billions of dollars spreading Wahhabism, its ultraconservative brand of Islam —hich in turn inspires ISIS, Al Qaeda and other Sunni extremists —hrough a network of imams and mosques in countries like Kosovo, Indonesia and Pakistan.

Dependent on the Wahhabi clerics for legitimacy, the royal family has been slow to reform a religion that teaches that nonbelievers and wayward Muslims should be shunned or fought if they reject its strict message. Experts say some Saudi school texts seem to make a virtue of hating others. The Saudis, aided by American intelligence and arms, may also be creating extremists with their brutal war in Yemen.

IRAN Unlike Qatar and Saudi Arabia, Iran is a Shiite nation. It is thus a natural enemy of Sunni terrorist groups like ISIS, which it is fighting in Iraq. Iran has been the target of two recent devastating attacks on Tehran for which ISIS has claimed credit. At the same time, if other terrorist groups are counted, Iran is a bad actor. It was designated a state sponsor of terrorism by the State Department in 1984, five years after the Iranian revolution, and is one of three countries, along with Sudan and Syria, still on the list.

American experts say that whatever Saudi Arabia or Qatar’ failings, Iran’ are worse because its involvement with extremist groups is sponsored by the government. According to State Department reports, Iran finances, trains and arms Hezbollah and other Shiite forces in Syria who have committed human rights abuses in the fight to prop up Syria’ notorious butcher, President Bashar al-Assad; anti-Israeli Hezbollah forces in Lebanon; and Shiite militants in Bahrain. Historically, Iran has also provided weapons, training and funding to Hamas and other Palestinian terrorist groups.

Significantly, the Americans are not accusing Russia, Iran’ ally, of terrorism for using its firepower to keep the Assad government in power; no Iranians were named as responsible when the administration in February published a list of 78 major terrorist attacks. And some of Iran’ activities, particularly its war on ISIS, dovetail with Western ambitions.

Each of these three main players has a role to play in the larger effort to defeat and defund terrorists. But there needs to be clarity and honesty about the various sources of the problem, and the various contributions each nation can make to the struggle. Exaggerating or misrepresenting the misdeeds of Qatar and Iran, while giving the Saudis a free pass, will only benefit Saudi Arabia’ efforts to expand its regional influence.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY ADAM MAIDA)

Document INHT000020170619ed6j000h5



The Stone
Opinion
Is Your God Dead?

By GEORGE YANCY 
2,606 words
19 June 2017
09:20
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Is your God dead?

I don’ mean the God of the philosophers or the scholars, but, as Blaise Pascal said, the “od of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob.”ith no disrespect, I hope the question comes as a jolt. And without being outraged or quick to accuse me of “lasphemy,”now, too, that I am a hopeful monotheist. I might even be called a Christian, only I continue, every day of my life, to fail. Friedrich Nietzsche’ observation weighs heavily on me: “here was only one Christian and he died on the cross.”all me a failed and broken Christian, but a Christian nevertheless.

So, is your God dead? Have you buried God in the majestic, ornamental tombs of your churches, synagogues and mosques? Perhaps prosperity theology, boisterous, formalistic and mechanical prayer rituals, and skillful oratory have hastened the need for a eulogy.

Perhaps by remaining in your “oly”laces, you have sacrificed looking in the face of your neighbor on the street. You know the one: the one who smells “ad”ecause she hasn’ bathed in days; the one who carries her home on her body; the one who begs. Surely you’e seen that “nholy”ace. I’e seen you suddenly look away, making sure not to make eye contact with the “nclean.”erhaps you’e preoccupied with texting, consumed by a work or family matter. Then again, perhaps it’ prayer time and you need to face east, or perhaps you’e too focused on holy communion as you make your way to church. Your refusal to stop, to linger, to look into her eyes, has already done its damage. Your body has already left a mark in its absence, in its fleeing the scene.

My hands are also dirty; I’ guilty of missing the opportunity to recognize something of the divine in the face of the Other on the street. I’ pretty sure I looked away when I caught a glimpse of a homeless man approaching the other day. How different is this from those who walked by the beaten and abandoned man in the parable of the good Samaritan? I failed to see the homeless man as a neighbor.

When we turn away like this we behave as if our bodies had boundaries, as if our skin truly separated us from the Other. But what if, as I would argue, our bodies don’ have strict edges? What if we could develop a new way of seeing the body that reveals that we are always already touching, that we are inextricably linked to a larger institutional and social body that binds us all?

In meditating on these questions, I have found that the prophetic voice of Abraham Joshua Heschel (1907-1972), a Polish-born Jewish-American rabbi and activist, can help us toward an answer. Heschel, who studied in Germany with Martin Buber, and later became a close friend of Martin Luther King Jr., warned frequently of the dangers of theological and religious shallowness, of our tendency to “orry more about the purity of dogma than about the integrity of love.”

Heschel cautions against “n outward compliance with ritual laws, strict observance mingled with dishonesty, the pedantic performance of rituals as a form of opportunism.”nd while there are many who worship in churches, synagogues and mosques, who understand that religious truth must be lived, who make a point of looking into the eyes of the woman on the street and show her mercy, too many of us refuse to look, to stop.

As the religious scholar Elisabeth T. Vasko writes, “o be human is to be a person in relation.”nd it is this social and existential relationality that ties you to, and implicates you in, the life of that destitute woman. Heschel writes, “ow dare we come before God with our prayers when we commit atrocities against the one image we have of the divine: human beings?”f there is a shred of life left in your God, full resuscitation might begin with remaining in the presence of that suffering face. If your God is dead, the possibility for a resurrection might be found in attending to the pain and sorrow of that image of the divine there on the street.

AS A YOUNG BOY, the idea of exempting no one from redemption tested my mother, who was a Baptist. One night I asked her if I could pray for the Devil. Strange, I admit. My mother eventually said yes. So there I was on my knees,

“ow I lay me down to sleep,

I pray the Lord my soul to keep,

If I should die before I wake,

I pray the Lord my soul to take.

God bless my mother, my sister and my friends. And God bless the Devil.”

My older son recently brought to my attention a Mark Twain quote: “ho in 18 centuries has had the common humanity to pray for the one sinner that needed it most …”ell, there I was as a little boy doing just that. Beyond boyhood now, and thinking of evil in a less personified way, I no longer pray for the Devil. The more important point here is that we need a paradigm shift in how we lay claim to our religious identities. Why not claim those that are suffused with compassion, a shared reality of suffering together, in which your pain is my pain?

Indeed, King wrote in his letter from the Birmingham jail, “njustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.”eschel suggests that we should be mortified by the inadequacy and superficiality of our anguish when we witness the suffering of others, the sort of anguish that should make us weep until our eyes are red and swollen and bring sleepless nights and agonizing days. He writes, “e are a generation that has lost the capacity for outrage.”

I have been troubled by the lack of religious and theological outrage against national and global poverty, white racism and supremacism, sexism, classism, homophobia, bullying, building walls, “lternative facts,”isa/immigration bans and xenophobia. Heschel reminds us that when we establish a way of life predicated upon a lie, “he world can turn into a nightmare.”e makes it clear that the Holocaust did not emerge suddenly. “t was in the making for several generations. It had its origin in a lie: that the Jew was responsible for all social ills, for all personal frustrations. Decimate the Jews and all problems would be solved.”

Those signs are here, too. Jewish people I’e met, whose parents escaped Hitler’ tyranny, have shared with me their parents’ense of deep alarm under the Trump administration. “ake America Great Again”s a call for law and order buttressed by a white nativist ideology. The lie on which the Holocaust began is still with us.

Anti-Semitism is on the rise. So is the belief that Black pathology is eroding America from within. Black people are told that we live in poverty. That our schools are no good. And we have no jobs. In addition, if we just build a wall, so this divisive logic goes, more of our problems will dissipate. After all, it is Mexicans, we are told, who are bringing drugs, crimes and rapists.

“ny god who is mine but not yours, any god concerned with me but not with you, is an idol,”eschel writes. Think of segregated white churches during Jim Crow, or the many churches today, in our “ost-racial”oment, that continue to be de facto segregated every Sunday morning. Think, too, of the blood that has been spilled in the name of the God we claim as our own. You have all heard the underpinnings of this idolatry: “od Bless America,”hich I see as the words of a bankrupt neoliberal theology. In fact, there is something profane in that statement, which worships and calls upon a God that blesses America only.

If there are any blessings to be had, the request, surely, mustn’ be partisan. At least in Christianity, Judaism and Islam, it is believed that human beings were created in the image of God. Not just the faithful of these religions, but all humans: Syrian refugees, whom our current administration have deemed threats, were created in the image of God. Kim Jong-un, Vladimir Putin, members of the Ku Klux Klan and Bashar al-Assad all were created in the image of God. So even as we ask God to bless America, surely we must ask God to bless those whom we have deemed threats or enemies. Our blessings must be scattered across the entire world, inclusive of all of humanity.

RECENTLY , TRUMP, SPEAKING at Liberty University, said to a graduating class of future evangelical leaders, “n America, we don’ worship government, we worship God.”he students applauded and cheered. If what Trump said was true, then why didn’ the students turn their backs to him, to protest the contradiction between the poisonous effects of his white nativism, extreme divisiveness and his “heology” Unless, of course, Liberty University’ God is clad in a profane theological whiteness.

When they were applauding Trump, the students were not applauding a prophetic visionary but someone with a dangerous Pharaonic mentality, one who is intemperate, self-indulgent, power hungry, unpredictable and narcissistic. Remember that the applause was for someone who refuses to take the nuclear option off the table, who said that global warming was a hoax and has now pulled out of the Paris climate agreement, who said of ISIS that he would “omb the shit out of ’m.”

The graduating students at Liberty University should have been told, as Heschel wrote, that “he age of moral mediocrity and complacency has run out. This is a time for radical commitment, for radical action.”

Heschel, in a speech on religion and race, reminded us of the persistence of autocratic power when he stated that “haraoh is not ready to capitulate. The exodus began but it is far from having been completed.”hat exodus, originating with Moses and the emancipation of the Jews, as Heschel suggests, is eternal, and signifies the march toward not just an outward physical emancipation but a spiritual one —ne that demands fierce self-reflection. I take it that for Heschel, all of the oppressed of the world are in need of an exodus. In another work Heschel later wrote, “ne’ integrity must constantly be examined.”ob Marley, in his song “xodus,”ays, “pen your eyes and look within. Are you satisfied with the life you’e living?”ome voices refuse to let us rest. King had such a voice, and so did Socrates.

AND WHAT HAVE WE SEEN? I am pretty sure that no contemporary Christians have seen God, no contemporary religious Jews have seen Yahweh and no contemporary Muslims have seen Allah —ertainly not face to face. Yet all of us have seen the aftermath of murdered children from war-torn countries, their fragile bodies covered with blood. I am haunted by the little body of 3-year-old Aylan Kurdi who lay dead and face down in 2015 on a Turkish beach after his family fled violence in Syria. I continue to be haunted by the murder of an unarmed Trayvon Martin in 2012. Hundreds of thousands of children around the world are suffering. We all have known about the cruel and despicable violence toward transgender individuals. We know about the magnitude of human trafficking, the magnitude of poverty, and the sickness of hatred.

Vasko writes, “hrough lamentation, voice is given to pain.”et our lamenting, our mourning for those who suffer, is far too short-lived. And our charity to those who wail in the night only temporarily eases their pain. According to Heschel, “ne may be decent and sinister, pious and sinful.”e easily forget the weight of human suffering, the agony. Heschel asks, “f all agony were kept alive in memory, if all turmoil were told, who could endure tranquillity?”eschel and Vasko help to remind us that we ought to be suspicious of our tranquillity.

In fact, I would ask, what if that tranquillity, that peace of mind, rests on the rotting corpses beneath our feet? What if as we pray and rejoice in our churches, synagogues and mosques, we are throwing handfuls of dirt on God’ casket? After all, prayer and rejoicing can also function as forms of narcissism, as ways to drown out the screams of the poor, the oppressed. In a story shared by Heschel’ daughter, Susannah, she writes that he found praying during the Vietnam War impossible, but necessary to demonstrate. “henever I open my prayer book,”e told a journalist, “ see before me images of children burning from napalm.”

Heschel writes, “he prophet’ word is a scream in the night.” wait to be awakened by that scream. I have not yet heard it. It is that scream, that deep existential lament, that will awaken us to the ways we are guilty of claiming to “ove God”hile forgetting the poor, refusing the refugee, building walls, banning the stranger, and praying and worshiping in insular and segregated “acred”paces filled with racism, sexism, patriarchy, xenophobia, homophobia and indifference.

WE HAVE FAILED TO DEEPEN our collective responsibility. Some of us will never do so. What would the world look like if believers from every major religion in every country, state, city and village, shut down the entire world for just a day? What would America look like, on that day, if we who call ourselves believers, decided to weep together, hold hands together, commit together to eradicate injustice? We might then permanently unlock our sacred doors, take a real step beyond our sanctimoniousness, and see one another face to face.

I await the day, perhaps soon, when those who believe in the “od of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob”ill lock arms and march on Washington, refusing to live any longer under the weight of so much inhumanity. Perhaps it is time for a collective demonstration of the faithful to delay going to the Western Wall in Jerusalem, to leave the pews in churches and pray one fewer time a day. None of us is innocent. “bove all, the prophets remind us of the moral state of a people,”eschel reminds us. “ew are guilty, but all are responsible.”

In 1968, in conversation with King, Heschel asked, “here does God dwell in America today?” ask myself this question today. But I do not find the answer. Heschel also asks, “here does moral religious leadership in America come from today?” look, but I have not seen it. Perhaps, like Diogenes the Cynic, you’l find me carrying a lamp in the daytime. But instead of looking for an honest man, I will be looking through the catacombs of your own making, asking, “s your God dead?”

Now in print: “The Stone Reader: Modern Philosophy in 133 Arguments,”n anthology of essays from The Times’ philosophy series, edited by Peter Catapano and Simon Critchley, published by Liveright Books.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

George Yancy is a professor of philosophy at Emory University. He is the author of “lack Bodies, White Gazes”nd “n Race: 34 Conversations in a Time of Crisis,”nd a co-editor of “ursuing Trayvon Martin”nd “ur Black Sons Matter.”

Damon Winter/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170619ed6j001kr



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Iraqi Forces Begin Assault On  ISIS  in Mosul's Old City

By TIM ARANGO; Falih Hassan contributed reporting. 
762 words
19 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq -- Iraqi forces on Sunday began penetrating the narrow streets and warrens of Mosul's heavily populated old city, in the last phase of a monthslong battle against the Islamic State militants that American commanders have described as one of the toughest in urban warfare since World War II.

The assault began at dawn, with airstrikes and a push by Iraq's counterterrorism forces into the neighborhoods of the old city. It was met with fierce resistance by Islamic State fighters, according to commanders, suggesting that the battle, the most vicious phase in the long fight for Mosul, could go on for days or weeks.

As the fight began, security forces broadcast a message to residents of the old city over loudspeakers: ''The security forces are advancing toward you and the salvation hour is near, and the enemy is losing its positions one after another, and their end is near.''

The message continued, asking civilians to flee toward security forces: ''Come toward your brothers, your armed forces, and you will find the proper care.''

The area of the old city sits on the west bank of the Tigris River and is home to the Great Mosque of al-Nuri, whose distinctive leaning minaret dominates western Mosul's skyline and where the Islamic State leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, spoke from the pulpit in 2014 and declared his caliphate.

The battle for Mosul -- the largest city that the Islamic State has controlled in a vast territory straddling the border between Iraq and Syria -- is already in its ninth month. It has proved to be longer and tougher than anyone anticipated, with hundreds of casualties among Iraqi security forces and civilians, many caused by United States-led airstrikes in the densely populated city.

Already on Sunday morning there were reports, which could not be immediately confirmed, that more than a dozen civilians had been killed in airstrikes on the old city.

As the battle has unfolded, the two sides of the city, east and west, have faced different fates. The eastern side was an easier task. Declared liberated this year, the east, where the city's more well-to-do had lived, was seen as less loyal to the extremists of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

Since the east was cleared of militants with relatively little destruction, a sense of normalcy has been reclaimed there, with civilians returning, schools and shops reopening -- including a liquor store -- and traffic clogging the streets. In the west, though, whole neighborhoods have been flattened, and hundreds of thousands of civilians now live in camps that have sprouted in the barren landscapes surrounding the city.

The battle has tested humanitarian aid groups and added to the crisis that has engulfed Iraq since 2014, when the Islamic State captured Mosul and swept across the north, west and center of the country. Since then, 4.8 million Iraqis have fled their homes, and today about three million have been unable to return home, according to the United Nations.

Humanitarian groups have been warning for weeks about the perils to civilians in the old city, where the United Nations believes up to 150,000 people are trapped, running low on food and water and held by Islamic State fighters as human shields in the face of advancing security forces.

Since the Mosul battle began in October, more than 800,000 civilians have fled the fighting. Some residents have since returned home, especially those from eastern Mosul, but close to 700,000 civilians from the city's west have fled since February, and remain displaced.

On Sunday, the International Rescue Committee, an aid organization, warned in a statement of the dangers to civilians in the fight for the old city.

''This will be a terrifying time for around 100,000 people still trapped in Mosul's old city and now at risk of being caught up in fierce street fighting to come,'' said Nora Love, the group's acting Iraq director.

''With its narrow and winding streets, Iraqi forces will be even more reliant on airstrikes despite the difficulty in identifying civilians sheltering in buildings and the increased risks of civilians being used as human shields by ISIS fighters.''

Iraqi forces took up positions on a building's roof as they advanced on Mosul's old city on Sunday. Security forces urged civilians to flee toward them. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AHMAD AL-RUBAYE/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170619ed6j0004a



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Shoots Down Syrian Warplane; Iran Launches Missiles Into Syria

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and THOMAS ERDBRINK; Michael R. Gordon reported from Washington, and Thomas Erdbrink from Tehran. 
1,095 words
19 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- An American fighter jet shot down a Syrian warplane on Sunday after it dropped bombs near local ground forces supported by the United States, the first time the American military has downed a Syrian aircraft since the start of the civil war in 2011, officials said.

The confrontation represents a further escalation between forces supporting President Bashar al-Assad of Syria and the United States, which has been directing the military campaign in Syria and Iraq against the Islamic State.

The American F/A-18 shot down the Syrian government warplane south of the town of Tabqah, on the same day that Iran's Revolutionary Guards Corps launched several midrange missiles from inside Iran at targets in Syria, hoping to punish Islamic State forces responsible for last week's terrorist attacks in Tehran.

The Guards Corp said it ''targeted the headquarters and meeting place and suicide car assembly line'' of ''ISIS terrorists'' in the province of Deir al-Zour, where Islamic State forces surround an estimated 200,000 people in a government-held section of the provincial capital of the same name.

American officials said there appeared to be no direct connection between the two events, but they underscored the complexity of a region in which Syria, Russia, Turkey, Iran, Israel and the United States with its allies have carried out air or missiles strikes, albeit in pursuit of different and often competing objectives.

For the United States, the main focus has been battling the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. This month, Syrian Kurdish and Arab fighters, supported by American advisers and air power, began the battle for Raqqa, the militants' self-declared capital.

Even before that battle is over, however, tensions have risen over control of eastern Syria as Iranian-backed militias, including the Lebanese group Hezbollah, have moved to extend their reach toward areas where the American-based fighters are also operating.

Not only are forces loyal to Mr. Assad interested in controlling the oil-rich Deir al-Zour Province and relieving the pressure on a Syrian military garrison that has been surrounded there, but the Iranian-backed Shiite fighters are also believed to be trying to link up with Iranian-backed militias in Iraq and establish a supply corridor that runs from Syria to Iraq and, eventually, to Iran.

The confrontation in Syria on Sunday began around 4:30 p.m. local time, when American-backed ground Syrian fighters, who are officially called the Syrian Democratic Forces, came under attack by what the Pentagon described only as ''pro-Syrian regime forces'' and were forced from their positions in the town of Ja'Din, south of Tabqah. Several of the American-supported fighters were wounded.

The United States had airlifted hundred of Syrian fighters and their American military advisers near Tabqah in March in a generally successful push to cut off the western approaches to Raqqa.

To scare away the adversary forces, American warplanes buzzed the pro-Assad troops in what the Pentagon called a ''show of force.'' That appeared to put an end to the fighting, and the Americans sought to defuse the situation by calling their Russian counterparts from Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar.

But the Syrians were not finished. At 6:43 p.m., a Syrian SU-22 warplane dropped several bombs near the American-backed fighters. Attempts to warn the Syrian plane away from the area using an emergency radio frequency failed, said Col. John J. Thomas, the spokesman for the United States Central Command, which oversees American military operations in the Middle East.

An F/A-18 ''Super Hornet,'' which was patrolling the area after launching from the George H. W. Bush aircraft carrier, quickly shot down the Syrian plane. American advisers were not in the immediate vicinity of the bombing by the Syrian SU-22.

A statement by the American-led task force that is fighting the Islamic State stressed that it was taken under rules of engagement permitting the ''collective self-defense'' of its Syrian partners.

This month, an American F-15E shot down an Iranian-made drone after it attacked American fighters in southeastern Syria.

The United States has set up a garrison at al-Tanf in southeastern Syria, where Syrian fighters and American, British and Norwegian advisers have been based.

The United States has warned pro-Assad forces to stay out of a ''deconfliction'' zone it has declared around the garrison. The town of Ja'Din is little more than a mile north of this deconfliction area, but the United States has made it clear that the Syrian fighters it supports and the American and other allied advisers that accompany them are not limited to that buffer area.

After Sunday's episode, the American-led task force said it was not seeking a confrontation with Mr. Assad or the Russian and Iranian forces or Shiite militias that are fighting to support the Syrian leader -- but added that it would defend the Syrian fighters it has assembled to pursue the Islamic State.

''The coalition's mission is to defeat ISIS in Iraq and Syria,'' the official statement said. ''The coalition does not seek to fight Syrian regime, Russian, or pro-regime forces partnered with them, but will not hesitate to defend coalition or partner forces from any threat.''

Iran offered official statements about its military actions, too, and a video of the launch of one of the missiles was posted by the semiofficial Fars News Agency.

The Guards Corps said the strike, sending missiles flying over neighboring Iraq into Syria, had been carried out in retaliation for the terrorist attacks this month on the Iranian Parliament building and the shrine of the founder of the Islamic Republic. Eighteen people died in those attacks and dozens were wounded. The Islamic State claimed responsibility.

The Iranians made no effort to offer warnings about or ''deconflict'' their missile strike with the United States, American officials said. The Iranian missile attack was seen by analysts as a sign of an escalating role for Iran in the Syrian conflict and an indication of Tehran's growing power in the region.

The missile strike over a considerable distance may have also been designed to send a message to Iran's enemies in the region, including Israel and Saudi Arabia, as well as the United States, which maintains multiple military bases in the Middle East.

Document NYTF000020170619ed6j00049



world
Hiding Christians in the Basement: Fear and Heroism in a Philippine War Zone

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
1,460 words
17 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MARAWI, Philippines —hree Christian civilians said they had cowered in a basement for weeks while militants inspired by the Islamic State went door to door killing non-Muslims in the southern Philippine city of Marawi before fleeing for their lives at dawn on Tuesday.

“e heard them shouting ‘llahu akbar’nd asking neighbors about religion,”aid Ian Torres, 25, a house painter who had come to Marawi for a job. “e could only hear them. If they could not answer questions about Quran verses, gunfire immediately followed.”

Their account, and others from people who have fled the battle zone in Marawi, starkly illustrate the brutal religious calculus of the militants as well as the heroic efforts of local Muslims who risked their lives to protect Christian friends and workers.

The militants, a coalition of local insurgent groups loyal to the Islamic State, began their assault on the city on May 23, announcing their intent to create an Islamic caliphate in the Philippines’nly predominantly Muslim city. Since then, more than 300 people have been killed, the military says.

There have been previous reports of the militants threatening or killing Christians, but it is not yet known how many have died. The military says a total of 26 civilians have been killed, but the militants still control about a fifth of the city, and there may be other areas the military has not reached.

A propaganda video released by the Islamic State on Monday showed what was said to be the execution of six Christians in Marawi. However, it was not possible to verify that the scene was recorded there, and military officials cast doubt on the claim.

The three Christians who escaped Marawi were among a group of five laborers from Iligan City, about 25 miles to the north, who were hired to refurbish the house of a prominent Muslim trader in Marawi.

But what was supposed to be a routine job turned into a nightmare when they were trapped in hostile territory with Islamist militants hunting them down.

One of the men, Nick Andilig, 26, said about 50 militants suddenly appeared in the neighborhood where they were working, shouting “llahu akbar”nd displaying a black flag.

“hey claimed to be \b ISIS\b0  out on a mission to cleanse the city,”e said, using another name for the Islamic State. He said he thought that meant they would kill all non-Muslims in the area.

The fighters appeared to be in their 20s, wore face masks and head gear, and carried long firearms, Mr. Andilig said. Some arrived in a police car, which they had apparently stolen.

Mr. Andilig said their employer hid the workers in his basement. When the militants reached his door, the workers overheard him arguing with them. “e told the gunmen that there were no Christians in the house,”r. Andilig said.

The militants eventually moved on to the next house. Then they heard shooting.

Mr. Andilig said he did not see the killings, but when he and his group eventually emerged from hiding, they saw several bodies on the ground with what appeared to be gunshot wounds.

“ur employer escaped earlier with another household staff,”e said. “e said he would come back for us but never made it. He was a good Muslim.”

That left the five workers, four men and a pregnant woman, trapped in the house.

For days they subsisted on food the owner had left behind, mostly canned goods and rice, but eventually that ran out. They began to leave the house on brief forays to scrounge for food, eating plants they found.

They were getting hungry, and the explosions outside, apparently from bombs dropped by military airplanes, had been getting louder, suggesting the bombs were getting closer.

“ll of us decided to escape,”r. Andilig said. “ut our companion, who is seven months pregnant, could not run along with us. She and her husband decided to stay.”

“e said we’ try to get rescue for them if we made it out. We also told ourselves that our fate was with the Lord.”

As dawn broke on Tuesday, Mr. Andilig, Mr. Torres and Arman Langilan, 22, fled.

“e told each other, whatever happens, happens,”r. Torres said. “f we get hit and die, that’ our fate. But we had to escape. Or at least die trying.”

They alternated running and hiding in thick shrubs, eventually reaching the Agos River that divides the city and separates the area controlled by the militants with that controlled by the Philippine military.

They tumbled down the banks of the river as bullets fired by snipers sporting black bandannas whizzed over their heads. They plunged into the rushing water, hugging the banks until they saw a clearing, and climbed out on the other side.

They were found by the police wandering, tired and hungry, among the ruins of the city, which the fighting has transformed into  a desolate landscape of pockmarked buildings and cratered structures.

At a government checkpoint, they told their stories to the police and to The New York Times.

All showed signs of trauma. Mr. Langilan spoke incoherently and shuddered when bombs from a passing military plane exploded in the distance. Mr. Andilig clutched a piece of cucumber, his only real food in days, and repeatedly said he needed a shower.

Mr. Torres was still wearing pants and a shirt smeared with paint, the clothes he was wearing the day hostilities broke out.

The fate of the two colleagues they left behind remains unknown. Attempts to reach them by mobile phone have been futile.

Christians and Muslims have long coexisted peacefully in Marawi, Mr. Andilig said.

“ have many friends who are Muslim,”e said. “t was never a problem in the past.”

There was still evidence of that camaraderie at another neighborhood in Marawi, where five Muslim police officers hid and protected five Christian construction workers for nearly three weeks.

“e had our chance to flee because we are Muslims,”aid Lumla Lidasan, one of the officers. “ut as police officers we are mandated to protect the people. So we elected to stay because they will execute the Christian civilians.”

Officer Lidasan said he and his colleagues were armed with long rifles, which allowed them to keep the militants at bay while the Christians hid in the basement. Outside, he said, he heard rockets and bombs exploding as the city was reduced to rubble.

“hey are not real Muslims,”e said. “eal Muslims will not hurt people unprovoked, regardless of religion.”

One of the Christians, Rodel Aleko, 24, said the bombing runs shook their hiding place, but whenever he peered out the window he would see the gunmen still patrolling.

A police officer, Ricky Alawi, said there were times that they thought it was going to be the end for all of them. He said they were in radio contact with the army, who told them that there would soon be a bombing run in their area. They decided to take a chance and leave that day, which was Monday.

“s we were fleeing we saw bodies lying on the ground,”e said. “he gunmen were shooting at us as we ran toward the next building, where we stayed overnight. One of my colleagues and one of the civilians were injured.”

When there was a lull in the fighting, the group started slowly walking toward Banggolo Bridge but were stopped by a gunman. Mr. Alawi said he told the militant that his colleagues were too traumatized to speak.

“e told us to just wait because he would call his companions,”r. Alawi said. “hen he left, we ran as fast as we could and crossed the bridge.”

Mr. Aleko was wounded when bomb shrapnel hit his left leg, he said, and the blasts were so loud that they may have permanently damaged his hearing.

But he could only feel grateful.

“his is our second life,”e said. “ thank God for these officers.”

PHOTOS: A building burned in Marawi, the Philippines’nly predominantly Muslim city. Militants who overran the city said they wanted to create a caliphate. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROMEO RANOCO/REUTERS); The Christian civilians trapped by the fighting in Marawi included, from left, Nick Andilig, 26, Ian Torres, 25, and Arman Langilan, 22. Local insurgents loyal to the Islamic State began their assault on the city on May 23. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FELIPE VILLAMOR/THE NEW YORK TIMES); Philippine soldiers in Marawi. Militants control about a fifth of the city, and there may be other areas the military has not been able to reach. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NOEL CELIS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE —GETTY IMAGES) MAP

Document INHT000020170617ed6h00001



world
7 U.S. Soldiers Wounded in Insider Attack in Afghanistan

By ROD NORDLAND 
588 words
17 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan —even American soldiers were shot and wounded by an Afghan commando on Saturday, the second such insider attack in a week, according to Afghan officials.

The attack took place in the Afghan National Army 209th Corps headquarters at Camp Shaheen, in the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif. Col. Abdul Qahar Aram, spokesman for the 209th Corps, said an Afghan soldier had opened fire, wounding foreign soldiers in the garrison area of the camp. He said reports claiming the soldiers had been killed were false.

The United States military would confirm only that American soldiers were wounded in an insider attack that occurred there at about 2 p.m., and that an Afghan soldier had been killed and another wounded. The United States military also denied that any of its soldiers had been killed.

Another Corps spokesman, Maj. Nasratullah Jamshidi, said the attacker, an Afghan commando, had been shot at the scene and died on his way to a hospital.

So-called green-on-blue, or insider, attacks have been a recurring problem for the American-led coalition, most recently on June 10 in the Achin District of eastern Nangarhar Province, where American ground forces are helping Afghan special forces fight Islamic State extremists.

A commando participating in the joint operations opened fire on four of the Americans, killing three and wounding another. The Taliban claimed the commando had been an infiltrator, but Afghan officials said it appeared to have been the outcome of a personal dispute. Both Afghan and American officials have said the incident is under investigation.

Special forces soldiers in the Afghan Army, generally referred to as commandos, are much more highly trained than regular troops and work in proximity to American soldiers, including serving as partners in ground combat operations, as well as in training exercises.

So far this year, six American soldiers have been killed in combat in Afghanistan, all of them involved in the fight against the Islamic State in Nangarhar Province. Five of the six apparently were killed by their own side: the three on June 10 and two others in April were killed accidentally in an airstrike in the same area.

In two episodes in March, a total of 11 American soldiers were wounded by Afghan soldiers in green-on-blue attacks in Helmand Province, in southern Afghanistan, according to Afghan officials. Nonetheless, the incidence of such attacks has decreased greatly as American and other foreign forces have declined from a peak of 150,000 soldiers to about 14,000 now. In 2012, one-fourth of all coalition killings were carried out by Afghan insiders, according to American military officials.

The 209th Corps has been particularly troubled this year, and in April was the scene of the Afghan military’ biggest single loss of life in the past 16 years, when Taliban infiltrators entered Camp Shaheen and killed more than 160 soldiers, many of them unarmed.

The northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif is relatively peaceful compared with other parts of the country, and the forces’eadiness at the base appeared to be slack. The 209th Corps commander was fired, and Afghanistan’ minister of defense and Army chief of staff were forced out over the incident.

Jawad Sukhanyar contributed reporting.

* Roadside Bomb Hits American Convoy in Afghanistan

* Death Toll in Kabul Bombing Has Hit 150, Afghan President Says

* All 6 U.S. Combat Deaths in Afghanistan in 2017 Were in Fight Against \b ISIS\b0 

Document INHT000020170619ed6h000ca



theater
Two Protesters Disrupt ‘ulius Caesar’n Central Park

By MICHAEL PAULSON 
826 words
17 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

A production of “Julius Caesar”n Central Park was disrupted on Friday evening by two protesters who objected to the bloody scene in which the title character, played by an actor costumed and styled to resemble President Trump, is knifed to death.

A woman who later identified herself on social media as Laura Loomer jumped onto the stage just after the assassination of Caesar and began shouting, “top the normalization of political violence against the right,”nd, “his is violence against Donald Trump.”s. Loomer describes herself as a “ right-wing investigative journalist and activist”ho has previously worked with James O’eefe, the conservative activist known for selectively edited undercover video investigations.

At JULIS CAESAR, during assassination, woman runs on stage saying, "Stop the normalization of violence against the right." Escorted out. —oward Sherman (@HESherman) June 17, 2017

Ms. Loomer’ interruption of the scene was being recorded by a man in the audience who began shouting, “ou are all Goebbels,” reference to the Hitler aide and Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels. On social media, Jack Posobiec, an activist who supports President Trump and has been associated with conspiracy theories, identified himself as Ms. Loomer’ collaborator.

The show was paused briefly, with the actors still on stage, as security officers removed the two protesters from the Delacorte Theater, the 1,800-seat outdoor amphitheater in which Shakespeare in the Park is staged. The audience tried to shout down the protesters, and applauded as they were removed.

Two thuggish Twitter trolls disrupted Julius Caesar tonight. They were escorted out. News that the show would resume got a standing ovation. —ark Harris (@MarkHarrisNYC) June 17, 2017

The show then resumed as a stage manager announced, “ick up at ‘iberty and freedom,’”eferring to the lines in the play that came next.

“wo protesters disrupted our show tonight; we stopped the show for less than a minute and our stage manager handled it beautifully,”Oskar Eustis, the artistic director of the Public Theater and the director of the “ulius Caesar”roduction, said in a statement. “he staff removed the protesters peacefully, and the show resumed with the line ‘iberty! Freedom!’he audience rose to their feet to thank the actors, and we joyfully continued. Free speech for all, but let’ not stop the show.”

Ms. Loomer, 24, continued to shout from outside the theater after she was removed, and declined requests by the police to step away from the structure; she was then arrested. The New York Police Department said she was charged with criminal trespass and disorderly conduct and was released.

Ms. Loomer, who outside the theater had shouted, “ou guys are just as bad as ISIS”nd, “ecause of liberal violence like this, a congressman this week was shot in Virginia,”osted a video of her own behavior on Twitter.

Julia Caesar meets Laura Loomer https://t.co/THlerwmODp —aura Loomer (@LauraLoomer) June 17, 2017

The assassination of Caesar is part of the script of the play, which was written 418 years ago by William Shakespeare; the choice to depict the title character as akin to President Trump is part of a long history of productions of the play that have used the text to explore contemporary politics. In 2012, another American production of “ulius Caesar”epicted the title character as President Barack Obama.

The decision by the Public Theater, which oversees Shakespeare in the Park, to depict Caesar as Mr. Trump has prompted social media protests from conservatives, and two corporate sponsors of the theater program, Delta Air Lines and Bank of America, withdrew their support. A third sponsor, American Express, as well as the National Endowment for the Arts, took steps to make sure the public knew they had not supported the production.

Defenders of the Public Theater, saying the play does not sanction political violence but is instead a cautionary tale about the use of antidemocratic means to defend a democracy, have said the critics are misconstruing the play and this production.

Two critics of the production demonstrated outside the Delacorte on Friday night, while a slightly larger group of defenders held a counter-demonstration.

Anti @PublicTheaterNY demonstrators at Trumpish "Julius Caesar" outnumbered by pro @PublicTheaterNY counter-demonstrators pic.twitter.com/0ehfVu4jUl —ichael Cooper (@coopnytimes) June 16, 2017

On Thursday, defenders of the production held a rally at Astor Place.

Friday night was the first time the play, which began performances May 23 and ends on Sunday, had been disrupted by protesters.

Michael Cooper and Scott Heller contributed reporting.

* Oskar Eustis on Trump, ‘ulius Caesar’nd the Politics of Theater

* How Outrage Built Over a Shakespearean Depiction of Trump

* Why ‘ulius Caesar’peaks to Politics Today. With or Without Trump.

* Et Tu, Delta? Shakespeare in the Park Sponsors Withdraw From Trump-Like ‘ulius Caesar’

* Review: Can Trump Survive in Caesar’ Palace?

Document INHT000020170619ed6h000bo



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Russia May Have Killed  ISIS  Leader in Airstrike

By ANDREW E. KRAMER and ERIC SCHMITT; Andrew E. Kramer reported from Moscow, and Eric Schmitt from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Oleg Matsnev and Ivan Nechepurenko from Moscow; Hwaida Saad from Beirut, Lebanon; and Sewell Chan, Stephen Farrell and Prashant S. Rao from London. 
1,395 words
17 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MOSCOW -- Russia's military said on Friday that it was looking into whether one of its airstrikes in the Syrian desert had killed Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the self-declared caliph of the Islamic State.

In a statement, the Defense Ministry said that the Russian Air Force struck a meeting of Islamic State leaders on May 28 outside Raqqa, Syria, the group's de facto capital, possibly killing Mr. Baghdadi.

The statement offered no explanation for the two-week delay in publicizing the airstrike. And it was also not clear whether the Russian military had known in advance that Mr. Baghdadi was at the gathering, or had learned of this possibility only after the strike was carried out.

Rumors of Mr. Baghdadi's death had circulated for months before the Russian announcement. But a Pentagon spokesman, Capt. Jeff Davis of the Navy, said on Friday: ''We have no information to corroborate those reports.''

A senior Defense Department official confirmed Friday that Russian warplanes were ''very active'' carrying out airstrikes in the area south of Raqqa where Russian officials say Mr. Baghdadi may have been killed.

But the official, echoing public statements from the Pentagon, said he could not corroborate Russian reports of Mr. Baghdadi's death.

Col. Ryan S. Dillon, a spokesman for the United States-led coalition fighting the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq, said that American air commanders in Qatar speak almost daily on a special hotline with their Russian counterparts, primarily to avoid any midair accidents by warplanes flying missions in Syria. He said in an interview that analysts were now going back over the reports from May 28 and the subsequent days to see what the Russians had said about flight operations.

Nothing has been heard from Mr. Baghdadi publicly since November, when the Islamic State released a blistering audio recording in which he urged forces to remain firm in the face of the American-backed Iraqi offensive in Mosul.

Rami Abdul Rahman, the founder of the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which closely monitors military operations in Syria, said it had no record of senior Islamic State leaders being in the area around Raqqa at the time of the strike. ''It's illogical for ISIS senior leaders to stay in Raqqa amid this military operation,'' he said, adding that senior leaders had already decamped southeast, to the area around the city of Deir al-Zour, closer to the border with Iraq.

Laith Alkhouri, a director at Flashpoint, a business risk intelligence company in New York that tracks militant threats and cyberthreats, also expressed skepticism.

''At this time, I'm not seeing credible chatter to verify the claim by Russia,'' he said. ''Al-Baghdadi has been claimed killed multiple times before, and none of the previous claims proved legitimate.''

Russia's foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, himself introduced a note of caution when asked about the Russian military's reports. ''So far, I do not have 100 percent confirmation of this information,'' he said at a news conference.

Mr. Lavrov also cautioned that the Islamic State was likely to survive the possible death of its leader. ''Examples of such actions to destroy or 'behead' a terrorist group have always been presented with great enthusiasm,'' he said. ''However, history shows that the fighting capacity of these structures was restored.''

Russia intervened in the Syrian civil war in 2015; it said at first that cargo planes flying to a Syrian air base carried only humanitarian aid, but later openly announced a military operation. The Kremlin's stated goal was fighting the Islamic State, lest it gain a stronghold in Syria not far from restive, predominantly Muslim regions in southern Russia.

But the Obama administration said that the pattern of airstrikes showed that Russia's real intention was to prop up the government of President Bashar al-Assad, a Russian ally battling a range of opposition groups, including moderate rebels. The killing of the Islamic State's leader, if confirmed, would help bolster Russia's initial justification for its intervention -- that its goal all along was to fight terrorism.

In its statement on Friday, the Russian Defense Ministry said that it had ''warned the American side about the strike in advance,'' but it was unclear whether Russia had shared intelligence on the meeting or cooperated in any other way with the Western-led coalition fighting in Syria. The United States and Russia do not typically share intelligence from their missions in Syria.

The Russian military does not draw a sharp separation between its psychological warfare operations and its media office, meaning the statement's purpose could be tactical and intended to assist Russian forces in Syria. A claim that the terrorist leader had been killed, regardless of the evidence, would sow doubt among Islamic State fighters.

Russia is believed to have an extensive intelligence operation targeting the Islamic State that makes use of the large numbers of Muslims from former Soviet states who have joined the group. A former Islamic State military commander, for example, was an ethnic Chechen from Georgia.

Whether this window into the Islamic State's activities helped the Russian military to choose a target was not clear.

The Russian military said two models of Sukhoi fighter jets, Su-34s and Su-35s, had carried out the strike, on what it described as ''high level commanders of the terrorist group within the so-called military council of the Islamic State,'' Interfax reported.

The strike also killed 30 field commanders and as many as 300 fighters, the military said. The strike lasted from 12:35 a.m. until 12:45 a.m., according to Interfax.

Russia learned of the meeting late in May, and while verifying the information ascertained that the commanders intended to discuss the retreat of their fighters from Raqqa, the Defense Ministry said.

The extent to which Mr. Baghdadi exerted day-to-day control over the Islamic State's activities is not fully clear, but his death would be a major blow, easily the most prominent since Osama bin Laden, the leader of Al Qaeda, was killed in an American operation in Pakistan in 2011.

Mr. Baghdadi, who is in his 40s, emerged from the jumble of Sunni extremist elements that battled the American forces and Iraq's new Shiite-led government in the decade after the 2003 invasion that topped Saddam Hussein. He was a follower of the Jordanian militant Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who formed a branch of Al Qaeda in Iraq, but eventually fell out with Al Qaeda because his wanton killings of Shiites were too brutal even by Qaeda standards.

Mr. Baghdadi was named the head of the Islamic State in 2010. After the Arab Spring uprisings of 2011, Syria became a fertile ground for jihadists like Mr. Baghdadi, who exploited the power vacuum left by the violent challenge to Mr. Assad.

Using porous borders between Syria and Iraq, the new jihadists overpowered Shiite-led authorities and rival Sunni factions in both countries, and established a stronghold in an overwhelmingly Sunni area. In the summer of 2014, the group declared itself a caliphate, a successor to early leaders of Islam. It has displayed a sophisticated command of social media to recruit potential jihadists from around the world, and to sow terror in the West.

One of Mr. Baghdadi's closest associates -- Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, who headed the group's efforts to build a global terrorism network, including overseeing attacks in Paris and Brussels -- was killed in an airstrike in August. The governments of Iran, Iraq, Russia and the United States have pounded Islamic State strongholds, and Raqqa has been under attack in recent weeks.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Follow Andrew E. Kramer on Twitter @AndrewKramerNYT.

President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, which was reviewing a strike on an ISIS meeting.; A still image from a video released by the Islamic State in 2014 is believed to show Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi in Mosul, Iraq. 

Document NYTF000020170617ed6h0003a



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Philanthropist Blown Up While Feeding Afghan Poor

By ROD NORDLAND and FAHIM ABED; Rod Nordland and Fahim Abed reported from Kabul, Afghanistan. 
761 words
17 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

''In these times, our photos

Live longer than ourselves.''

Those two lines of verse, posted on the Facebook page of Ramazan Hussainzada last month, proved sadly prophetic. Mr. Hussainzada, a prominent Kabul businessman and philanthropist, was among four people killed by a suicide bomber who blew himself up at Al Zahra mosque in the Afghan capital on Thursday night.

The attack was the latest outrage attributed to Afghanistan's small but growing wing of the Islamic State, which claimed responsibility in a message on Telegram, a WhatsApp-like service, noting pointedly that the mosque was a Shiite one.

While Afghanistan's many ethnic factions have long warred among themselves, in recent years they have taken pains to play down differences between the majority Sunnis and minority Shiites, who are mostly members of the Hazara ethnic group.

A spokesman for the Taliban, Zabihullah Mujahid, immediately repudiated the attack on the mosque.

''We are not attacking mosques and our Shiite brothers,'' Mr. Mujahid said, reached over the social messaging service Viber.

Mr. Hussainzada, a Hazara community leader who owned a shopping center, a private hospital and construction companies, built the mosque where he was killed. During the fasting month of Ramadan he had been active at the mosque preparing meals for the poor; that activity may have cost him his life.

According to Afghan police officials, two attackers, wearing explosive vests and carrying handguns, tried to force their way into the mosque's main entrance, but encountered strong resistance from the police guarding it. One attacker was shot and killed, but the second went around to the kitchen area of the mosque, where he detonated his explosives, killing Mr. Hussainzada and three others.

One of the dead and four of the eight wounded were Afghan police officers, said Najib Danish, a spokesman for the Interior Ministry.

A member of Mr. Hussainzada's family, Ali Sadaat, who was at the mosque during the attack, said his relative ''was a good businessman, a great man and an important figure among the Hazaras.'' Mr. Sadaat said Mr. Hussainzada had been known for helping street vendors and day laborers, and for giving money to parents to send their children to school rather than putting them to work.

The Islamic State in Khorasan, as the group's Afghan branch is often known, is most active in southern parts of Nangarhar Province, along the border with Pakistan, but in recent months there has been an increase in attacks attributed to the group in Kabul. Several militants from the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, rampaged through a military hospital in the capital in March, killing patients in their beds.

On Wednesday, Islamic State militants wrested control of Tora Bora, the mountain redoubt that was once Osama bin Laden's fortress, from the Taliban.

No faction has claimed responsibility for the truck bombing at an entrance to the Green Zone in Kabul on May 31, which killed more than 150 people. The Taliban have denied any role in that assault, or in an attack days later at a funeral that killed at least a dozen others. Those attacks have set off weeks of demonstrations against the government.

The protesters have accused senior officials of conspiring with terrorists, and some of Mr. Hussainzada's supporters expressed that view as well.

''ISIS claimed responsibility, but we are not sure,'' Mr. Sadaat said. ''It may be Taliban terrorists, it may be a fifth column in the government. There are too many questions unanswered, like how did these terrorists know about last night's program?''

Ahmad Ramazanzada, Mr. Hussainzada's son, said it was clear to him that his father had been assassinated. Mr. Ramazanzada was reached by telephone at his home, where family members were waiting for all of Mr. Hussainzada's sons to return from abroad before burying him.

''My father was the target,'' Mr. Ramazanzada said. ''When the suiciders attacked the mosque, there weren't many people there, and the attacker knew all the alternative routes of the mosque, and he knew where my father was standing.''

In Afghanistan, he said, ''when too many people love you, and you are getting your place in the heart of everyone, then you are a target for some people.''

Afghan police officers on Friday at the Shiite mosque in Kabul where a suicide bomber killed four people the previous night. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAWAD JALALI/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) 

Document NYTF000020170617ed6h00036



Briefing
Donald Trump , Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, ‘ll Eyez on Me’ Your Friday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,393 words
16 June 2017
11:36
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up .)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•rump and Russia.

Members of President Trump’ transition team were ordered on Thursday to preserve documents and other materials  related to the investigation into Russian interference in the presidential election, according to a memo obtained by The Times.

As director of the F.B.I., Robert Mueller stayed above partisan politics. But as special counsel overseeing the Trump-Russia investigation, he’ dealing with the most charged political brawl of his career .

Mr. Trump again called the Russia investigation a “itch hunt” on Thursday, and the deputy attorney general encouraged Americans  to be “keptical about anonymous allegations.”

Vice President Mike Pence has hired a defense lawyer  to help guide him through the investigations facing the White House.

•ussia says it may have killed ISIS leader.

Russia’ military said today that it was looking into whether an airstrike in Syria had killed one of the world’ most wanted terrorists: Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , the self-declared caliph of the Islamic State.

The strike on May 28 hit a meeting of the militant group’ leaders outside Raqqa, the group’ de facto capital.

The U.S. said it couldn’ confirm the Russian report.

•ow we became enemies.

Democratic and Republican voters don’ just disagree about health care or President Trump. Many despise the other side, to a degree that political scientists and pollsters say has worsened significantly  over the last 50 years.

But on Thursday, Washington signaled a moment of bipartisanship  with a call to action: Play ball! Lawmakers gathered for a charity baseball game a day after Representative Steve Scalise, a member of the Republican team, was shot at a practice. Doctors said on Thursday that he was improving but faces additional operations .

We traced the steps of the suspect  before the shooting and assessed rumors  that spread afterward.

•lso from Washington.

•resident Trump is expected to announce a clampdown on travel and commercial ties  between the U.S. and Cuba today, reversing an Obama administration rapprochement.

•enate Republican leaders are writing legislation to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act without a single hearing on the bill , a process that has raised alarm in both parties.

•ormer captive has brain injury.

After Otto Warmbier, a 22-year-old American student, was freed from captivity in North Korea, his father said the country had “rutalized and terrorized” his son.

•oday in court.

•urors in Bill Cosby’ sexual assault trial return for a fifth day of deliberations . On Thursday, they said they were deadlocked.

• verdict is expected this morning in the trial of a Massachusetts woman  who repeatedly encouraged her boyfriend to kill himself.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

In today’ show, we discuss the complexities of the Bill Cosby and Massachusetts trials.

Listen on a computer , an iOS device  or an Android device .

Business

•resident Trump ordered an expansion of federally funded apprenticeship programs .

Our European economics correspondent also looked at  cautionary tales  from the rest of the world about private investment in public works, a key part of the administration’ infrastructure plan.

•Jeff Bezos , Amazon ’ founder and chief executive, is on his way to becoming the world’ richest person .

We asked him about his philanthropic goals. He then asked Twitter .

•.S. stocks were down  on Thursday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets .

Smarter Living

•ffhand comments (good and bad) can have a remarkable shelf life .

•ecipe of the day: Grilling supercharges this Caesar salad .

Noteworthy

•eet Peru’ hairless dogs.

In today’ 360 video , a breeder in Lima says the dogs are “s important as Machu Picchu”o the country’ cultural history.

•ondon’ new normal.

Under the threat of terrorism, residents are a little spooked these days.

Our correspondent writes : “or the fourth time in 12 weeks I marked myself safe on Facebook . In Britain.”

The death toll in a horrific high-rise fire rose to 30 today , as the authorities said a full accounting might be impossible because some victims may never be identified.

•“hat was a beautiful experience.”

On a balmy Friday evening in May, Flint Northwestern High School held its prom.

For the students, it was a chance to set aside anxieties about the Michigan city’ three-year-old water crisis, its poverty and its gun violence. We tagged along .

•eady for the weekend.

At the movies, we review “Cars 3 ” “All Eyez on Me ,” fictionalized biography of the rapper Tupac Shakur; and “Rough Night ,”tarring Scarlett Johansson and Kate McKinnon.

We also check in with Katy Perry, who has a new album  and says she no longer wants to be a frothy pop star. And we review Lorde’ latest .

Big Brother is arriving on Broadway , with contemporary political resonance, as “984”omes to the Hudson Theater.

Speaking of dystopian fiction, Margaret Atwood talked to us  about Hulu ’ TV adaptation of her novel “he Handmaid’ Tale.”

The Book Review recommends eight   titles .

Finally, Sunday is Father’ Day in the U.S. and many other countries. Looking for a way to treat dear ol’ad? Our Cooking editors have some ideas .

•est of late-night TV.

What is a witch hunt? Comedy hosts disputed   President Trump’ definition .

•uotation of the day.

“t’ early in the game to begin to impugn the prosecutors.”

—Philip Allen Lacovara , a former Watergate prosecutor, on a push by President Trump and his allies to question the impartiality of Robert Mueller.

Back Story

Today is Bloomsday, a special day on the literary calendar.

James Joyce, the groundbreaking Irish novelist chose to immortalize June 16, 1904 , in his novel “lysses”ecause it was the date of his first outing with his future wife, Nora Barnacle.

It is named after Leopold Bloom , whom the book follows on a daylong picaresque voyage through Dublin, Joyce’ hometown. More than a century later, the character’ “dyssey”s celebrated around the world with readings, re-enactments and, sometimes, heavy drinking.

“lysses”s no easy summer read. A review  when it was published in 1922 compared the prose to the “roductions of the Ouija board.”

But help is a tap away.

There are now apps , including one that uses a touch screen to untangle tough sentences, plus an explanatory podcast . A group of Boston College students is developing a “lysses”ame , “oycestick.”

“f it’ so hard to read,”he illustrator Robert Berry once asked , “hy are people having so much fun with it?”

Have a great Bloomsday.

Charles McDermid contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing  should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning .

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com   .

You can sign up here  to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

Steve Garvey, a former major league star, led a prayer before the congressional baseball game in Washington on Thursday. | Al Drago/The New York Times | A still from a video released by the Islamic State in 2014, believed to show Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi in Mosul, Iraq. | via Reuters | Fred Warmbier held a news conference in Wyoming, Ohio, on Thursday, wearing the same jacket that his son wore during a courtroom appearance last year in North Korea. | Bill Pugliano/Getty Images | Steel and concrete barriers have been installed on London Bridge and other major bridges to protect pedestrians. | Matt Dunham/Associated Press | Students gathered outside Flint Northwestern High School before the school’ prom for what is known as the catwalk. “t’ like a fashion show,”aid one student. “t’ a bunch of yelling and screaming. You walk, you stop, and everybody wants to take your picture.” Zackary Canepari for The New York Times | James Joyce in Paris with Sylvia Beach, who published “lysses.” James Joyce Collection at SUNY Buffalo | Meet some Peruvian hairless dogs, an ancient breed whose image is recognizable on pre-Incan pottery. The breed has been declared a part of Peru’ cultural patrimony. | By KASSIE BRACKEN and KAITLYN MULLIN 

Document NYTFEED020170616ed6g00335



opinion
Mr. Trump, Afghanistan Is Your War Now; Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
880 words
16 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

President Trump was typically self-absorbed in his tweet on Wednesday celebrating the 242nd birthday of the United States Army. “roud to be your commander-in-chief,”e proclaimed to the soldiers.

Yet, when it comes to the actual life-and-death responsibilities of the commander in chief —verseeing America’ vast war machine and sending men and women into conflict —r. Trump seems more like the delegator in chief. The latest evidence was his decision this week to give Defense Secretary Jim Mattis the authority to determine troop levels in Afghanistan, which could lead to an increase of as many as 5,000 troops, if proposals favored by Mr. Mattis and his generals go forward.

Mr. Mattis has acknowledged to Congress that the United States-led coalition is “ot winning”n Afghanistan. It is not at all clear that adding 5,000 more troops — roughly 50 percent increase over the current troop level of 9,800 —an make a difference, especially when the administration has yet to confront the basic problem of ensuring public safety and the larger political and economic issues that must be part of a comprehensive strategy to resolve the conflict.

What such a decision would do is reverse the drawdown President Barack Obama put in place and set a new policy of expanding involvement in a war that has already dragged on for 16 years, cost thousands of American and Afghan lives and consumed billions of dollars.

Military commanders chafed under Mr. Obama’ tight controls on troop deployments and war making, which some of them saw as micromanagement. Even so, commanders in chief cannot subcontract their most sacred duties; what the United States faces at this moment is not some routine tactical maneuver or choice. It is what to do about America’ longest war. That is, at bottom, Mr. Trump’ responsibility, and at the moment the nation has no idea what he thinks or where he is headed.

Mr. Trump, who has no prior government experience, leaves the impression that he is cowed by the weighty responsibility of sending more Americans into battle, and is looking to put that onus on Mr. Mattis so he has somebody to blame if things go wrong, as he did when he fingered the generals for a botched raid in Yemen in January, in which one member of the Navy SEALs was killed.

That the president may be distancing himself from a complex challenge is only one concern. Another is the absence of an informed, wide-ranging public debate. Discussions about possible troop increases have largely been theoretical and limited to experts, prompting Senator John McCain, the Republican chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, to complain fiercely at a hearing on Tuesday that the Pentagon has yet to present a plan to regain the battlefield momentum that could provide a framework for decision making.

There is an urgent need for just such a plan and such a discussion, not least because everything in Afghanistan seems to be going backward. Mr. Mattis says that he may send some additional troops even before the new war plan is completed, perhaps next month, because the Taliban is once again “urging.”The Islamic State, a relative newcomer to the conflict, has been flexing its muscles in Afghanistan this year.)

Apart from the fact that the need for additional troops has not been cogently debated, much less established as necessary, such a move now would be premature: None of the big questions have been answered. How will 5,000 more troops turn the tide, when the United States was unable to bring stability to Afghanistan when it had more than 100,000 troops there in 2011? What is the core American national security interest —efeating Al Qaeda, ISIS, the Taliban? Stabilizing the Afghan state? All of the above? None?

American civilian and military leaders have long agreed that the goal must be a political settlement with the Taliban. Yet five months into Mr. Trump’ tenure, the well-resourced Pentagon, which is on track to receive a large budget increase this year, is calling the shots —ot the State Department, which Mr. Trump’ budget would decimate.

There also is no sign of a comprehensive strategy coordinated by the National Security Council to integrate all efforts —ot just the battle against the Taliban and the Islamic State, but also broader issues of improving governance in Kabul, battling corruption, fostering reconciliation with the Taliban and engaging Pakistan and other regional partners.

One major hindrance to sound policy making is the fact that there are few experts in place to do the work; many senior national security positions remain unfilled. However capable and respected Mr. Mattis may be, the Pentagon and American military forces cannot alone bring stability, or whatever counts as “inning,”o Afghanistan. To achieve any worthwhile outcome, the president must be committed and involved, as must his entire national security team. So far the Pentagon is running the show, largely by default.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERICSPHOTOGRAPHY, VIA GETTY IMAGES) DRAWING (DRAWING BY ERIK CARTER)

Document INHT000020170616ed6g0000v



briefing
Donald Trump, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, ‘ll Eyez on Me’ Your Friday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,281 words
16 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

• he Russia investigation.

President Trump acknowledged today for the first time publicly that he is under investigation in the expanding inquiry into Russian influence in the election.

He also appeared to attack the integrity of Rod Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, who is in charge of the inquiry, and to accuse him of leading a “itch hunt.”

Members of the president’ transition team were ordered on Thursday to preserve documents and other materials related to the investigation, according to a memo obtained by The Times.

We also look at how Robert Mueller, when he was F.B.I. director, stayed above partisan politics. But as special counsel overseeing the inquiry, he’ dealing with the most charged political brawl of his career.

•ews from Washington .

•resident Trump will not deport the so-called Dreamers, undocumented immigrants who came to the U.S. as small children, reversing a campaign pledge.

•he president is expected to announce a clampdown on travel and commercial ties between the U.S. and Cuba today, reversing an Obama administration rapprochement.

•enate Republican leaders are writing legislation to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act without a single hearing on the bill, a process that has raised alarm in both parties.

•oscow says it may have killed ISIS leader.

Russia’ military said today that it was looking into whether an airstrike in Syria had killed one of the world’ most wanted terrorists: Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the self-proclaimed caliph of the Islamic State.

The strike on May 28 hit a meeting of the militant group’ leaders outside Raqqa, the group’ de facto capital.

The U.S. said it couldn’ confirm the Russian report.

•ow we became enemies.

Democratic and Republican voters don’ just disagree about health care or President Trump. Many despise the other side, to a degree that political scientists and pollsters say has worsened significantly over the last 50 years.

But on Thursday, Washington signaled a moment of bipartisanship with a call to action: Play ball! Lawmakers gathered for a charity baseball game a day after Representative Steve Scalise, a member of the Republican team, was shot at a practice. Doctors said on Thursday that he was improving but faces additional operations.

We traced the steps of the suspect before the shooting and assessed rumors that spread afterward.

•ormer captive has brain injury.

After Otto Warmbier, a 22-year-old American student, was freed from captivity in North Korea, his father said the country had “rutalized and terrorized” his son.

•oday in court.

• young woman in Massachusetts was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter for repeatedly encouraging her boyfriend to kill himself. It was a rare legal finding that, essentially, a person’ words alone can directly cause someone else’ suicide.

•urors in Bill Cosby’ sexual assault trial return for a fifth day of deliberations. On Thursday, they said they were deadlocked.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

In today’ show, we discuss the complexities of the Bill Cosby and Massachusetts trials.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•Amazon said today that it had agreed to buy the organic supermarket chain Whole Foods for $13.4 billion, the latest move by the online giant to push into food retail.

Jeff Bezos, Amazon’ founder and chief executive, is on his way to becoming the world’ richest person. We asked him about his philanthropic goals. He then asked Twitter.

•resident Trump ordered an expansion of federally funded apprenticeship programs.

Our European economics correspondent also looked at cautionary tales from the rest of the world about private investment in public works, a key part of the administration’ infrastructure plan.

•Walmart has agreed to acquire the men’ clothing company Bonobos for $310 million.

•.S. stocks were down on Thursday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

•ffhand comments(good and bad) can have a remarkable shelf life.

•ecipe of the day:Grilling supercharges this Caesar salad.

Noteworthy

•eet Peru’ hairless dogs.

In today’ 360 video, a breeder in Lima says the dogs are “s important as Machu Picchu”o the country’ cultural history.

•ondon’ new normal.

Under the threat of terrorism, residents are a little spooked these days.

Our correspondent writes: “or the fourth time in 12 weeks I marked myself safe on Facebook. In Britain.”

The death toll in a horrific high-rise fire rose to 30 today, as the authorities said a full accounting might be impossible because some victims may never be identified.

•“hat was a beautiful experience.”

On a balmy Friday evening in May, Flint Northwestern High School held its prom.

For the students, it was a chance to set aside anxieties about the Michigan city’ three-year-old water crisis, its poverty and its gun violence. We tagged along.

•eady for the weekend.

At the movies, we review “Cars 3” “All Eyez on Me,” fictionalized biography of the rapper Tupac Shakur; and “Rough Night,”tarring Scarlett Johansson and Kate McKinnon.

We also check in with Katy Perry, who has a new album and says she no longer wants to be a frothy pop star. And we review Lorde’ latest.

Big Brother is arriving on Broadway, with contemporary political resonance, as “984”omes to the Hudson Theater.

Speaking of dystopian fiction, Margaret Atwood talked to us about Hulu’ TV adaptation of her novel “he Handmaid’ Tale.”

The Book Review recommends eight  titles.

Finally, Sunday is Father’ Day in the U.S. and in many other countries. Looking for a way to treat dear ol’ad? Our Cooking editors have some ideas.

•est of late-night TV.

What is a witch hunt? Comedy hosts disputed  President Trump’ definition.

•uotation of the day.

“t’ early in the game to begin to impugn the prosecutors.”

—Philip Allen Lacovara, a former Watergate prosecutor, on a push by President Trump and his allies to question the impartiality of Robert Mueller.

Back Story

Today is Bloomsday, a special day on the literary calendar.

James Joyce, the groundbreaking Irish novelist chose to immortalize June 16, 1904, in his novel “lysses”ecause it was the date of his first outing with his future wife, Nora Barnacle.

It is named after Leopold Bloom, whom the book follows on a daylong picaresque voyage through Dublin, Joyce’ hometown. More than a century later, the character’ “dyssey”s celebrated around the world with readings, re-enactments and, sometimes, heavy drinking.

“lysses”s no easy summer read. A review when it was published in 1922 compared the prose to the “roductions of the Ouija board.”

But help is a tap away.

There are now apps, including one that uses a touch screen to untangle tough sentences, plus an explanatory podcast. A group of Boston College students is developing a “lysses”ame, “oycestick.”

“f it’ so hard to read,”he illustrator Robert Berry once asked, “hy are people having so much fun with it?”

Have a great Bloomsday.

Charles McDermid contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

Document INHT000020170619ed6g0007b



World; Middle East
Russian Military Says It Might Have Killed  ISIS  Leader

By ANDREW E. KRAMER 
1,617 words
16 June 2017
10:24
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSCOW —Russia’ military said on Friday that it was looking into whether a Russian airstrike in the Syrian desert killed Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the self-declared caliph of the Islamic State, in what would be a major military achievement.

In a statement, the Defense Ministry said that the Russian Air Force struck a meeting of Islamic State leaders on May 28 outside Raqqa, Syria, the group’ de facto capital, possibly killing Mr. Baghdadi, one of the world’ most wanted terrorists.

The announcement hinted that Russia is close to claiming a major success in the fight against the Islamic State —ne that has eluded the United States and its allies for years —nd yet it left major questions unanswered.

The statement offered no explanation for the two-week delay in publicizing the airstrike. It was also not clear whether the Russian military knew in advance that Mr. Baghdadi was at the gathering, or learned of this possibility only after the strike.

Mr. Baghdadi’ death has been the subject of many rumors, and the United States-led coalition fighting the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq, said it could not back up the Russian account.

“e cannot confirm these reports at this time,”aid Col. Ryan S. Dillon, a spokesman for the coalition.

American air commanders in Qatar speak almost daily on a special hotline with their Russian counterparts, primarily to avoid any midair accidents by warplanes flying missions in Syria.

Colonel Dillon said in an interview that analysts were now going back over the reports from May 28 and the subsequent days to see what the Russians had said about flight operations. The United States and Russia, however, do not typically share intelligence from their missions in Syria.

Nothing has been heard from Mr. Baghdadi since November, when the Islamic State released a blistering audio recording in which he urged forces to remain firm in the face of the American-backed Iraqi offensive in Mosul.

The Russian statement was itself written cautiously, suggesting that the military remained uncertain about whether its strike had killed Mr. Baghdadi, a prize sought by several countries in the long struggle against the Islamic State.

“ccording to information which we are checking through various channels, the leader of the Islamic State, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, was at the meeting and the strike destroyed him,”he statement said.

Russia’ foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, introduced a note of caution while speaking at a news conference in Moscow. “f course, I have heard these reports,”r. Lavrov said. “o far, I do not have 100 percent confirmation of this information.”

Mr. Lavrov also cautioned that the Islamic State was likely to survive the death of its leader. “xamples of such actions to destroy or ‘ehead’ terrorist group have always been presented with great enthusiasm,”e said. “owever, history shows that the fighting capacity of these structures was restored.”

Russia intervened in the Syrian civil war in 2015; it said at first that cargo planes flying to a Syrian air base carried only humanitarian aid, but later openly announced a military operation. The Kremlin’ stated goal was fighting the Islamic State, lest it gain a stronghold in Syria not far from restive, predominantly Muslim regions in southern Russia.

But the Obama administration said that the pattern of airstrikes showed that Russia’ real intention was to prop up the government of President Bashar al-Assad, a Russian ally battling a range of opposition groups, including moderate rebels. The killing of the Islamic State’ leader, if confirmed, would help bolster Russia’ initial justification for its intervention —hat its goal all along was to fight terrorism.

In its statement on Friday, the Russian Defense Ministry said that it had “arned the American side about the strike in advance,”ut it was unclear whether Russia had shared intelligence on the meeting or cooperated in any other way with the Western-led coalition fighting in Syria.

The Russian military does not draw a sharp separation between its psychological warfare operations and its media office, meaning the statement’ purpose could be tactical and intended to assist Russian forces in Syria. A claim that the terrorist leader has been killed, regardless of the evidence, sows doubt among Islamic State fighters.

Russia is believed to have an extensive intelligence operation targeting the Islamic State that makes use of the large numbers of Muslims from former Soviet states who have joined the group. A former Islamic State military commander, for example, was an ethnic Chechen from Georgia.

Whether this window into the Islamic State’ activities helped the Russian military to choose a target was not clear.

The Russian military said two models of Sukhoi fighter jets, Su-34s and Su-35s, had carried out the strike, on what it described as “igh level commanders of the terrorist group within the so-called military council of the Islamic State,”nterfax reported.

The strike also killed 30 field commanders and as many as 300 fighters, the military said. The strike lasted from 12:35 a.m. until 12:45 a.m., according to Interfax.

Russia learned of the meeting late in May, and while verifying the information ascertained that the commanders intended to discuss the retreat of their fighters from Raqqa, the Defense Ministry said.

The extent to which Mr. Baghdadi exerted day-to-day control over the Islamic State’ activities is not fully clear, but his death would be a major blow, easily the most prominent since Osama bin Laden, the leader of Al Qaeda, was killed in an American operation in Pakistan in 2011.

Mr. Baghdadi, who is believed to have been born in Iraq in 1971, grew up under Saddam Hussein’ regime. After the United States invaded the country and toppled Mr. Hussein in 2003, Mr. Baghdadi spent years imprisoned at Camp Bucca in southern Iraq.

He emerged from the jumble of Sunni extremist elements that battled the American forces and Iraq’ new Shiite-led government in the decade after the invasion. He was a follower of the Jordanian militant Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who formed a branch of Al Qaeda in Iraq, but eventually fell out with Al Qaeda because his wanton killings of Shiites were too brutal even by Qaeda standards.

An American airstrike killed Mr. Zarqawi in June 2006. Four months later, his successors, including Mr. Baghdadi, declared the founding of the Islamic State of Iraq. It was one of several Sunni groups fighting mostly in northern Iraq.

The American military and Sunni tribesmen, banded together in what became known as the Awakening, left Al Qaeda, the Islamic State and other Sunni jihadists in disarray by 2010, but with an American troop withdrawal looming in 2011, tensions between Sunnis and the Shiite-dominated government of Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki soared.

Mr. Baghdadi was named the head of the Islamic State in 2010, and his group seemed particularly adroit at turning these tensions to its advantage. After the Arab Spring uprisings of 2011, Syria became a fertile ground for jihadists like Mr. Baghdadi, who exploited the power vacuum left by the violent challenge to President Bashar al-Assad’ rule. The group also displayed a sophisticated command of social media to recruit potential jihadists from around the world, and to sow terror in the West.

Using porous borders between Syria and Iraq, the new jihadists overpowered Shiite-led authorities and rival Sunni factions in both countries, and established a stronghold in an overwhelmingly Sunni area. In the summer of 2014, the group declared itself a caliphate, a successor to early leaders of Islam.

Mr. Baghdadi has not been seen publicly in quite some time, even as the governments of Iran, Iraq, Russia and the United States have pounded Islamic State strongholds in major cities and recaptured stretches of territory from the group.

One of Mr. Baghdadi’ closest associates —bu Muhammad al-Adnani, who headed the group’ efforts to build a global terrorism network, including overseeing attacks in Paris and Brussels —as killed in an airstrike in August.

Raqqa has been under attack in recent weeks: Kurdish and Arab forces, with American support, have been closing in on the ground, and a United States-led coalition of Western and Arab air forces has attacked the city from above.

In the past, Russian state news agencies have reported inaccurately on the deaths of Islamic separatists in the Chechen conflict.

In 2011, for example, several Russian wire agencies citing anonymous sources reported that Doku Umarov, a leader of the Chechen insurgency, had been killed in an airstrike in the North Caucasus region, but there was never official confirmation. When Mr. Umarov died years later —n murky circumstances, months before the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia —he Russian authorities made no official announcement, perhaps to avoid reminding visitors about the threat. Instead, Islamist group he had led, the Emirate of the Caucasus, eventually reported his death on a website.

Follow Andrew E. Kramer on Twitter @AndrewKramerNYT.Reporting was contributed by Ivan Nechepurenko from Moscow, Eric Schmitt from Washington, and Sewell Chan, Stephen Farrell and Prashant S. Rao from London.

* U.S. Actions in Iraq Fueled Rise of a Rebel

* \b ISIS\b0  Leader Is My Ex-Husband, Woman Says, but Doubts Remain

* \b ISIS\b0 ’arsh Brand of Islam Is Rooted in Austere Saudi Creed 

* \b ISIS\b0  Leader Takes Steps to Ensure Group’ Survival

A still from a video released by the Islamic State in 2014 is believed to show Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi in Mosul, Iraq. | Via Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170616ed6g002gx



Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
Facebook Will Use Artificial Intelligence to Uncover Extremist Posts

By SHEERA FRENKEL 
568 words
16 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

SAN FRANCISCO -- Responding to complaints that not enough is being done to keep extremist content off social media platforms, Facebook said Thursday that it would begin using artificial intelligence to help remove inappropriate content.

Artificial intelligence will largely be used in conjunction with human moderators who review content on a case-by-case basis. But developers hope its use will be expanded over time, said Monika Bickert, the head of global policy management at Facebook.

One of the first applications for the technology is identifying content that clearly violates Facebook's terms of use, such as photos and videos of beheadings or other gruesome images, and stopping users from uploading them to the site.

''Tragically, we have seen more terror attacks recently,'' Ms. Bickert said. ''As we see more attacks, we see more people asking what social media companies are doing to keep this content offline.''

In a blog post published Thursday, Facebook described how an artificial-intelligence system would, over time, teach itself to identify key phrases that were previously flagged for being used to bolster a known terrorist group.

The same system, they wrote, could learn to identify Facebook users who associate with clusters of pages or groups that promote extremist content, or who return to the site again and again, creating fake accounts in order to spread such content online.

''Ideally, one day our technology will address everything,'' Ms. Bickert said. ''It's in development right now.'' But human moderators, she added, are still needed to review content for context.

Brian Fishman, Facebook's lead policy manager for counterterrorism, said the company had a team of 150 specialists working in 30 languages doing such reviews.

Facebook has been criticized for not doing enough to monitor its site for content posted by extremist groups. Last month, Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain announced that she would challenge internet companies -- including Facebook -- to do more to monitor and stop them.

''We cannot allow this ideology the safe space it needs to breed,'' Ms. May said after the bombing of a concert in Manchester that killed 22 people. ''Yet that is precisely what the internet -- and the big companies that provide internet-based services -- provide.''

J. M. Berger, a fellow with the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism at The Hague, said a large part of the challenge for companies like Facebook is figuring out what qualifies as terrorism -- a definition that might apply to more than statements in support of groups like the Islamic State.

''The problem, as usual, is determining what is extremist, and what isn't, and it goes further than just jihadists,'' he said. ''Are they just talking about ISIS and Al Qaeda, or are they going to go further to deal with white nationalism and neo-Nazi movements?''

Ms. Bickert said Facebook was hopeful that the new artificial intelligence technology could be used to counter any form of extremism that violated the company's terms of use, although for the time being it will be narrowly focused.

Still, questions about the program persist.

''Will it be effective or will it overreach?'' said Jillian York, the director for international freedom of expression at the Electronic Frontier Foundation. ''Are they trying to discourage people from joining terrorist groups to begin with, or to discourage them from posting about terrorism on Facebook?''

Document NYTF000020170616ed6g0004d



technology
Facebook Will Use Artificial Intelligence to Find Extremist Posts

By SHEERA FRENKEL 
592 words
15 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

SAN FRANCISCO —esponding to complaints that not enough is being done to keep extremist content off social media platforms, Facebook said Thursday that it would begin using artificial intelligence to help remove inappropriate content.

Artificial intelligence will largely be used in conjunction with human moderators who review content on a case-by-case basis. But developers hope its use will be expanded over time, said Monika Bickert, the head of global policy management at Facebook.

One of the first applications for the technology is identifying content that clearly violates Facebook’ terms of use, such as photos and videos of beheadings or other gruesome images, and stopping users from uploading them to the site.

“ragically, we have seen more terror attacks recently,”s. Bickert said. “s we see more attacks, we see more people asking what social media companies are doing to keep this content offline.”

In a blog post published Thursday, Facebook described how an artificial-intelligence system would, over time, teach itself to identify key phrases that were previously flagged for being used to bolster a known terrorist group.

The same system, they wrote, could learn to identify Facebook users who associate with clusters of pages or groups that promote extremist content, or who return to the site again and again, creating fake accounts in order to spread such content online.

“deally, one day our technology will address everything,”s. Bickert said. “t’ in development right now.”ut human moderators, she added, are still needed to review content for context.

Brian Fishman, Facebook’ lead policy manager for counterterrorism, said the company had a team of 150 specialists working in 30 languages doing such reviews.

Facebook has been criticized for not doing enough to monitor its site for content posted by extremist groups. Last month, Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain announced that she would challenge internet companies —ncluding Facebook —o do more to monitor and stop them.

“e cannot allow this ideology the safe space it needs to breed,”s. May said after the bombing of a concert in Manchester that killed 22 people. “et that is precisely what the internet —nd the big companies that provide internet-based services —rovide.”

J. M. Berger, a fellow with the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism at The Hague, said a large part of the challenge for companies like Facebook is figuring out what qualifies as terrorism — definition that might apply to more than statements in support of groups like the Islamic State.

“he problem, as usual, is determining what is extremist, and what isn’, and it goes further than just jihadists,”e said. “re they just talking about ISIS and Al Qaeda, or are they going to go further to deal with white nationalism and neo-Nazi movements?”

Ms. Bickert said Facebook was hopeful that the new artificial intelligence technology could be used to counter any form of extremism that violated the company’ terms of use, although for the time being it will be narrowly focused.

Still, questions about the program persist.

“ill it be effective or will it overreach?”aid Jillian York, the director for international freedom of expression at the Electronic Frontier Foundation. “re they trying to discourage people from joining terrorist groups to begin with, or to discourage them from posting about terrorism on Facebook?”

* Twitter Fails E.U. Standard on Removing Hate Speech Online

* Facebook Struggles to Put Out Online Fires in Israeli-Palestinian Conflict

* Obama Shifts Online Strategy on \b ISIS\b0 

Document INHT000020170616ed6f00009



opinion
How  ISIS  Grew in the Philippines; Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
509 words
15 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

While President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines was bragging about his brutal war on drugs, the Islamic State was consolidating its sway over Islamist rebel groups on the island of Mindanao. The extent to which ISIS has succeeded is now alarmingly evident, as a pitched battle between Philippine troops and Islamist militants for control of the largely Muslim city of Marawi enters its fourth week.

With the presence of foreign fighters, including Malaysians and Indonesians, who are working alongside militant leaders with strong ties to ISIS, Mr. Duterte has a serious problem on his hands that threatens the security of the entire region.

The news on Wednesday that, in addition to American military advisers and intelligence assistance, United States troops are now on the ground in Marawi raises the stakes. Mr. Duterte, who has threatened to eject American forces from his country, said Sunday that he was unaware of the presence of military assistance in Marawi. In fact, the Pentagon has no permanent presence in the Philippines, but for years has kept 50 to 100 Special Forces troops in the south of the country on rotational exercises. Despite Mr. Duterte’ hostility to America, his army has close ties to the Pentagon, values its help against the extremists and has resisted Mr. Duterte’ efforts to expel the Americans.

Mr. Duterte’ braggadocio is partly to blame for the escalation of the conflict. Last year, he rejected a cease-fire offer from the Maute group, which is leading the fight in Marawi. He said in December that when the group pledged to “o down upon Marawi to burn the place,”e responded, “o ahead, do it.”he battle raging now began when Maute militants, who have joined forces with the Abu Sayyaf Islamist group, strongly resisted an attempt on May 23 by Philippine security forces to capture Isnilon Hapilon, Abu Sayyaf’ leader. Mr. Hapilon is on the F.B.I.’ list of most-wanted terrorists.

The Philippine military is pummeling Marawi with daily bombing runs, presumably with targeting assistance from Americans. More than 200 people have been killed and some 2,000 civilians are believed to be trapped.

President Trump has supported Mr. Duterte, including his use of extrajudicial killings to fight the drug trade, and he has intensified the fight against ISIS in Syria and Iraq. But strongman tactics —ike Mr. Duterte’ recent threat to declare martial law over the entire country —nd a widening military show of brute force aided by the United States will not address the fundamental problems that have fueled militant movements on Mindanao since the 1970s: grinding poverty; lawless zones, where criminal gangs reign; and overcrowded prisons, which are a boon to Islamist recruiters.

The most urgent need now is to ratchet down the fight in Marawi and press Mr. Duterte to restart negotiations with militant groups.

* Duterte, Focused on Drug Users in Philippines, Ignored Rise of \b ISIS\b0 

* In Indonesia and Philippines, Militants Find a Common Bond: \b ISIS\b0 

Document INHT000020170615ed6f0000e



Technology
Facebook Will Use Artificial Intelligence to Find Extremist Posts

By SHEERA FRENKEL 
627 words
15 June 2017
19:12
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

SAN FRANCISCO —esponding to complaints that not enough is being done to keep extremist content off social media platforms, Facebook said Thursday that it would begin using artificial intelligence to help remove inappropriate content.

Artificial intelligence will largely be used in conjunction with human moderators who review content on a case-by-case basis. But developers hope its use will be expanded over time, said Monika Bickert, the head of global policy management at Facebook.

One of the first applications for the technology is identifying content that clearly violates Facebook’ terms of use, such as photos and videos of beheadings or other gruesome images, and stopping users from uploading them to the site.

“ragically, we have seen more terror attacks recently,”s. Bickert said. “s we see more attacks, we see more people asking what social media companies are doing to keep this content offline.”

In a blog post published Thursday, Facebook described how an artificial-intelligence system would, over time, teach itself to identify key phrases that were previously flagged for being used to bolster a known terrorist group.

The same system, they wrote, could learn to identify Facebook users who associate with clusters of pages or groups that promote extremist content, or who return to the site again and again, creating fake accounts in order to spread such content online.

“deally, one day our technology will address everything,”s. Bickert said. “t’ in development right now.”ut human moderators, she added, are still needed to review content for context.

Brian Fishman, Facebook’ lead policy manager for counterterrorism, said the company had a team of 150 specialists working in 30 languages doing such reviews.

Facebook has been criticized for not doing enough to monitor its site for content posted by extremist groups. Last month, Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain announced that she would challenge internet companies —ncluding Facebook —o do more to monitor and stop them.

“e cannot allow this ideology the safe space it needs to breed,”s. May said after the bombing of a concert in Manchester that killed 22 people. “et that is precisely what the internet —nd the big companies that provide internet-based services —rovide.”

J. M. Berger, a fellow with the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism at The Hague, said a large part of the challenge for companies like Facebook is figuring out what qualifies as terrorism — definition that might apply to more than statements in support of groups like the Islamic State.

“he problem, as usual, is determining what is extremist, and what isn’, and it goes further than just jihadists,”e said. “re they just talking about ISIS and Al Qaeda, or are they going to go further to deal with white nationalism and neo-Nazi movements?”

Ms. Bickert said Facebook was hopeful that the new artificial intelligence technology could be used to counter any form of extremism that violated the company’ terms of use, although for the time being it will be narrowly focused.

Still, questions about the program persist.

“ill it be effective or will it overreach?”aid Jillian York, the director for international freedom of expression at the Electronic Frontier Foundation. “re they trying to discourage people from joining terrorist groups to begin with, or to discourage them from posting about terrorism on Facebook?”

* Twitter Fails E.U. Standard on Removing Hate Speech Online

* Facebook Struggles to Put Out Online Fires in Israeli-Palestinian Conflict

* Obama Shifts Online Strategy on \b ISIS\b0 

Facebook says the first use of its new artificial intelligence program will be to prevent the posting of gruesome content such as images from terrorist attacks. | Patricia De Melo Moreira/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170615ed6f005sd



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S.-Led Syria Strikes Said to Take Heavy Civilian Toll

By NICK CUMMING-BRUCE 
784 words
15 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

GENEVA -- Airstrikes by the American-led coalition against Islamic State targets have killed hundreds of civilians around Raqqa, the militant group's last Syrian stronghold, and left 160,000 people displaced, a United Nations panel said on Wednesday.

The findings of the panel, which has been documenting the war in Syria with periodic reports almost since the conflict began more than six years ago, reinforced fears by humanitarian groups over the heavy loss of civilian life that would result from the American-led coalition's airstrikes.

Paulo Ségio Pinheiro, the Brazilian diplomat who leads the panel, said the airstrikes had escalated as an American-backed militia known as the Syrian Democratic Forces moved recently to retake Raqqa, which Islamic State fighters seized in 2014 and made their de facto capital.

''We note in particular that the intensification of airstrikes, which have paved the ground for an S.D.F. advance in Raqqa, has resulted not only in staggering loss of civilian life, but has also led to 160,000 civilians fleeing their homes,'' Mr. Pinheiro said in a report, presented to the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva.

It was the first time Mr. Pinheiro's panel had focused on American military conduct that has led to heavy civilian casualties and other suffering.

The panel's investigators found that 300 civilians had been killed in the airstrikes since March 21, panel member Karen Abuzayd told reporters in Geneva later. They included 200 civilians killed in a single incident in March when an airstrike hit a school in the town of Mansoura, she said.

The attack on Mansoura, shortly after midnight on March 21, hit a school building housing families that had fled the fighting around Palmyra and other towns, investigators said. Initial reports said up to 40 people had died in the bombing, but rescue workers and other witnesses interviewed by the panel said that as operations to clear the rubble progressed the death toll had climbed to around 200. The United States military has said it is aware of the reports of higher casualty figures in Mansoura and is investigating.

The Mansoura attack came on a day that the American-led coalition conducted 19 airstrikes on targets in the vicinity of Raqqa and a week after 49 people reportedly died when coalition aircraft struck the village of Al Jinah in western Aleppo Province. In that strike, residents said coalition aircraft had hit a mosque but American officials said they had hit a meeting of Al Qaeda operatives, producing satellite images which showed the mosque was still standing.

The recapture of Raqqa would be a significant step in the drive to eliminate the Islamic State's hold on Syrian territory, and in the wider battle between President Bashar al-Assad's government, backed by Russia and Iran, and rebel forces supported by the United States and Arab regional powers to decide the future of Syria.

Mr. Pinheiro's panel, officially known as the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, has been chronicling evidence of war crimes and other atrocities in exhaustive detail.

Success in purging Raqqa of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, would free thousands of civilians from the group's rule, Mr. Pinheiro said, including women from Iraq's Yazidi minority who have been held as sex slaves for almost three years. But ''the imperative to fight terrorism must not, however, be undertaken at the expense of civilians who unwillingly find themselves living in areas where ISIL is present,'' Mr. Pinheiro said.

Its report echoed deepening fears among humanitarian agencies over the toll in civilian lives exacted by American and coalition forces in the campaign to eliminate the Islamic State in both Iraq and Syria.

Airwars, a nonprofit group monitoring reports of civilian deaths in Iraq and Syria, has estimated that at least 3,100 civilians were killed in coalition airstrikes since the onset of the war against Islamic State in August 2014 up to March 2017, more than eight times the 352 civilian casualties acknowledged by the United States military.

The number of civilians killed in coalition attacks has raised questions among human rights organizations over whether the greater autonomy the Trump administration has allowed military commanders on the battlefield has diverted attention from protection of civilians. Those concerns were further underscored by reports last week that coalition forces attacking Islamic State positions around Raqqa had used munitions containing white phosphorus, a weapon banned in populated areas under international law. United States officials said last week that the weapons were not being used against people.

Document NYTF000020170615ed6f0006k



DISPATCH FROM TEHRAN
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Retracing an  ISIS  Attack at an Iranian Shrine

By THOMAS ERDBRINK 
1,007 words
15 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

TEHRAN -- I had visited the sprawling mausoleum of the founder of the Islamic republic multiple times, trying to blend in with pilgrims.

I would sit on the thick red carpets with visitors from across Iran and beyond, talking with them about the war in Syria, the latest soap operas and coming elections.

Sometimes officials would ask me who I was, only to offer tea and let me be. Despite its reputation, Iran is much more open than many think, even for a foreign journalist.

Of course, after the attacks last week on the Parliament building and the mausoleum, a gold-domed sanctuary that houses the remains of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and other important Iranian officials, entering as a common foreign tourist is more problematic because of new security checks. So I went with my journalist identification.

At least 17 people were killed and dozens more were wounded when five homegrown Islamic State fighters entered the two sites armed with assault rifles, grenades and suicide vests. It was the first successful assault in Iran by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

Many in Iran are trying to grasp the new reality, completely opposite the image of a strong and invincible country long presented to them by their leaders.

The attack hit the Islamic republic in its political heart. Iran's Parliament is home to 290 directly elected representatives. The Khomeini shrine is the resting place of the man who introduced political Islam to the world.

But the shrine is also where families visiting the capital stop to hang out, set up tents and drink tea. Children run around between praying grandmothers and Afghans en route home from a tour of fighting in Syria.

In my visit to the shrine after the attack, I passed commandos armed with Kalashnikovs and plainclothes agents who made no secret about their role.

Nobody wanted to admit it, but things had changed.

Their chins up, entrance-gate guards quoted Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who had said that the assailants were merely ''playing with firecrackers.''

The message spread through the state news media is that the assailants failed to reach their objectives. Analysts on TV have said the assailants wanted to kill all the representatives in Parliament but could not even find the main meeting chamber.

As for the shrine, it was a pointless attack, TV commentators said, almost joking that the assailants lost their way inside the complex -- even though it seemed clear they knew exactly where to go.

I passed giant, empty courtyards, used only a couple of times a year for religious events, searching for the shrine's public relations department. In its office, tucked away in a corner near the western entrance, a slow-moving official who introduced himself as Yasser Maleki checked my identification and said, ''Let's go for a walk.'' He changed from a red and white tracksuit to the black coat and trousers common for shrine officials.

Mr. Maleki, 32, a newlywed and part-time professional fighter, walked me to the highway, cars zipping by.

There, he explained step-by-step how two of the assailants had made their way into the shrine. They stepped out of a car, walked up to the gate and started shooting. After one attacker's assault rifle jammed, ''he just threw it away and used a handgun,'' Mr. Maleki said.

He walked to the spot where Maziar Sabzalizadeh, 45, a shrine official who had been helping unload a truck, was fatally shot in the back by the assailants.

''I wish I had jumped them and took them down,'' Mr. Maleki said.

He had been sitting behind his computer, he said, when he heard the shooting.

At a second gate, Hossein Jafari-Araghi, 51, a guard who has been on the job for 15 years, was already back at his post, treated after an assailant's bullet grazed his cheek, now covered by a modest white bandage.

''I just came back to work,'' he said.

When the assailants entered the western hall, they shot in the air and picked the route to the heart of the shrine, right under the gold dome, where Ayatollah Khomeini is buried. ''They absolutely knew where they were going,'' Mr. Maleki said. By that time, Mr. Maleki had grabbed a video camera and was following the assailants discreetly as they made their way forward.

Hiding behind a pillar, he recorded how one assailant detonated a suicide vest when confronted by the police, and he posted the clip via the shrine's social media. Showing it on his phone, Mr. Maleki said the suicide bomber's ''liver fell right in front of me.''

He pointed out in detail where other body parts had landed. ''What an idiot, right?'' Mr. Maleki said.

The other assailant, also wearing a suicide vest, was killed by a police officer. ''Right in the neck -- what a crack shot,'' Mr. Maleki said. The assailant ''didn't even have time to press his detonators.''

Inside the shrine, near the gilded silver cage where Ayatollah Khomeini is buried, visitors did not display the same bravado.

Most had come to pray and pay respects to Ayatollah Khomeini, while others were just enjoying the air-conditioning on a hot day of fasting during the Ramadan month. ''I felt insecure when I heard of the attack,'' said Mozafar Amiri, 48, a cleric.

Hossein Nezammolaei, who was relaxing with co-workers, said that ''until now, I had always felt safe.''

Things have changed, Mr. Maleki conceded.

''We are now ordered to shoot first and ask questions later,'' he said. ''In that sense, the attack has made us even safer.''

Follow Thomas Erdbrink on Twitter @ThomasErdbrink .

The tomb of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the father of the 1979 revolution, was attacked by Islamic State militants last week.; Hossein Jafari-Araghi, a guard, was wounded. ''I just came back to work,'' he said. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY THOMAS ERDBRINK/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170615ed6f0005d



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Takes Tora Bora, Once Bin Laden's Afghan Fortress

By ROD NORDLAND and FAHIM ABED; Khalid Alokozay contributed reporting from Jalalabad, Afghanistan. 
993 words
15 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan -- Tora Bora, the mountain redoubt that was once Osama bin Laden's fortress, fell to the Islamic State early Wednesday, handing the extremists a significant strategic and symbolic victory, according to Afghan officials and local elders and residents.

Taliban fighters who had previously controlled the extensive cave and tunnel complex fled overnight after a determined, weeklong assault by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, according to villagers fleeing the area on Wednesday.

Hazrat Ali, a member of Parliament and a prominent warlord from the area who helped the Americans capture Tora Bora from Al Qaeda in 2001, said that the offensive was prompted by the American decision to drop the so-called mother of all bombs on an Islamic State network of tunnels in Achin District in April. The 20,000-pound bomb was thought to be the largest non-nuclear bomb ever deployed.

The Islamic State then decided to shift its refuge to the Tora Bora caves and tunnels, Mr. Ali said. ''Some 1,000 ISIS militants were gathered close to Tora Bora, to capture the area,'' Mr. Ali said. ''I informed government forces to target them, and I told them they are trying to capture Tora Bora, but they did not pay attention.''

A local Afghan police official confirmed that the fortress had fallen. ''ISIS has captured Tora Bora and areas around it,'' he said. ''The tribal elders are here in my office. They all escaped the area last night.'' He spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the news media.

Zabihullah Mujahid, the spokesman for the Taliban in that area, denied that Tora Bora had fallen to their rival insurgents. ''Fighting is underway in the Tora Bora area between ISIS and our mujahedeen,'' Mr. Mujahid said via the Viber messaging service. ''It is the front line between our mujahedeen and ISIS. No one has advanced in the area.''

He accused the United States of carrying out airstrikes in support of the Islamic State, but local officials and residents denied hearing any.

Residents said the Taliban had fled. ''The Taliban escaped from the area last night and left us to ISIS with our women and children,'' said Juma Gul, a tribal elder from the Suleymankhel Valley, close to Tora Bora, who said his was among hundreds of families who fled the area after the Islamic State took over. ''There was no resistance by the Taliban against ISIS, and local tribes had no way to fight them anymore, so we just escaped.''

The militants now have an easily defended base at Tora Bora, Mr. Ali said, as well as access to many other parts of Nangarhar Province through the Spin Ghar mountains along the Pakistan border, where Tora Bora sits. ''ISIS has a stronghold and will capture these areas one after another,'' he said.

Mr. Ali has extensive experience fighting against Al Qaeda in the area but has also been accused of having helped Bin Laden escape from Tora Bora in December 2001, reportedly betraying his American and Afghan allies as they closed in on the Qaeda leadership.

Mr. Ali has denied having done so.

The Islamic State in Khorasan, as the militants in Afghanistan and Pakistan are known, has no direct connection with Al Qaeda, which is largely a spent force in the area. But the Islamic State was originally formed by Qaeda elements, and the two groups have many doctrinal similarities.

Government forces and their coalition allies in the Tora Bora area have engaged in little recent fighting against the Taliban who have been entrenched there, supported by local tribes along the mountainous border with Pakistan. But since March, Afghan forces supported by American Special Operations troops have been mounting a vigorous campaign against the Islamic State in Achin District, also in the Spin Ghar range but about 50 miles to the east of Tora Bora.

All six of the American soldiers killed in Afghanistan so far this year died in the fighting around Achin District.

The American military said it had killed hundreds of Islamic State fighters in the Achin District area, including the ''emir'' of the Islamic State in Khorasan, Sheikh Abdul Hasib. Mr. Hasib was a former commander with the Pakistani Taliban, who broke away to join the Islamic State. The Islamic State and the Taliban have been competing savagely for dominance in the areas they control, but the more extreme Islamic State fighters have dominated Achin District as well as some other areas in southern parts of Nangarhar Province.

Taliban officials are concerned about the Islamic State's appeal to younger fighters impatient with the progress of the 15-year insurgency.

In the Tora Bora area, residents were angry at both the Taliban and the government for allowing the Islamic State to take over. Malak Tor, a tribal elder from Pachir Agam District, where Tora Bora is situated, complained that residents' demands that the government mount an offensive to protect Tora Bora were ignored.

Among other things, the Islamic State insurgents had taken a large marble quarry as well as a fuel depot. ''Now they will find financial resources for themselves, and then it will be very difficult to push them out of Tora Bora,'' Mr. Tor said.

President Ashraf Ghani on Wednesday ordered the 201st Corps of the Afghan National Army to move against the Islamic State in the districts including the Tora Bora area, according to Attaullah Khogyani, the spokesman for the Nangarhar Province governor. Alim Eshaqzai, the deputy governor, said security officials would start ground, air and artillery operations against the Islamic State as soon as possible.

An Afghan farmer working in a field near the Spin Ghar range, where Islamic State fighters seized the Tora Bora cave complex. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ENRIC MARTI/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170615ed6f0003r



World; Asia Pacific
 ISIS  Captures Tora Bora, Once Bin Laden’ Afghan Fortress

By ROD NORDLAND and FAHIM ABED 
1,003 words
14 June 2017
13:02
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan —ora Bora, the mountain redoubt that was once Osama bin Laden’ fortress, fell to the Islamic State early Wednesday, handing the extremists a significant strategic and symbolic victory, according to Afghan officials and local elders and residents.

Taliban fighters who had previously controlled the extensive cave and tunnel complex fled overnight after a determined, weeklong assault by the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL, according to villagers fleeing the area on Wednesday.

Hazrat Ali, a member of Parliament and a prominent warlord from the area who helped the Americans capture Tora Bora from Al Qaeda in 2001, said that the offensive was prompted by the American decision to drop the so-called mother of all bombs on an Islamic State network of tunnels in Achin District in April. The 20,000-pound bomb was thought to be the largest non-nuclear bomb ever deployed.

The Islamic State then decided to shift its refuge to the Tora Bora caves and tunnels, Mr. Ali said. “ome 1,000 ISIS militants were gathered close to Tora Bora, to capture the area,”r. Ali said. “ informed government forces to target them, and I told them they are trying to capture Tora Bora, but they did not pay attention.”

A local Afghan police official confirmed that the fortress had fallen. “ISIS has captured Tora Bora and areas around it,”e said. “he tribal elders are here in my office. They all escaped the area last night.”e spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the news media.

Zabihullah Mujahid, the spokesman for the Taliban in that area, denied that Tora Bora had fallen to their rival insurgents. “ighting is underway in the Tora Bora area between ISIS and our mujahedeen,”r. Mujahid said via the Viber messaging service. “t is the front line between our mujahedeen and ISIS. No one has advanced in the area.”

He accused the United States of carrying out airstrikes in support of the Islamic State, but local officials and residents denied hearing any.

Residents said the Taliban had fled. “he Taliban escaped from the area last night and left us to ISIS with our women and children,”aid Juma Gul, a tribal elder from the Suleymankhel Valley, close to Tora Bora, who said he was among hundreds of families who fled the area after the Islamic State took over. “here was no resistance by the Taliban against ISIS, and local tribes had no way to fight them anymore, so we just escaped.”

The militants now have an easily defended base at Tora Bora, Mr. Ali said, as well as access to many other parts of Nangarhar Province through the Spin Ghar mountains along the Pakistan border, where Tora Bora sits. “ISIS has a stronghold and will capture these areas one after another,”e said.

Mr. Ali has extensive experience fighting against Al Qaeda in the area but has also been accused of having helped bin Laden escape from Tora Bora in December 2001, reportedly betraying his American and Afghan allies as they closed in on the Qaeda leadership.

Mr. Ali has denied having done so.

The Islamic State in Khorasan, as the militants in Afghanistan and Pakistan are known, has no direct connection with Al Qaeda, which is largely a spent force in the area. But the Islamic State was originally formed by Qaeda elements, and the two groups have many doctrinal similarities.

Government forces and their coalition allies in the Tora Bora area have engaged in little recent fighting against the Taliban who have been entrenched there, supported by local tribes along the mountainous border with Pakistan. But since March, Afghan forces supported by American Special Operations troops have been mounting a vigorous campaign against the Islamic State in Achin District, also in the Spin Ghar range but about 50 miles to the east of Tora Bora.

All six of the American soldiers killed in Afghanistan so far this year died in the fighting around Achin District.

The American military said it had killed hundreds of Islamic State fighters in the Achin District area, including the “mir”f the Islamic State in Khorasan, Sheikh Abdul Hasib. Mr. Hasib was a former commander with the Pakistani Taliban, who broke away to join the Islamic State. The Islamic State and the Taliban have been competing savagely for dominance in the areas they control, but the more extreme Islamic State fighters have dominated Achin District as well as some other areas in southern parts of Nangarhar Province.

Taliban officials are concerned about the Islamic State’ appeal to younger fighters impatient with the progress of the 15-year insurgency.

In the Tora Bora area, residents were angry at both the Taliban and the government for allowing the Islamic State to take over. Malak Tor, a tribal elder from Pachir Agam District, where Tora Bora is situated, complained that residents’emands that the government mount an offensive to protect Tora Bora were ignored.

Among other things, the Islamic State insurgents had taken a large marble quarry as well as a fuel depot. “ow they will find financial resources for themselves, and then it will be very difficult to push them out of Tora Bora,”r. Tor said.

President Ashraf Ghani on Wednesday ordered the 201st Corps of the Afghan National Army to move against the Islamic State in the districts including the Tora Bora area, according to Attaullah Khogyani, the spokesman for the Nangarhar Province governor. Alim Eshaqzai, the deputy governor, said security officials would start ground, air and artillery operations against the Islamic State as soon as possible.

Khalid Alokozay contributed reporting from Jalalabad, Afghanistan.

An Afghan soldier during an attack by Islamic State militants in Nangarhar Province in May. In expelling the Taliban from Tora Bora, the extremists gain an easily defended base, an Afghan official said. | Ghulamullah Habibi/European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170614ed6e003e9



World; Asia Pacific
U.S. Troops in Besieged City of Marawi, Philippine Military Says

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
816 words
14 June 2017
15:13
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MARAWI, Philippines —merican troops are on the ground in the embattled southern Philippine city of Marawi, where the Philippine military is battling Islamic State-linked militants for control of the city, a Philippine military spokesman said on Wednesday.

While the spokesman, Brig. Gen. Restituto Padilla, said the American forces were not engaged in combat, his statement was the first official confirmation of the American military presence in Marawi.

Philippine and American officials have previously said that United States Special Operations forces were providing military assistance in the battle for the city, but American officials have not said from where, and Philippine officials have said there were no American military “oots on the ground”n Marawi.

American officials have framed the assistance as part of a long-term counterterrorism project, noting in a statement on Monday that the Special Forces had been “roviding support and assistance in the southern Philippines for many years.”

On Wednesday, General Padilla said that some of those forces, who are usually based in Zamboanga City, had “een moved to help ground forces in Marawi.”

“hey are in Marawi, but are not allowed to join combat,”e said.

He declined to say how many American troops were in Marawi, but said that they were “ery few.”

“hey are also not engaged in battles, but in case their defenses are breached they are allowed to protect themselves,”e said. The Americans are carrying rifles, he said.

The American presence in Marawi is complicated, and not just because of the possibility that United States troops could get drawn into battle.

The Philippine Constitution prohibits the presence of foreign combat troops, and President Rodrigo Duterte, who has frequently sparred with the United States, a military ally, has threatened to eject American forces from the Philippines.

On Sunday, Mr. Duterte told reporters that he had “ever approached America”or help and was unaware of American military assistance in Marawi. His spokesman, Ernesto Abella, said on the same day that the American role “oes not involve any boots on the ground.”

Those comments suggested that the Philippine military, which has a long relationship with the American military, may not have consulted Mr. Duterte.

“he only issue here is that when the military operation began in Marawi, the president has instructed the chief of staff and the secretary of national defense to do all they can to defeat this threat,”eneral Padilla said on Wednesday.

He noted that the United States and the Philippines were bound by a 1951 mutual defense treaty that calls for them to aid each other in times of aggression by a third party.

Hundreds of militants claiming allegiance to the Islamic State attacked Marawi last month with the goal of establishing an Islamic caliphate in the Philippines. The military said 290 people had been killed in the fighting since then, and that the militants still controlled about a fifth of the city.

The United States military said in a statement on Monday that the Special Forces were providing “ecurity assistance and training”n the areas of intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance.

“or security reasons, we are not able to to discuss specific technical details”f the American support, the statement said.

The Philippine defense secretary, Delfin Lorenzana, told reporters on Sunday that the United States soldiers were gathering information from American P3 Orion spy planes. These planes have been spotted passing over Marawi.

The Americans were “taying inside the camp and coordinating technical communications,”e said, referring to Camp Ranao, which is near Marawi.

Most of the fighting has been confined to one section of the city, but there have been skirmishes and sniper fire in many areas.

Marawi, a once vibrant city of 200,000, has been reduced to a virtual ghost town, with the military continuing to drop bombs in a bid to dislodge the militants. The city is the largest majority-Muslim city in the Philippines, a predominantly Roman Catholic country.

A few hundred civilians are believed to be either trapped in the crossfire or being held hostage by the gunmen, who are led by Isnilon Hapilon, a leader of a faction of Abu Sayyaf, an Islamist insurgency based in the region.

Mr. Hapilon, the leader of the Islamic State in Southeast Asia, is also on the F.B.I. most-wanted-terrorists list, with a $5 million bounty being offered for his capture.

* Destroying a Philippine City to Save It From \b ISIS\b0  Allies

* Duterte, Focused on Drug Users in Philippines, Ignored Rise of \b ISIS\b0 

A soldier searched a house in Marawi, Philippines, last week. | Noel Celis/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | United States Army Col. Ernest Lee, center left, with Philippine Marine Maj. Gen. Emmanuel Salamat during a handover of counter-terrorism weapons in Taguig, east of Manila, last week. | Bullit Marquez/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170614ed6e0040h



world
Destroying a Philippine City to Save It From  ISIS  Allies

By RICHARD C. PADDOCK and FELIPE VILLAMOR 
1,353 words
13 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA —lack smoke billows behind lush palm groves. Tanks rumble past graceful minarets. Bullets rain on empty streets.

As the siege of the southern Philippine city of Marawi enters its fourth week, more than 200 people have been killed and much of the city lies in ruins. The strongest attempt yet by supporters of the Islamic State to seize and hold territory in Southeast Asia has turned into an urban street fight in what is now largely a ghost town.

Hastily closed businesses bear signs reading “ooters will be shot.”tray dogs scavenge for food on deserted streets. A light rain on Tuesday added to the feeling of despair.

The Philippine military appears to have adopted a strategy of destroying the city to save it, conducting bombing runs at least twice a day.

The rebels are holding a piece of the city center, controlling checkpoints on several bridges and planting well-armed snipers in some of the city’ mosques. Hundreds of civilians are believed to be in their midst, making the government assault more difficult. Each side claims to have the other boxed in; both seem to be digging in for a protracted battle.

A battle fought house by house

Marawi, a city of 200,000, sits on the shore of Lake Lanao on the island of Mindanao. The Agus River, which flows from the lake, divides the city.

The militants still hold the part of the city southeast of the river that was once the economic and business center. The heaviest fighting is concentrated there in an area of about 500 square meters, one military commander said.

Rebel snipers are positioned in the taller buildings, forcing Philippine troops to maintain their distance. The military says the rebels control a fifth of the city.

“t’ urban warfare, face-to-face combat,”aid Lt. Col. Christopher Tampus, an infantry battalion commander at the front line. “hey are still holding out. The fighting is house to house, building by building.”

The Philippine military controls the skies and has been using helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft to bombard the city, inflicting heavy damage but so far failing to drive out the militants.

Officially known as the Islamic City of Marawi, Marawi is the largest predominantly Muslim city in a country that is more than 90 percent Roman Catholic. Some of the city’ most notable buildings are mosques. Some remain standing.

The Philippine military says that the militants are using mosques and madrasas as bases for fighting, including for the placement of sniper nests. It has complained that it can’ attack these buildings because they are protected as cultural monuments.

Who are the rebels?

The militants are a combined force of two Islamist insurgencies.

Their leader is Isnilon Hapilon, designated by the Islamic State as its emir in Southeast Asia. He leads a faction of Abu Sayyaf, a decades-old militant group best known for taking foreign hostages. He is on the F.B.I.’ list of most-wanted terrorists, and the United States has offered a $5 million bounty for his capture.

Mr. Hapilon has banded with the Maute group, led by the brothers Abdullah and Omarkhayam Maute. Educated in the Middle East, they are said to have sworn allegiance to Mr. Hapilon.

The Philippine military says the militants have put up a much fiercer fight than expected. A video recovered by the army shows the militant leaders planning to seize Marawi. Mr. Hapilon is seated at a table wearing a head scarf, to the right of Abdullah Maute, who is standing.

The fight for Marawi represents the first time the Maute and Hapilon groups have joined for such a major operation. The authorities say they have also been joined by fighters from Indonesia, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Yemen and Chechnya.

The militants’ropaganda machine

As the battle has raged, the Islamic State has posted videos, said to be from Marawi, promoting the rebels’arrative that they are winning and that the Philippine Army had “ompletely failed”o retake the city.

The most recent footage, released Monday, shows men firing weapons from buildings interspersed with scenes of Marawi. It ends with a graphic execution in which six men in orange shirts and handcuffs are made to kneel and are then machine-gunned from the back.

Zia Alonto Adiong, a military spokesman in Marawi, said the scenes of militants firing weapons “ppears to be Marawi”ut that the executions do not. He said he could not confirm the location and that the victims’range shirts were not typical attire. “obody wears that here as a regular outfit,”e said.

The video also claims that more than 200 Philippine soldiers have been killed, and that the militants have seized weapons left behind by retreating government forces.

“wenty-one days since Islamic State fighters breached the city of Marawi in the Philippines, intense battles are still raging in its center, and Islamic State fighters are spread out over more than two-thirds of the area, tightening the noose on the Philippine Army, which is unable to take back the initiative,”he narrator says.

The Philippine military says that the government has lost 58 soldiers and police officers, and that it is boxing in the rebels.

The role of the United States

Americans are providing surveillance and intelligence assistance to the Philippine military under a longstanding agreement. Since the early 2000s, the United States has stationed a rotating force of 50 to 100 Special Forces troops in the southern Philippines to provide training and technical assistance to the Philippine military in its fight against terrorists.

Now, U.S. intelligence is probably helping the Philippine military select bombing targets, like those targeted by OV-10 Broncos.

But foreign troops are barred from combat by the Philippine Constitution, and United States and Philippine officials say there are no American troops in Marawi.

A government crackdown

President Rodrigo Duterte declared martial law for 60 days on the island of Mindanao, the country’ second-largest island, where various rebel Islamic groups have operated for decades. Mr. Duterte, facing his biggest crisis since taking office nearly a year ago, had talked of declaring martial law nationwide in his antidrug campaign, which has resulted in thousands of deaths at the hands of police officers and vigilantes.

Checkpoints set up around Mindanao may aid in the apprehension of militants who slip away from Marawi in the coming weeks. The Maute brothers’ather, Cayamora Maute, and other relatives were arrested at a checkpoint in Davao City. A combined military and police unit arrested their mother, Ominta Romato Maute, in the town of Masiu, an hour’ drive from Marawi.

Philippine security forces searched houses for guns and ammunition last week.

For the Philippine military, which is more experienced at fighting the Islamists in the jungle, the Marawi siege has meant urban street fighting. Government tanks rolled through the streets as the military went door to door, seen in this clip from June 7.

The trapped civilians

The militants seized an unknown number of civilians on the first day of the siege. It is unclear how many have survived. The military believes the rebels are using some of them as human shields.

Those who escape from the city are closely vetted by the police.

Tens of thousands of refugees fled the city when the fighting began. But as many as 2,000 civilians remain, according to rescuers and the local Red Cross.

Many are trapped in their homes or in other buildings —hose that still stand —aiting for the siege to end. In the last few days, some have been able to flee.

Thousands of the displaced have been housed in temporary evacuation centers on the outskirts of the city.

Richard C. Paddock reported from Manila, and Felipe Villamor from Marawi.

MAP: Much of Marawi has been decimated in recent weeks. Government forces and militants both seem to be digging in for a long fight. (SOURCE: AERIAL IMAGERY BY GOOGLE. ANJALI SINGHVI/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Document INHT000020170614ed6d0000g



world
Hundreds of Iraqis Sickened by Food Poisoning at Camp Near Mosul

By TIM ARANGO 
826 words
13 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq —ay after day, the miseries of life pile up in camps for civilians driven from their homes by fighting between Iraqi forces and Islamic State militants in Mosul. The searing heat has been made worse by a lack of electricity to power air-conditioners. Hearts ache for missing loved ones. Uncertainty about when, or if, they can ever go home lingers.

Food, though, usually is not the problem, especially during the holy month of Ramadan, when the pious reach deep into their pockets to help the needy.

On Monday at sundown, hundreds of residents of one of the many tent camps that have sprawled across the barren landscape around Mosul gathered for iftar, the evening meal to break the day’ Ramadan fast. They were treated to a meal of chicken, rice, soup, beans and yogurt —aid for by a Qatari charity and prepared by a restaurant in Erbil, the capital of the autonomous Kurdish region.

Within hours, hundreds fell sick, vomiting and suffering from diarrhea. Overnight, until about 4 a.m., ambulances and cars rushed victims to hospitals, said Alaa Muhsin, an ambulance driver from Baghdad who works at the camp.

Because this unfolded in the Middle East, where events are rarely taken at face value, it did not take long for the episode to become bound up in geopolitics. When it was made known that a charity from Qatar, called RAF, paid for the meals, state television in Saudi Arabia, which is in the midst of a diplomatic dispute with Qatar, jumped on it. On Twitter, Saudi Arabia’ state-run Alekhbariya television station showed photographs of sick-looking children languishing on the floor of what appeared to be an overcrowded clinic.

“he authorities in Doha poison displaced people,”n Arabic hashtag in one tweet read, saying the “AF Qatari terrorist association”ad provided the meals. Another tweet sought to implicate another of Saudi Arabia’ foes in the episode, saying there were reports of “poiled Iranian milk.”

RAF was among a number of Qatari organizations, as well as some individuals, that Saudi Arabia and a few other Arab countries designated as linked to terrorism last week as tensions rose between the large Arabian kingdom and its tiny gulf neighbor.

Another conspiracy theory that made the rounds claimed that the Islamic State, which is fighting to maintain control of its last neighborhoods in Mosul, sabotaged the food as a way for some of its fighters, who had posed as displaced civilians, to escape the camps.

But the episode was really just a nasty case of food poisoning, an act of intended generosity that went badly awry.

Breaking protocol at the United Nations-run camp, which calls for any hot meals to be produced inside the camp, and only dry food to be brought in, officials allowed food prepared outside to enter, from, in this case, a restaurant more than an hour’ drive away. The meals, one official said, had been prepared in the afternoon and then driven to the camp, where they sat inside cars in the 100-degree heat for nearly two hours before they were served.

“he meals were prepared in the afternoon,”zgar Obed, a manager at the camp, called Hassan Sham, said in an interview Tuesday afternoon. “he weather was very hot. That was the reason.”r. Obed said RAF had paid for the meals, which were prepared by a restaurant in Erbil called Dunya. Local news reports said that the police were investigating, and that managers of the restaurant had been detained. On Tuesday afternoon, Dunya was padlocked and empty, even though a sign said that during Ramadan it opened at 4 p.m. and stayed open all night.

Earlier on Tuesday, news reports circulated, claiming that two people, including a child, had died from the food poisoning. But later in the day, officials said that was not true, and that no one had died.

“o be honest, we checked all the tents and couldn’ find that anyone died,”r. Obed said.

But plenty were sick, and by the end of the day, a few dozen people remained in hospitals, according to Mr. Obed.

The battle for Mosul, the largest city in either Iraq or Syria to have fallen under control of the Islamic State, began in October. Much of the city has been liberated, including the districts to the east of the Tigris River, which have reclaimed a measure of normalcy. Iraqi forces are now converging on the narrow streets of the old city in west Mosul, where more than 100,000 civilians are stuck. Already, more than 600,000 people have been displaced from west Mosul, where buildings have been flattened by airstrikes and artillery, with much fighting still ahead.

Ben Hubbard contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon.

* On the Mosul Front, a Brutal Battle Against \b ISIS\b0  and Time

Document INHT000020170614ed6d0000d



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Digital Weapons That Worked in Iran Miss Mark Against  ISIS , Officials Say

By DAVID E. SANGER and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,755 words
13 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- America's fast-growing ranks of secret cyberwarriors have in recent years blown up nuclear centrifuges in Iran and turned to computer code and electronic warfare to sabotage North Korea's missile launches, with mixed results.

But since they began training their arsenal of cyberweapons on a more elusive target, internet use by the Islamic State, the results have been a consistent disappointment, American officials say. The effectiveness of the nation's arsenal of cyberweapons hit its limits, they have discovered, against an enemy that exploits the internet largely to recruit, spread propaganda and use encrypted communications, all of which can be quickly reconstituted after American ''mission teams'' freeze their computers or manipulate their data.

It has been more than a year since the Pentagon announced that it was opening a new line of combat against the Islamic State, directing Cyber Command, then six years old, to mount computer-network attacks. The mission was clear: Disrupt the ability of the Islamic State to spread its message, attract new adherents, pay fighters and circulate orders from commanders.

But in the aftermath of the recent attacks in Britain and Iran claimed by the Islamic State, it has become clear that recruitment efforts and communications hubs reappear almost as quickly as they are torn down. This is prompting officials to rethink how cyberwarfare techniques, first designed for fixed targets like nuclear facilities, must be refashioned to fight terrorist groups that are becoming more adept at turning the web into a weapon.

''In general, there was some sense of disappointment in the overall ability for cyberoperations to land a major blow against ISIS,'' or the Islamic State, said Joshua Geltzer, who was the senior director for counterterrorism at the National Security Council until March. ''This is just much harder in practice than people think. It's almost never as cool as getting into a system and thinking you'll see things disappear for good.''

Even one of the rare successes against the Islamic State belongs at least in part to Israel, which was America's partner in the attacks against Iran's nuclear facilities. Top Israeli cyberoperators penetrated a small cell of extremist bombmakers in Syria months ago, the officials said. That was how the United States learned that the terrorist group was working to make explosives that fooled airport X-ray machines and other screening by looking exactly like batteries for laptop computers.

The intelligence was so exquisite that it enabled the United States to understand how the weapons could be detonated, according to two American officials familiar with the operation. The information helped prompt a ban in March on large electronic devices in carry-on luggage on flights from 10 airports in eight Muslim-majority countries to the United States and Britain.

It was also part of the classified intelligence that President Trump is accused of revealing when he met in the Oval Office last month with the Russian foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, and the ambassador to the United States, Sergey I. Kislyak. His disclosure infuriated Israeli officials.

The Islamic State's agenda and tactics make it a particularly tough foe for cyberwarfare. The jihadists use computers and social media not to develop or launch weapons systems but to recruit, raise money and coordinate future attacks.

Such activity is not tied to a single place, as Iran's centrifuges were, and the militants can take advantage of remarkably advanced, low-cost encryption technologies. The Islamic State, officials said, has made tremendous use of Telegram, an encrypted messaging system developed largely in Germany.

The most sophisticated offensive cyberoperation the United States has conducted against the Islamic State sought to sabotage the group's online videos and propaganda beginning in November, according to American officials.

In the endeavor, called Operation Glowing Symphony, the National Security Agency and its military cousin, United States Cyber Command, obtained the passwords of several Islamic State administrator accounts and used them to block out fighters and delete content. It was initially deemed a success because battlefield videos disappeared.

But the results were only temporary. American officials later discovered that the material had been either restored or moved to other servers. That setback was first reported by The Washington Post.

The experience did not surprise veteran cyberoperators, who have learned, through hard experience, that cyberweapons buy time but rarely are a permanent solution. The attacks on Iran's Natanz nuclear facility, begun in the George W. Bush administration and code-named Olympic Games, destroyed roughly 1,000 centrifuges and set back the Iranians by a year or so -- the amount of time is still hotly disputed. But it created some room for a diplomatic negotiation.

The attacks on North Korea's missile program, which President Barack Obama accelerated in 2014, were followed by a remarkable series of missile failures that Mr. Trump noted in a conversation, which leaked recently, with the president of the Philippines. But recent evidence suggests that the North, using a different kind of missile, has overcome at least some of the problems.

The shortcomings of Glowing Symphony illustrated the challenges confronting the government as it seeks to cripple the Islamic State in cyberspace.

The disruptions often require fighters to move to less secure communications, making them more vulnerable. Yet because the Islamic State fighters are so mobile, and their equipment relatively commonplace, reconstituting communications and putting material up on new servers are not difficult. Some of it has been encrypted and stored in the cloud, according to intelligence officials, meaning it can be downloaded in a new place.

''There were folks working hard on this stuff, and there were some accomplishments that had an impact, but there was no steady stream of jaw-dropping stuff coming forward as some expected,'' said Mr. Geltzer, who now teaches law at Georgetown University Law Center. ''There was no sort of shining cybertool.''

The Obama administration's frustration with the lack of success against the Islamic State was one factor in its effort to oust Adm. Michael S. Rogers, the director of the N.S.A. and the commander of Cyber Command, according to several former administration officials. They complained that the organizations were too focused on traditional espionage and highly sophisticated efforts to use networks to blow up or incapacitate adversary facilities, like those in Iran and North Korea.

The former defense secretary Ashton B. Carter traveled to Admiral Rogers's headquarters in Fort Meade, Md., on several occasions, the officials said, to voice his displeasure at the slow pace of the effort and to stoke new initiatives, like Glowing Symphony.

Obama administration officials backed off around the time that President-elect Trump appeared to be considering Admiral Rogers, who had run the Navy's Fleet Cyber Command operations, as director of national intelligence -- and the Trump administration appears to have embraced him.

But the fundamental problem of how to use cybertechniques effectively against the Islamic State remains.

That was evident in the frustration voiced by Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain after the recent attack on London Bridge and in nearby restaurants. She focused on how the internet creates ''a safe space'' for radical ideology, and said that ''the big companies that provide internet-based services'' would have to join the fight more fully.

They already police for gruesome videos and overt recruitment, and a former N.S.A. official noted recently that Cyber Command was also highly attuned to taking down anything that seemed to celebrate the deaths of Americans or other Westerners.

But in the United States, any crackdown is likely to run headlong into First Amendment issues, where the advocacy of an ideology, short of direct incitement to violence, is protected speech.

American officials say that even with the loss of territory in Syria and Iraq, and a broad military effort to disrupt the Islamic State's activities, the militants have proved remarkably resilient.

''The global reach of ISIS right now is largely intact,'' Nicholas Rasmussen, the director of the National Counterterrorism Center, said in a speech in Washington last month. ''The group also continues to publish thousands of pieces of official propaganda and to use online apps to organize its supporters and inspire attacks.''

Mr. Rasmussen's assessment came a year after some of the best of the newly created cyber mission teams joined more traditional military units in the fight. The teams are the cyber equivalent of Special Forces teams, dispatched around the world to work on defending Pentagon networks or launching cyberattacks in coordination with more traditional operations.

Cyberoperations are also closely integrated with Iraqi ground combat and allied air missions to maximize the impact on Islamic State fighters hunkered down in the extremist group's two major strongholds: Mosul, Iraq, and Raqqa, Syria.

''We're able to either blind them so they can't see or make sure they can't hear us,'' Lt. Gen. Jeffrey L. Harrigian, the allied air commander, said in an interview at his headquarters in Qatar in December. ''There are things we are doing both with space and cyber that are being effectively synchronized to achieve important effects even in Mosul and Raqqa.''

Lt. Gen. Sean MacFarland, who was the top American military commander in Iraq until August, said specialists at Cyber Command had assisted his troops in ''disrupting enemy command and control during our offensive operations, and that support improved over the time I was in command.''

Other senior military officials said the number and quality of tools in the United States' cyberarsenal against the Islamic State had expanded over the past year. Some of the effects are employed repeatedly over days. Locking Islamic State propaganda specialists out of their accounts -- or using the coordinates of their phones and computers to target them for a drone attack -- is now standard operating procedure.

General Harrigian said allied countries were also employing cyberweapons and techniques against the Islamic State that the United States did not. Without identifying specific countries or skills, he said the allies ''can do things we can't do -- some cyberactivities that they have authorities to execute that we do not.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

The National Security Agency's headquarters in Fort Meade, Md. An N.S.A. program to delete ISIS material was initially deemed a success, but the content reappeared on other servers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM LO SCALZO/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) 

Document NYTF000020170613ed6d0004q



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Combat Deaths in Afghanistan Tied to  ISIS  Fight

By ROD NORDLAND; Fahim Abed and Jawad Sukhanyar contributed reporting from Kabul, and Khalid Alokozay from Jalalabad, Afghanistan. 
1,124 words
12 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDKABUL, Afghanistan -- All six of the American soldiers who have died in combat in Afghanistan this year were S involved in the fight against the Islamic State group in its stronghold in a small eastern area of the country.

Five of the six may have been killed by their own side, according to reports from American and Afghan military officials.

The casualty rate shows an increased concentration on fighting the local branch of the extremist group, known here as the Islamic State in Khorasan, which two years ago was dismissed as a small breakaway faction, numbering in the low hundreds, of the much more powerful Taliban.

Since March, the United States military has said that joint Afghan-American forces have killed or captured hundreds of Islamic State fighters.

Last year, one American soldier was killed in combat in Nangarhar Province, the eastern area that includes the Achin District -- the Islamic State's stronghold -- in mountains close to the Pakistani border. In all, nine American soldiers were killed in 2016, four of them Special Operations forces in combat roles. The others were on bases or in support roles.

The deaths on Saturday of three American soldiers -- a fourth was wounded and transported out of Afghanistan -- were the result of a ''green on blue'' attack, or insider attack, by an Afghan commando, said Jawed Salim, a spokesman for the Afghan Army Special Forces command.

But Afghan officials were skeptical of a claim by the Taliban that the commando had infiltrated the unit intending to carry out the attack.

''It is part of their propaganda war,'' said Gen. Mohammad Radmanish, a spokesman for the Ministry of Defense. ''We need to investigate what really happened here.''

The attacker was killed by the Americans, who returned fire, Afghan officials said.

The United States military has not yet commented in any detail on Saturday's attack, and the victims' names have not been released pending notification of next of kin. The military rarely releases Special Operations details.

Although the United States military is ostensibly on an ''advise and assist'' mission to aid Afghan forces, the Obama and Trump administrations have granted wide latitude for Special Operations forces to participate in Afghan combat missions.

Afghan officials confirmed that the latest deaths took place in the midst of an operation against the Islamic State, despite the Taliban's claim of responsibility.

Vice President Mike Pence, speaking at an event in Milwaukee on Saturday, said he and President Trump had been briefed on the deaths.

''When heroes fall, Americans grieve, and our thoughts and prayers are with the families of these American heroes,'' Mr. Pence said.

The first American killed in Afghanistan this year, Staff Sgt. Mark R. De Alencar, 37, of Edgewood, Md., was also involved in an operation against the Islamic State in Nangarhar Province, according to a statement from the Defense Department.

A much-decorated veteran of the Army in Iraq, Sergeant De Alencar earned his Green Beret in 2016, according to Military Times.

He ''died April 8 in Nangarhar Province, Afghanistan, of injuries sustained when his unit came in contact with enemy forces using small-arms fire during combat operations,'' the Defense Department said.

Just over two weeks later, on April 26, two Army Rangers were killed in Achin District during a major operation against the Islamic State.

The Pentagon spokesman, Capt. Jeff Davis, said they might have been killed by friendly fire, presumably from close air support during the fight.

''We are investigating the circumstances of the combat deaths of the two Army Rangers in the beginning of what was an intense three-hour firefight,'' Captain Davis said.

The military identified the men as Sgt. Joshua P. Rodgers, 22, of Bloomington, Ill., and Sgt. Cameron H. Thomas, 23, of Kettering, Ohio.

Ten days later, the American military commander in Afghanistan, Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., said the operation had also killed the ''emir'' of the local Islamic State in Khorasan, Sheikh Abdul Hasib.

''This successful joint operation is another important step in our relentless campaign to defeat ISIS-K in 2017,'' General Nicholson said, using the military's shorthand for the local Islamic State affiliate. ''This is the second ISIS-K emir we have killed in nine months, along with dozens of their leaders and hundreds of their fighters.''

He said that Sheikh Hasib had been responsible for a deadly attack in March on a military hospital in Kabul, in which militants killed more than 50 people, many of them patients.

Between the two fatal episodes in April, the United States military dropped a GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb, known as the mother of all bombs, the largest nonnuclear bomb ever deployed, on what it said was an Islamic State tunnel complex in Achin District.

It was unclear how much damage the 22,000-pound bomb caused, and Afghan officials offered no proof for their assertion that 96 militants had been killed and that buildings had been destroyed in a two-mile radius. Islamic State radio disputed the claims.

The three soldiers killed on Saturday were fighting about a mile from where the bomb had been dropped, Afghan officials said.

While the Islamic State appears to have ousted the Taliban from much of Achin District, there have been only scattered reports of Islamic State activity in other parts of the country, with the Taliban still the dominant insurgent force nationally.

American Special Operations troops are involved in joint operations with Afghan forces against the Taliban in southern Helmand Province and in northern Kunduz Province, but so far this year, no Americans have died in those areas.

Yet in two episodes in March, according to Afghan officials, a total of 11 American soldiers were wounded by Afghan soldiers in green-on-blue attacks in Helmand.

Correction: June 13, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Monday about American combat deaths in Afghanistan referred incorrectly to some of the six soldiers who have been killed so far in 2017. The three who died in an apparent insider attack on Saturday were Army paratroopers; the three who died in April, not all six, were members of the Special Operations forces.

American soldiers in a campaign against the Islamic State in the Khot District of Nangarhar Province, Afghanistan, in April. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GHULAMULLAH HABIBI/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY); A military honor guard with the coffin of Sgt. Joshua P. Rodgers, 22, who was killed in a raid against the Islamic State. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID PROEBER/THE PANTAGRAPH, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170613ed6c0000m



EDITORIAL
Editorial Desk; SECTA
Shunning Gun Control, Helping Terrorists

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
507 words
12 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
20
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDWhen knife wielding terrorists struck in London this month, President Trump expressed odd satisfaction about one aspect of the carnage.

''Do you notice we are not having a gun debate right now?'' he tweeted. ''That's because they used knives and a truck!''

The president's triumphal note completely overlooked the fact that Britain, unlike the United States, settled its gun debate emphatically decades ago in favor of civilian safety and tight controls. The difference in the two nations' gun homicides is stark. The gun death rate in America is 25 times higher than other high-income nations, like Britain.

As the candidate of the National Rifle Association, however, Mr. Trump obviously prefers to discourage any debate in this country about the lethal role played by easily obtainable guns in the terrorist threat that preoccupies him.

In his obligation to protect the public, President Trump would do well to note that the nation's loophole-ridden gun laws are hailed by the Islamic State as a pro-mayhem advantage. They are described in how-to detail in the propaganda magazine Rumiyah that ISIS publishes for potential terrorists.

There, readers are informed, entirely accurately, that in America identification requirements are virtually nonexistent for buying military-style weapons from private sellers online or at weekend gun shows where there is no federal jurisdiction.

''With approximately 5,000 gun shows taking place annually within the United States, the acquisition of firearms becomes a very easy matter,'' the magazine says, enthused.

Britain first banned the semiautomatic guns and magazine-fed firearms favored by terrorists and other mass shooters amid a wave of national grief and resolve after 16 people were murdered in a shooting spree in Hungerford in 1987. The laws were strengthened nine years later after 16 5- and 6-year-old children were shot to death in a Dunblane schoolhouse.

Comparable gun assaults in this country have been met by an outraged public but craven politicians have yielded to the gun lobby's propaganda.

Having clumsily raised the issue, Mr. Trump needs to know that in the years since Britain held a national gun debate and enacted laws for public safety, it has suffered only one mass shooting involving four or more victims. In this country, the F.B.I. has found the rate of such deadly sprees has more than doubled since 2000, to more than 16 a year. Increasingly, these involve the assault-style weapons whose absence Mr. Trump, inadvertently, celebrated in his tweet.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Correction: June 13, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An editorial on June 12 about terrorists' trying to take advantage of more lenient gun control in the United States misstated identification requirements for buying guns online or at gun shows. Private sellers are not required to follow federal mandates on background checks of buyers. Dealers must do so.

Document NYTF000020170613ed6c0000q



Editorial
Opinion
Shunning Gun Control, Helping Terrorists

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
507 words
12 June 2017
09:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

When knife wielding terrorists struck in London this month, President Trump expressed odd satisfaction about one aspect of the carnage.

“o you notice we are not having a gun debate right now?”e tweeted. “hat’ because they used knives and a truck!”

The president’ triumphal note completely overlooked the fact that Britain, unlike the United States, settled its gun debate emphatically decades ago in favor of civilian safety and tight controls. The difference in the two nations’un homicides is stark. The gun death rate in America is 25 times higher than other high-income nations, like Britain.

As the candidate of the National Rifle Association, however, Mr. Trump obviously prefers to discourage any debate in this country about the lethal role played by easily obtainable guns in the terrorist threat that preoccupies him.

In his obligation to protect the public, President Trump would do well to note that the nation’ loophole-ridden gun laws are hailed by the Islamic State as a pro-mayhem advantage. They are described in how-to detail in the propaganda magazine Rumiyah that ISIS publishes for potential terrorists.

There, readers are informed, entirely accurately, that in America identification requirements are virtually nonexistent for buying military-style weapons from private sellers online or at weekend gun shows where there is no federal jurisdiction.

“ith approximately 5,000 gun shows taking place annually within the United States, the acquisition of firearms becomes a very easy matter,”he magazine says, enthused.

Britain first banned the semiautomatic guns and magazine-fed firearms favored by terrorists and other mass shooters amid a wave of national grief and resolve after 16 people were murdered in a shooting spree in Hungerford in 1987. The laws were strengthened nine years later after 16 5- and 6-year-old children were shot to death in a Dunblane schoolhouse.

Comparable gun assaults in this country have been met by an outraged public but craven politicians have yielded to the gun lobby’ propaganda.

Having clumsily raised the issue, Mr. Trump needs to know that in the years since Britain held a national gun debate and enacted laws for public safety, it has suffered only one mass shooting involving four or more victims. In this country, the F.B.I. has found the rate of such deadly sprees has more than doubled since 2000, to more than 16 a year. Increasingly, these involve the assault-style weapons whose absence Mr. Trump, inadvertently, celebrated in his tweet.

Correction: June 13, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An editorial on June 12 about terrorists’rying to take advantage of more lenient gun control in the United States misstated identification requirements for buying guns online or at gun shows. Private sellers are not required to follow federal mandates on background checks of buyers. Dealers must do so.

President Trump speaking at a National Rifle Association event in April. | Al Drago/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170612ed6c001us



opinion
Shunning Gun Control, Helping Terrorists; Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
425 words
12 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

When knife wielding terrorists struck in London this month, President Trump expressed odd satisfaction about one aspect of the carnage.

“o you notice we are not having a gun debate right now?”e tweeted. “hat’ because they used knives and a truck!”

The president’ triumphal note completely overlooked the fact that Britain, unlike the United States, settled its gun debate emphatically decades ago in favor of civilian safety and tight controls. The difference in the two nations’un homicides is stark. The gun death rate in America is 25 times higher than other high-income nations, like Britain.

As the candidate of the National Rifle Association, however, Mr. Trump obviously prefers to discourage any debate in this country about the lethal role played by easily obtainable guns in the terrorist threat that preoccupies him.

In his obligation to protect the public, President Trump would do well to note that the nation’ loophole-ridden gun laws are hailed by the Islamic State as a pro-mayhem advantage. They are described in how-to detail in the propaganda magazine Rumiyah that ISIS publishes for potential terrorists.

There, readers are informed, entirely accurately, that in America identification requirements are virtually nonexistent for buying military-style weapons from private sellers online or at weekend gun shows where there is no federal jurisdiction.

“ith approximately 5,000 gun shows taking place annually within the United States, the acquisition of firearms becomes a very easy matter,”he magazine says, enthused.

Britain first banned the semiautomatic guns and magazine-fed firearms favored by terrorists and other mass shooters amid a wave of national grief and resolve after 16 people were murdered in a shooting spree in Hungerford in 1987. The laws were strengthened nine years later after 16 5- and 6-year-old children were shot to death in a Dunblane schoolhouse.

Comparable gun assaults in this country have been met by an outraged public but craven politicians have yielded to the gun lobby’ propaganda.

Having clumsily raised the issue, Mr. Trump needs to know that in the years since Britain held a national gun debate and enacted laws for public safety, it has suffered only one mass shooting involving four or more victims. In this country, the F.B.I. has found the rate of such deadly sprees has more than doubled since 2000, to more than 16 a year. Increasingly, these involve the assault-style weapons whose absence Mr. Trump, inadvertently, celebrated in his tweet.

Document INHT000020170612ed6c0000l



World; Asia Pacific
Chinese Couple Missing in Pakistan Are Killed

By SALMAN MASOOD 
536 words
12 June 2017
22:56
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan —wo Chinese citizens abducted last month in southwestern Pakistan have been killed, a senior Pakistani official said on Monday, though he did not indicate who was responsible for their killings.

The official, Interior Minister Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan, said in a statement that the Chinese couple —ee Zing Yang, 24, and Meng Li Si, 26 —ad been kidnapped in the city of Quetta on May 24 by unknown gunmen.

He said they were in the country on legally issued business visas, but he suggested there were reports that they may have been proselytizing in an area of predominantly Muslim Pakistan where Islamist militants are active.

Last week, the Islamic State claimed that its fighters had kidnapped and killed Mr. Lee and Ms. Meng, according to statement issued by the extremist group’ news agency, Amaq.

The presence of the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL, in Pakistan is a delicate subject for the government, which has long downplayed the group’ activities in southwest Pakistan despite new attacks.

Last month, the Islamic State said it had carried out a suicide bombing in Mastung, in the same province where the Chinese couple was abducted, that killed at least 25 people and injured 30, including Abdul Ghafoor Haideri, deputy chairman of the Pakistani Senate.

At the beginning of this month, Pakistani troops operating in the same area killed 12 militants with an extremist group seeking to establish an ISIS foothold in the province, the military said.

It was after that operation that ISIS said it had killed the Chinese couple, though Pakistani military officials put pressure on the news media not to publicize the ISIS claim until the government could confirm the couple were dead. Almost all newspapers in the country, many of which observe self-censorship when it comes to reporting on sensitive national security issues, complied with the military’ orders.

The killing of the Chinese couple comes at a time when China is expanding its outreach in Pakistan under a multibillion dollar economic cooperation initiative known as One Belt, One Road, which includes joint infrastructure and industrial projects.

A number of Chinese have been traveling to Pakistan for this initiative, also known as the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor. There are growing concerns over the security of foreigners working on the venture.

Mr. Khan, the interior minister, said in his statement on Monday that the two Chinese who were killed had been acting as missionaries, even though they were in the country on business visas, ostensibly to learn Urdu at a technology institute owned by a Korean businessman in Quetta.

The minister said that while the government was trying to ensure security for foreigners in Pakistan, the “isiting foreigners were equally bound to abide by the terms and conditions of their visas and inform local authorities about their movements and activities.”

At least 70,000 visas were issued to Chinese nationals last year, according to the Pakistani interior ministry. “his year, in the first five months, at least four to five thousand visas have already been issued to the Chinese,”aid Sarfraz Hussain, a spokesman for the Interior Ministry.

Document NYTFEED020170612ed6c007sl



World; Asia Pacific
Roadside Bomb Hits American Convoy in Afghanistan

By KHALID ALOKOZAY and ROD NORDLAND 
326 words
12 June 2017
08:45
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

JALALABAD, Afghanistan —hree civilians were killed after a roadside bomb hit a convoy of American soldiers early Monday in Nangarhar province in eastern Afghanistan, according to Afghan officials in the area. The civilians were killed when soldiers opened fire after the explosion, according to Attaullah Khogyani, a spokesman for the governor of Nangarhar.

The United States military said that none of its personnel had been wounded. It added that though there was an exchange of gunfire after the bombing, it had received no official reports of civilian casualties.

“e take civilian casualties very seriously, and all allegations are thoroughly investigated,”he military said in a news release.

All six of the American soldiers who have been killed in Afghanistan so far in 2017 have died in Nangarhar province while fighting the Islamic State. The most recent three died on Saturday in an apparent insider attack. They were identified on Monday as soldiers from the 101st Airborne Division: Sgt. Eric M. Houck, 25, of Baltimore; Sgt. William M. Bays, 29, of Barstow, Calif.; and Cpl. Dillon C. Baldridge, 22, of Youngsville, N.C.

A spokesman for the Taliban, Zabihullah Mujahid, claimed responsibility for the attack on Saturday, which took place in Ghanikhel district, bordering on the Islamic State stronghold of Achin district.

Correction: June 12, 2017, Monday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article described incorrectly the American soldiers killed in Afghanistan so far in 2017. Three of them belonged to the Special Operations forces, not six (the other three were Army paratroopers).

* 3 U.S. Soldiers Are Killed and a 4th Is Wounded by an Afghan Soldier

* All 6 U.S. Combat Deaths in Afghanistan in 2017 Were in Fight Against \b ISIS\b0 

An American military patrol in Nangarhar Province, Afghanistan, in April. | Noorullah Shirzada/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170612ed6c001p5



The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
‘he Daily’ It’ All About ‘ope’

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
574 words
12 June 2017
11:47
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device : On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

James Comey says he took it as a command. President Trump says he never even said it. We discuss the one word that an obstruction of justice case could turn on.

On today’ episode:

•Adam Liptak, who covers the Supreme Court, unpacks the word “ope”nd what it could mean in an obstruction of justice case.

•he U.S. military has waged cyberattacks on Iran’ nuclear program and North Korea’ missile systems. So why is it struggling to hack into the low-tech computers of the Islamic State? David E. Sanger discusses American cyberattacks on ISIS.

Background reading:

•n explanation of some of the nuances of obstruction of justice cases, including several examples showing that it is possible to obstruct justice by saying, “ hope.”

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if that isn’ enough, we can even text.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

On your iPhone or iPad:

Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “he Daily.”

Once you’e on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “ubscribe”utton to have new episodes sent to your phone free.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

On your Android phone or tablet:

You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, senior producer; Andy Mills, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director; Pedro Rosado, studio manager.

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

President Trump’ exact words to James Comey. the former F.B.I. director, are being closely parsed, with special attention to the word “ope.” Hilary Swift for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170612ed6c002bd



NEWS ANALYSIS
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Duterte, Focused on Drugs in Philippines, Ignored Rise of  ISIS 

By RICHARD C. PADDOCK; Sol Vanzi contributed reporting. 
1,664 words
12 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA -- It was classic bravado from the Philippines' tough-guy president, Rodrigo Duterte.

The Maute Group, a militant Islamist band fighting government troops near the southern Philippines city of Marawi last year, had asked for a cease-fire.

The president rejected the overture.

''They said that they will go down upon Marawi to burn the place,'' Mr. Duterte recounted in December. ''And I said, 'Go ahead, do it.'''

He got his wish.

Hundreds of militants belonging to the Maute Group and its allies fighting under the black flag of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, seized Marawi three weeks ago, leading to a battle with the Philippine armed forces and the biggest test yet of Mr. Duterte's leadership during his tumultuous first year in office.

A president who has focused on a deadly antidrug campaign that has claimed the lives of thousands of Filipinos seems to have been caught unprepared for a militant threat that has been festering in the south for years.

''The government has largely been in denial about the growth of ISIS and affiliated groups,'' said Zachary M. Abuza, a professor at the National War College in Washington who specializes in Southeast Asian security issues. ''Duterte has been preoccupied with his campaign of gutting the rule of law by using police and other security forces for the extrajudicial killing of drug pushers.''

Government forces have been unable to dislodge the militants despite deploying ground troops and bombing the city of 200,000 people from the air. More than 200 people have been killed, including 24 civilians, 58 soldiers and police officers and at least 138 militants, according to the Philippine military.

Tens of thousands of civilians have fled, and much of the city center lies in ruins. The military says that it has cleared 90 percent of the city but that militants remain in three neighborhoods in the center, where they are mixed in with hundreds of civilians.

Mr. Duterte has declared 60 days of martial law for the southern island of Mindanao, which includes Marawi and his hometown, Davao City. He has twice set deadlines for troops to retake Marawi, the country's largest predominantly Muslim city, but each deadline has passed with the battle still raging.

On Friday, Brig. Gen. Restituto Padilla predicted that the government would retake Marawi by Monday, Philippines Independence Day. On Saturday, 13 Philippine marines were killed in a clash with militants there.

The militants' seizure of the city, a bold attempt to establish an Islamic State caliphate in Southeast Asia, is a significant advance for the Middle East-based terrorist group as well as an apparent reordering of the militant threat in the southern Philippines.

For the first time, it puts the Philippines on the map with failed states such as Libya and Afghanistan as places where Islamic State allies have sought to seize territory for a caliphate, giving the group another regional flash point in its effort to spread its influence globally.

The Islamic State has urged fighters who cannot reach Syria to join the jihad in the Philippines instead, said Sidney Jones, director of the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict. Fighters from Indonesia, Malaysia, Chechnya, Yemen and Saudi Arabia were among those killed in the battle for Marawi.

Mindanao has long been a hotbed of insurgencies, with numerous armed groups operating outside government control. Until the siege at Marawi, the best-known internationally was Abu Sayyaf, an ostensibly Islamist group that specialized in kidnapping for ransom, turning Southeast Asia into the world's piracy capital, edging out the Horn of Africa.

The Marawi siege also heralds the rise of Isnilon Hapilon, a longtime leader of Abu Sayyaf who had grown more ideologically minded over the years. Last year, Mr. Hapilon, 51, was named by the Islamic State as its emir in Southeast Asia. Previously based on the island of Basilan, he is on the F.B.I.'s list of most-wanted terrorists, and the United States has offered a $5 million reward for his capture.

Various factions have come together behind Mr. Hapilon, notably the Maute Group, led by the brothers Omar and Abdullah Maute. Educated in the Middle East, the Mautes are based in the Marawi area and recently accepted Mr. Hapilon's leadership as emir.

The Mautes are believed responsible for bombing a market in Davao City in September that killed 15.

Mr. Duterte is the first president from Mindanao, and he ran last year as the candidate who could bring peace to the region. The bombing of his hometown may have inspired his angry challenge to the Mautes in December.

''It's the usual Duterte brand of bravado,'' said Roilo Golez, a former national security adviser to President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, who left office in 2010. ''It's a way of intimidating the opposition. It works most of the time.''

It hasn't with the Islamists in Mindanao.

After a clash between his military and Abu Sayyaf in April, Mr. Duterte suggested that the way to stop the militants was to eat them. ''Make me mad,'' he taunted. ''Get me a terrorist. Give me salt and vinegar. I will eat his liver.''

In May, the Philippine military got a tip that Mr. Hapilon had arrived in Marawi to join up with the Maute brothers. When soldiers raided the house where Mr. Hapilon was believed to be, hoping to capture him and claim the $5 million reward, they were surprised to find dozens of well-armed militants arrayed against them.

A video later recovered by the military and published by The Associated Press shows the militant leaders plotting their takeover of Marawi days before the military learned of Mr. Hapilon's presence there. Hundreds of fighters who had gathered in preparation for seizing the city quickly put their plan into effect, burning schools and churches, taking hostages and taking over central Marawi.

Mr. Duterte's declaration of martial law helped lead to the capture of Cayamora Maute, the father of the Maute brothers, along with other family members on Tuesday at a military checkpoint in Davao City. Some fear that the temporary martial law order in Mindanao could be expanded nationwide, an idea Mr. Duterte has openly toyed with so that he could use the military in his antidrug campaign.

''There is a sense of dread and fear that this will build support for martial law,'' said Richard Javad Heydarian, a political analyst and author of the forthcoming book ''Duterte's Rise.'' ''This could strengthen the feeling of isolation by the Muslim minority.''

Muslims make up only about 5 percent of the country's population over all but a larger proportion, estimated at 20 to 40 percent, on Mindanao.

Historical grievances among the Muslim Moro people there, widespread poverty and large lawless areas have helped create an opportunity for the Islamic State. A peace process pursued by Mr. Duterte's predecessor, President Benigno S. Aquino III, faltered in 2015 and has remained deadlocked under Mr. Duterte.

''It was not the spread of ISIS in Iraq and Syria that fueled ISIS cells in the Philippines, but the collapse of the peace process,'' Mr. Abuza, of the National War College, said.

The growing threat in the south is likely to compel Mr. Duterte to improve his relations with the United States, a process that had already begun with the election of President Trump.

Mr. Duterte has raged against the United States for daring to criticize his antidrug campaign and, when President Barack Obama was in office, called for a ''separation'' from Washington. But Mr. Trump has shown a willingness to overlook the killings, and has praised Mr. Duterte for doing an ''unbelievable job on the drug problem.''

Leaders of the Philippine armed forces prevailed on Mr. Duterte not to reduce military cooperation, including a longstanding United States program to provide training, equipment and intelligence to fight terrorism. Since 2001, the United States has maintained a rotating force of 50 to 100 troops in the southern Philippines to combat Abu Sayyaf.

On Sunday, Mr. Duterte said he never asked the United States for help in Marawi, and it was a surprise to him when American Special Forces arrived to assist the Philippine military.

The United States Embassy said on Friday that American personnel were helping as part of a military relationship with the Philippines that ''remains robust and multifaceted.'' Emma Nagy, a spokeswoman for the embassy in Manila, said, ''U.S. Special Forces have been providing support and assistance in the southern Philippines for many years, at the request of several different Filipino administrations.''

Whether or not the military can retake Marawi by its new deadline, the rebellion in the south is still far from over. The audacity of the rebel takeover, even if it ultimately fails, will probably draw recruits from across the region, including members of other Islamist groups still disaffected and dissatisfied with a moribund peace process.

''If Duterte doesn't deal with that, then this whole problem is going to fester for a very long time,'' Mr. Abuza said. The ''ungoverned space'' on Mindanao, he said, ''is a regional security threat, not just a Philippine security threat.''

Security forces last week in Marawi, Philippines, which was seized three weeks ago by hundreds of Islamist militants. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JES AZNAR/GETTY IMAGES); President Rodrigo Duterte, left, at a funeral on Sunday for a marine killed by militants in Marawi, on the southern island of Mindanao. Right, evacuees waited for aid on Mindanao, where Mr. Duterte has declared 60 days of martial law. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TED ALJIBE/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES; NOEL CELIS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES); A Muslim boy was buried on Friday after he was killed by a stray bullet. Tens of thousands of civilians have fled Marawi, and much of the city center is in ruins. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROMEO RANOCO/REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020170612ed6c00052



Q. AND A.
The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
An Observer Inside the Terrifying World of Jihad

By JOHN WILLIAMS 
1,147 words
12 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

In the opening pages of her new book, ''I Was Told to Come Alone,'' the journalist Souad Mekhennet recounts setting up a meeting with an Islamic State leader in Turkey in 2014. ''I told my contacts with ISIS that I would ask whatever questions I wanted and that I wouldn't clear quotes or show them the article before it was published,'' she writes. ''I also needed their guarantee that I wouldn't be kidnapped.''

How she was in a position to request such harrowing meetings, and what happened during them, is all part of this memoir, which takes readers behind the scenes of Mekhennet's reporting on Islamist militancy for The Washington Post, where she is now a national security correspondent, The New York Times and other outlets. ''As a Muslim woman of Moroccan-Turkish descent, born and raised in Germany, I am an outlier among the journalists covering global jihad,'' she writes.

Below she discusses why writing about herself was a challenge, how she approaches neutrality as a reporter and more.

When did you first get the idea to write this book?

When I was sure it was time to write something was during the so-called Arab Spring, when some people had the assumption that the whole threat of jihadism was gone, and I felt that we would see another wave coming. I also had the impression that people were wondering, where does this kind of radicalization come from, and what are the reasons for it? I have been covering this since Sept. 11, and since Sept. 11 different people ask me all the time: ''Why do those people hate us so much? What is it like to be in the world of jihad?''

What's the most surprising thing you learned while writing it?

How difficult it was for me to write about myself in the moment, explaining to readers how I felt about certain situations, the fear, the threat, the moment where you get back to your hotel room or home and you're trying to deal with what you've seen out there. I lived through it again. I lived many moments I tried to forget, moments where I found myself in danger, moments where I found myself in the car with Taliban commanders or ISIS commanders. Later, I realized how dangerous those situations were.

I did keep a diary, which is one of the reasons I was able to describe some moments and interactions very precisely. But it was different and difficult for me to take those things that I wrote down for myself and offer it to the world. To be part of the story was something absolutely new.

One of the reasons I have access into the world of jihad, and how I was able to meet people on the most wanted list, is because I'm trying to stay in the middle of everything. I'm trying to stay neutral, even if that's not always easy. Some people believe reporters should take sides. I believe it's far more important to gain access to understand how those people think and where the hatred comes from.

I didn't grow up as a Muslim with this kind of interpretation of ideology, the kind of interpretation groups like Al Qaeda and ISIS are offering people. When I sit with someone in Europe, telling me about how they were radicalized there, when they're telling me about moments where they don't belong, I understand that.

I grew up with parents and grandparents who equipped me not to fall for easy answers. But I do understand the processes much better given my own background. In my work life, I'm staying out of the story. In this book, I'm telling the reader how it was to meet people, how it felt when I was threatened from various sides. I'm revealing a lot of myself.

In what way is the book you wrote different from the book you set out to write?

When I proposed the book, there was no Paris attack chapter; there was no chapter on the so-called refugee crisis in Germany. The saddest part is that the epilogue was not supposed to be a chapter where I describe how it felt for me, my cousin and his wife to lose a family member. Their son was killed in an attack in Munich last year. He was 14. Certain chapters were added or changed given the circumstances, and what I lived through.

It was a very challenging writing process because I was reporting on current events while I was working on the book. I was sent to Munich because we thought it was an attack by some ISIS fighter or returnee. When I left to cover this, I learned that my relative was missing. During the night we learned that he was one of the victims.

Basically I had to tell The Washington Post, I can no longer report here because now my own family is part of the story, so I can no longer be a neutral reporter.

Who is a creative person (not a writer) who has influenced you and your work?

It was a movie that led to my decision to become a journalist: ''All the President's Men.'' I don't know if Robert Redford played a role in this, but that movie had a huge impact on me when I was in my teenage years in Germany and was looking for what to do. I thought of becoming an actor -- which my parents weren't happy about. But now today, after all the places I've been and the people I've interviewed, they sometimes say, ''We wish you'd become an actress.''

I forced my parents to see this movie. I took scissors and cut out the black-and-white photograph in the newspaper ad that showed Robert Redford and Dustin Hoffman in the newsroom. I put this picture on my door in my room and told my parents, ''That's what I want to do.''

Persuade someone to read ''I Was Told to Come Alone'' in less than 50 words.

A combination of memoir and reportage, this book gives the reader unique access behind the lines of jihad. This is a book to understand what drives people into the hands of recruiters, and the nature of the threat that is facing the West today.

This interview has been condensed and edited.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

The journalist Souad Mekhennet, right, who gives readers a behind-the-scenes take on her meetings with Islamic State leaders in her memoir, reflects on the challenge of writing about herself. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BEN KILB) 

Document NYTF000020170612ed6c0004r



Q. and A.
Arts
Tell Us 5 Things About Your Book: Inside the World of Jihad

By JOHN WILLIAMS 
1,102 words
11 June 2017
21:31
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In the opening pages of her new book, “ Was Told to Come Alone,”he journalist Souad Mekhennet recounts setting up a meeting with an Islamic State leader in Turkey in 2014. “ told my contacts with ISIS that I would ask whatever questions I wanted and that I wouldn’ clear quotes or show them the article before it was published,”he writes. “ also needed their guarantee that I wouldn’ be kidnapped.”

How she was in a position to request such harrowing meetings, and what happened during them, is all part of this memoir, which takes readers behind the scenes of Mekhennet’ reporting on Islamist militancy for The Washington Post, where she is now a national security correspondent, The New York Times and other outlets. “s a Muslim woman of Moroccan-Turkish descent, born and raised in Germany, I am an outlier among the journalists covering global jihad,”he writes.

Below she discusses why writing about herself was a challenge, how she approaches neutrality as a reporter and more.

When did you first get the idea to write this book?

When I was sure it was time to write something was during the so-called Arab Spring, when some people had the assumption that the whole threat of jihadism was gone, and I felt that we would see another wave coming. I also had the impression that people were wondering, where does this kind of radicalization come from, and what are the reasons for it? I have been covering this since Sept. 11, and since Sept. 11 different people ask me all the time: “hy do those people hate us so much? What is it like to be in the world of jihad?”

What’ the most surprising thing you learned while writing it?

How difficult it was for me to write about myself in the moment, explaining to readers how I felt about certain situations, the fear, the threat, the moment where you get back to your hotel room or home and you’e trying to deal with what you’e seen out there. I lived through it again. I lived many moments I tried to forget, moments where I found myself in danger, moments where I found myself in the car with Taliban commanders or ISIS commanders. Later, I realized how dangerous those situations were.

I did keep a diary, which is one of the reasons I was able to describe some moments and interactions very precisely. But it was different and difficult for me to take those things that I wrote down for myself and offer it to the world. To be part of the story was something absolutely new.

One of the reasons I have access into the world of jihad, and how I was able to meet people on the most wanted list, is because I’ trying to stay in the middle of everything. I’ trying to stay neutral, even if that’ not always easy. Some people believe reporters should take sides. I believe it’ far more important to gain access to understand how those people think and where the hatred comes from.

I didn’ grow up as a Muslim with this kind of interpretation of ideology, the kind of interpretation groups like Al Qaeda and ISIS are offering people. When I sit with someone in Europe, telling me about how they were radicalized there, when they’e telling me about moments where they don’ belong, I understand that.

I grew up with parents and grandparents who equipped me not to fall for easy answers. But I do understand the processes much better given my own background. In my work life, I’ staying out of the story. In this book, I’ telling the reader how it was to meet people, how it felt when I was threatened from various sides. I’ revealing a lot of myself.

In what way is the book you wrote different from the book you set out to write?

When I proposed the book, there was no Paris attack chapter; there was no chapter on the so-called refugee crisis in Germany. The saddest part is that the epilogue was not supposed to be a chapter where I describe how it felt for me, my cousin and his wife to lose a family member. Their son was killed in an attack in Munich last year. He was 14. Certain chapters were added or changed given the circumstances, and what I lived through.

It was a very challenging writing process because I was reporting on current events while I was working on the book. I was sent to Munich because we thought it was an attack by some ISIS fighter or returnee. When I left to cover this, I learned that my relative was missing. During the night we learned that he was one of the victims.

Basically I had to tell The Washington Post, I can no longer report here because now my own family is part of the story, so I can no longer be a neutral reporter.

Who is a creative person (not a writer) who has influenced you and your work?

It was a movie that led to my decision to become a journalist: “ll the President’ Men.” I don’ know if Robert Redford played a role in this, but that movie had a huge impact on me when I was in my teenage years in Germany and was looking for what to do. I thought of becoming an actor —hich my parents weren’ happy about. But now today, after all the places I’e been and the people I’e interviewed, they sometimes say, “e wish you’ become an actress.”

I forced my parents to see this movie. I took scissors and cut out the black-and-white photograph in the newspaper ad that showed Robert Redford and Dustin Hoffman in the newsroom. I put this picture on my door in my room and told my parents, “hat’ what I want to do.”

Persuade someone to read “ Was Told to Come Alone”n less than 50 words.

A combination of memoir and reportage, this book gives the reader unique access behind the lines of jihad. This is a book to understand what drives people into the hands of recruiters, and the nature of the threat that is facing the West today.

This interview has been condensed and edited.

The journalist Souad Mekhennet. | Ben Kilb 

Document NYTFEED020170611ed6b00335



Foreign Desk; SECTA
After Raqqa, Fates of  ISIS  and Syria Rest on a Bigger Battle

By ANNE BARNARD; Reporting was contributed by Eric Schmitt from Washington; Hwaida Saad and Nada Homsi from Beirut; Maher Samaan from Paris; and a Times employee from Damascus, Syria. 
1,639 words
11 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- American-backed forces have begun an assault on Raqqa, the Islamic State's hub in northern Syria, and signs are that they could capture the long-sought target with relative ease. Yet the militant group's commanders, who have already withdrawn their toughest forces from the city, and most everyone else in Syria's multifaceted war are looking ahead to an even more decisive battle in the south.

There, a complex confrontation is unfolding, with far more geopolitical import and risk. The Islamic State is expected to make its last stand not in Raqqa but in an area that encompasses the borders with Iraq and Jordan and much of Syria's modest oil reserves, making it important in stabilizing Syria and influencing its neighboring countries.

Whoever lays claim to the sparsely populated area in this 21st-century version of the Great Game not only will take credit for seizing what is likely to be the Islamic State's last patch of a territorial caliphate in Syria, but also will play an important role in determining Syria's future and the postwar dynamics of the region.

With the stakes so high, the United States, Iran and Russia are all scrambling for advantage. They are building up their forces and proxy fighters and, increasingly, engaging in inflammatory clashes that threaten to escalate into a larger conflict.

On Thursday, an American pilot shot down an Iranian-made drone as big as an American Predator, which had fired on American-backed Syrian fighters and American Special Forces advisers.

All have their eyes on the province of Deir al-Zour, where Islamic State forces surround an estimated 200,000 people in a government-held section of the provincial capital of the same name.

The contested area also includes desert regions farther south that include several border crossings, including the critical highway connecting Damascus and Baghdad -- coveted by Iran as a land route to Lebanon and its ally, the Shiite militia Hezbollah.

But what is really at stake are even larger issues. Will the Syrian government re-establish control of the country all the way to its eastern borders? Will the desert straddling the Syrian-Iraqi border remain a no man's land ripe for militant control? If not, who will dominate there -- forces aligned with Iran, Russia or the United States? Which Syrian factions will wield the most influence?

The moment is a ''major crossroads'' in the conflict, said Kamel Wazne, who studies Hezbollah, the United States and the Middle East and teaches at the American University of Beirut.

The Americans want to prevent the establishment of a ''Shiite crescent'' of influence from Iran to Lebanon, Mr. Wazne said, and to maintain ''a piece of what is taking place in Syria.''

''They will not allow the Iranians and those they support to have a victory at the expense of the Americans in the whole region,'' he added.

That, Mr. Wazne said, puts the United States at loggerheads with the pro-government alliance in Syria, especially Hezbollah and Iran. With President Trump and his newly emboldened Sunni partners in Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf turning up the heat against Iran, Tehran and its allies will be determined, he said, to show they cannot be intimidated.

''They can drive the confrontation,'' he said. ''This camp is actually more determined to carry through with the fight, in their minds the ultimate confrontation.''

Indeed, on Friday, pro-government forces struck what could be a major blow to American plans, making a surprise advance to the Iraqi border that cut off American-backed troops, blocking their way to the front against Islamic State in Deir al-Zour.

The lineup of combatants is dizzying. Moving east from the heart of Syria is the alliance backing President Bashar al-Assad, consisting of the Syrian Army and Iran-backed militias, supported by Russian air power and Iranian advisers. Some reports even suggest that Russian advisers are active on the battlefield.

Moving north from the Jordanian border are Syrian rebels who have long fought the government but are now being trained to fight the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, by American, British and Norwegian forces. They have a garrison near the Jordanian and Iraqi borders and the Baghdad highway, and receive air support from the United States-led, anti-ISIS coalition.

Then there is a different American-backed force, the one attacking the Islamic State in Raqqa. There are signs that to take Raqqa without an all-out fight, they will let more Islamic State fighters escape to the south. And their leaders have voiced ambitions to follow the fight south to Deir al-Zour.

That is a problematic prospect because the force, known as the Syrian Democratic Forces, is led by Syrian Kurdish militias that have established a semiautonomous Kurdish zone farther north and are distrusted by many Arabs. American officials have sought to allay those concerns by noting the force is half Arab and saying it will hand over retaken areas to civilian local councils.

Finally, in Iraq, Iran-backed Iraqi Shiite militias have pushed west to the border with Syria.

With all these forces on a collision course, several recent escalations have raised fears of a direct confrontation between the United States and Iran, or even Russia.

While saying it does not seek confrontation with the Syrian government or its allies, the United States has begun deliberately bombing them, something it had not done before in the war, hitting Iranian-backed militias it deemed too close to Tanf, the site of the American and rebel garrison.

But the pro-government alliance has not backed down. It has denounced the American presence as illegal and continued to confront the allied forces, culminating in Thursday's drone strike.

That episode showed that Iranian advisers, or perhaps even Iranian proxies like Hezbollah, are operating full-size drones in Syria and are willing to risk clashes with the United States.

Looming over everything is the question of how far Russia is prepared to back Iran -- a tactical ally but one with which it differs strategically on major issues like Israel and the United States. American generals believe that the answer is ''not far.'' Secretary of Defense James Mattis even said Russia had tried to persuade the Iranian-backed forces not to approach the American base.

But diplomats in Beirut say Russia may be saying the opposite to its allies in Syria, and may see little reason to halt what could be an awkward test for the United States, which insists it does not want to get more deeply involved in Syria. Will it risk war to protect a small base?

One diplomat who was briefed on the Russian position said Moscow wanted to see that the American-backed rebels left the area.

The rising tensions reflect increased strains in the region. The Trump administration has vowed to push back against Iran. Israel, saying it will not tolerate a Hezbollah presence abutting its territory, has been striking pro-government forces in the south.

Saudi Arabia, emboldened by Mr. Trump, has increased the pressure, isolating Qatar in part for its cordial relations with Iran. Islamic State attacks in Tehran on Wednesday further inflamed sentiments, and Iran said Saudi Arabia, Israel and the United States were ultimately to blame.

Now, into that volatile mix, toss a battle that will reveal the unsustainable contradictions of the fight against the Islamic State as the forces arrayed against it jockey against one another.

As always, the Deir al-Zour arena is a rat's nest of contradicting alliances. As they converge, something will have to give.

For instance, the United States is working indirectly in Iraq with Iranian-backed Iraqi Shiite militias -- some of the very ones that it has fired on in Syria's southeastern desert.

Islamic State fighters are besieging Syrian government forces in the provincial capital, Deir al-Zour, so by routing them, the United States would be helping Mr. Assad, whom it opposes.

Mr. Assad says that Syria's sovereignty is paramount and that he will retake all lost territory, but he cannot do so without the help of Iran and Russia, which exercise a striking degree of autonomy and authority in Syria. Nor can he prevent the United States from operating there.

The Kurdish militias have so far hedged, neither directly confronting the pro-government forces nor openly collaborating with them, to avoid alienating Arab opposition allies. But they may have to choose, as the forces come into contact.

The dangers were underscored by a Syrian member of a Hezbollah-trained militia that took part in the recent drone attack on the American garrison. He said Shiite militiamen and technicians from Iran were monitoring the base with a drone, which American planes then destroyed on the ground. Five people, including two Iranians, were injured.

A second drone shot at the rebels and the Americans, said the fighter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ''This is a message to the Americans,'' he said. ''They can't tell us there are places we're not allowed to approach.''

Top, a woman who fled with other civilians from an Islamic State-controlled area greeted soldiers from the Syrian Democratic Forces near Raqqa on Wednesday. Above left, Syrians fleeing Raqqa in a truck loaded with their belongings. Above right, fighters with the Kurdish-Arab alliance unloading ammunition supplied by the United States-led coalition in a village north of Raqqa. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RODI SAID/REUTERS; ZEIN AL-RIFAI/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY; DELIL SOULEIMAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170611ed6b00091



FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
'What Is It Asking For? To Be Something'

By ELISABETH ZEROFSKY 
6,614 words
11 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
50
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

On Feb. 2, around a quarter to 5 in the afternoon, just as the day began to darken, police officers approached four young men outside a recording studio in the Rose des Vents, an agglomeration of chalky cité, or public-housing projects, that covers a remote expanse of the northeast Paris suburb Aulnay-sous-Bois. The police asked to see one man's identity papers. Within minutes, another was on his stomach. The officers put handcuffs on the 21-year-old, whose family, of Congolese origin, lived nearby. When they arrived at the station, staff members noticed that he was in a lot of pain. He was rushed to a hospital, where an examination revealed a 10-centimeter tear in his rectum. It had been caused by a police baton.

Nine days later, 3,000 people gathered in the muddy yard in front of the courthouse that serves the ''93'' -- the department to the north and east of Paris that includes Aulnay. Most of the protesters were in their 20s, first- or second-generation French, their parents or grandparents having arrived from Morocco or Mali or Algeria in the 1960s and '70s. Among them was Mehdi Bouteghmè, a 28-year-old city counselor in the neighboring suburb La Courneuve. When news of the incident first spread on social media, where the campaign for the presidential election was also heating up, Bouteghmè took to Facebook. ''In my vision of the Republic, the election campaign should come to a halt,'' he wrote. ''All the candidates should focus on and make a priority of resolving the problem of the role of the police in this country.'' Then he posted the opening lines of ''What Is the Third Estate?'' a tract published by the Abbéieyè in January 1789, that took up the cause of the common classes: ''We have three questions before us. One -- What is the Third Estate? EVERYTHING. Two -- What has it been until now in the political order? NOTHING. Three -- What is it asking for? TO BE SOMETHING.''

The election campaign did not stop; instead Bouteghmè found himself here, surrounded by the citizens he represented. A handful of gendarmes loitered on a steel walkway that ran above the complex, peering down at the crowd. A dozen young men hoisted themselves onto a parapet, fists raised. ''We're finished with this savagery,'' one shouted into a microphone. ''With this violence that's been going on for 30 years. Today you can kill an African, rape an African. Some of you experience daily humiliations. It's a myth, the country of the rights of man. Do you feel like the country respects you?'' The crowd yelled back: ''No!''

The protesters began to sing ''The Marseillaise.'' Someone set off a mortar that burst red into the sky with a pop like gunfire, close enough to shed ash on the crowd. A humming sound floated up from behind. Everyone turned to watch a group of kids rush up the steps of the walkway toward the gendarmes, hurling stones at their riot shields until the officers charged, forcing them back down. A truck belonging to the radio station RTL went up in flames, sending a dark column of smoke skyward. Police reinforcements arrived and set off tear-gas, pushing the crowd out of the courtyard, into the surrounding streets and down into the metro station.

The next morning, newspapers ran pictures of streets filled with fumes and burning cars; inside one, reports said, was a child rescued just in time. Far-right activists took to Twitter to denounce the protesters as savage anarchists. ''Support goes out to police confronting those who take advantage of an unfortunate accident to attack the police and spit on France,'' Marion Maréhal-Le Pen, the niece of the president of the National Front, tweeted. Another party leader wrote, ''Riots in Bobigny -- there you have it: the result of 40 years of mass immigration, judicial cowardice and political blindness.''

I was separated from Bouteghmè in the chaos, and he messaged me later to make sure I got out all right. ''What happened was predictable,'' he said. ''The speeches weren't clear, weren't calming. We need only to be able to communicate in order to make things just a little bit better. But I don't know if it's possible anymore.''

Bouteghmè had gone to the protest with several friends with whom he recently started a new local political party, which they called the Éan Populaire Courneuvien. They had wanted to assert their ability to improve life in their community, even if their ideas tended toward the prosaic and technocratic: making governance more transparent as a way to draw in more local residents; offering incentives to businesses relocating to the banlieues to hire locally rather than bring in commuters; and striking deals with vendors to give food that remained unsold at the end of the day to needy residents. Such preoccupations seemed almost quixotic as explosive demonstrations continued throughout the next few weeks, with more than 50 incidents in 30 towns around the country. Bouteghmè was seized with a dismaying sense of déàu. In 2005, a month of protests rocked La Courneuve and other suburbs, following the deaths of two teenagers, Zyed Benna and Bouna Traoré who were electrocuted in a power station while fleeing police. Thousands of cars were burned, and there were several deaths. Now, even though the election campaign provided an unusual opportunity to be heard, things were unfolding in much the same way: a bold expression of anger, which would surely be followed by inaction.

Soon after the protest, Bouteghmè wrote an op-ed on Bondy Blog, a news site that covers the suburbs, in which he argued that organizations in the banlieues should unite behind a single message: ''That the protests should be qualified as 'riots,' is one thing. ... That they should be emptied of their meaning is another. We are responsible for our own weaknesses ... our silence, our inability to organize in order to act on the things that unify us.'' He was tired of the sense of futility that reigned in the banlieues, the squabbles that prevented his peers from effectively confronting a politically stagnant system. Privately, he was even less sanguine. On Facebook, he sent out a call: ''Is unity even possible?''

The campaign season in France this spring revolved around the meaning of ''Frenchness,'' a perennial question given new urgency by a refugee crisis, terrorist attacks that resulted in the highest number of deaths on French soil since the 1940s, the year-and-a-half-long state of emergency that followed and a generalized economic anxiety. Every week seemed to bring a new polemic about ''mass immigration'' (in reality, France granted refugee status to only 26,000 people who applied in 2016, and the total immigrant population has increased only slightly in the last 10 years) or the role of France's Muslims (estimated at less than 6 percent of the population, half of whom are largely secular) in formulating an Islam compatible with the French Republic or the importance of affirming French ''culture,'' whatever that might be. In one way or another, politicians were often talking about the banlieues, which served as a kind of boogeyman, a stand-in for the social currents unsettling France. Bouteghmè, himself a product of these forces and a consummate proponent of French Republicanism, was, like many of the people he represents, an object of much of this discussion if seldom an equal partner in it.

I met Bouteghmè through a former student with whom I kept in touch after teaching English at a high school in La Courneuve nearly a decade ago. Earlier, I had spent a semester in Paris, studying the French language and way of life, my English girlfriends and I mimicking the proper methods for knotting scarves and pairing wine, to see if we could pass for natives. A month or two after I returned home, the banlieues erupted in the violent protests of 2005. I felt a sense of shame that my frivolous game was in reality an urgent political matter: an invitation to be part of French society was not available to just anyone, particularly if you happened to have non-European, non-Christian roots.

Three years later, I returned to France to teach in La Courneuve, which Nicolas Sarkozy had famously promised to clean up with a ''Karcher,'' a German industrial-strength street-cleansing machine. In the high school where I worked, the election of Barack Obama had generated a new sense, among my students, of what was possible for members of a minority with a complicated historical relationship to their country. But change, symbolic or otherwise, failed to materialize, and by 2014, halfway through Obama's second term, La Courneuve and other suburbs were struggling with a wave of radicalism. While the reasons any one individual may be seduced by jihadism are complex, it was hard to ignore that many of the young French citizens leaving for Syria were coming from the banlieues. And after the terror attacks of 2015 and 2016, whatever sympathy existed in broader French society for the plight of the banlieues seemed to harden into apathy.

La Courneuve's mayor for nearly two decades was Gilles Poux, a stalwart of the French Communist Party, the labor-oriented segment of the French left that once enjoyed broad popularity but whose membership had declined everywhere except in the Paris banlieues. The party took over La Courneuve in the 1950s when the town still had factories producing metalwork and boilers. To Bouteghmè, there was a disconnect between the way things were run and the needs of the people who now lived there. He began to think about running for office. He was 23 and studying philosophy at the Sorbonne. Two years later, he was on the ballot.

He had plenty of ideas. Architecture was a passion, and he had studied urban planning to understand how new buildings might be designed to resist the kind of rapid degradation that plagued the town's infrastructure. He even helped start a program for architecture students in Paris, who could propose ideas for La Courneuve as their final thesis. The results were sometimes outlandish -- one student drafted a blueprint for a perfume museum -- but Bouteghmè still found them useful. ''It makes you dream a bit,'' he said, ''which changes what you can do.''

The mayor encouraged Bouteghmè and his friends to run on his ticket; he needed to join forces with young men of their background to win a majority in a town that has more than 100 nationalities. Once elected, though, they felt constrained by a decades-old political machine. In the fall of 2015, Poux shut down the Samaritain Roma camp in La Courneuve that was home to 300 people; he stated that what was needed was a national, not a local, solution. For months, Bouteghmè had helped organize protests to keep it open, and as it became clear the Roma would not prevail, he worked with local nongovernment organizations to help find temporary squats. He felt that he could no longer share a political identity with the mayor, and he and three others split off to form the Éan Populaire Courneuvien, on the theory that as a bloc they could wield some power. Eventually, one of them might even run against the mayor.

''In the beginning, in my head, identity was important,'' Bouteghmè told me. I met him at an Illy cafe behind the Opéa Garnier in late January, when all the surfaces of the city are darkened from incessant rain. He is tall and unfailingly well put together; that day he had on a navy blue shawl-neck sweater over a pressed white button-down shirt, dark, slim-fitted wool pants and large glasses with clear-plastic frames that were slightly out of tune with his otherwise sober demeanor. We talked for nearly an hour and a half before he smiled for the first time. ''In reality, identity doesn't mean anything,'' he said. What had been, initially, an American-style venture in identity politics led him back to the French Republican ideals of universalism. ''You have a group of people who all look alike, they criticize the old white guys who keep everything to themselves. But then we do the same thing. The Arabs complain about racism, but they're racist toward the Roma. Identity is a trap.''

Bouteghmè's father was born near Constantine, in the Algerian east, in 1950, when the country was still a part of France. He left at 23 for France and met Bouteghmè's mother, a Tunisian, while they were working at a hotel near the Gare de l'Est in Paris. He went back to Algeria, as he always planned, but after a few months he returned to France to be with Bouteghmè's mother. They bought an apartment in La Courneuve, when suburban design was still confidently utopian. Bouteghmè's father eventually became a site manager for a construction company and a union representative. ''He paid for it dearly,'' Bouteghmè told me. ''In front of him were the bosses attacking him, next to him people who deserted him, betrayed him.'' He would negotiate a pay raise, and they would increase everyone's salary except for his. ''My father would always say to me, 'Don't do what I did.' And now I'm living the same thing he lived. Exactly the same.''

The problems facing the suburbs, Bouteghmè asserted, could not be addressed without taking on the larger national malaise. ''For me, today, being named Mehdi Bouteghmè, my father was born in a French colony, my mother was born in a French protectorate, if I want to question the political methods, practices, Republican institutions, people will say I'm an Islamist,'' Bouteghmè told me. ''It's not normal.'' At 18 he joined the Young Muslims of France, a community youth group, and during a phase in college read extensively in Islamic philosophy and theology. Islam was part of his identity, but now, 10 years later, he was certain this would be used against him if he decided to enter national politics. ''They'll attack me, twist positions I may have taken before, activities I might have been involved in in the past,'' he said.

Bouteghmè attended high school in the neighboring suburb Aubervilliers, at the Lycé Henri Wallon, where, in 2003, during his first semester, the Affaire Alma and Lila Léy, which led to the 2004 law banning religious symbols, unfolded. ''In my opinion, that was the breaking point of the Republic,'' he said. That fall, two sisters, daughters of an Algerian mother who was baptized Catholic and an atheist Jewish father, refused to remove the head scarves they had recently begun to wear. The school suspended them for ''ostentatious'' attire that was ''disturbing'' to the public order. ''We had debates about it in the schoolyard,'' Bouteghmè said. ''But with the teachers, there was an incredible racism.'' He went on: ''You crack. It becomes us against them, against those who want nothing of us -- everyone.'' His parents weren't particularly religious, but social dynamics led him, for a time, to delve into Islam. ''I would go around talking about values: 'No, that's no good. No, this is what Islam is.' But people allowed me to make my mistakes, let me evolve, realize my errors. I didn't know who I was yet. Today, if you're an 18-year-old kid, you talk about Islam like that, you go straight to prison.''

Reading Kant and Machiavelli helped Bouteghmè look beyond what could be a closed circuit in the banlieues. ''France is philosophy,'' he told me. It was only through understanding the foundational principles of French Republicanism, and 200-year-old ideas that were in crisis in a modern, multicultural France, that he could see they needed to be adjusted to a new reality. One of his teachers wanted him to try to qualify for the Éole Nationale d'Administration, France's ultra-elite finishing school for the haute fonctionnaire class; Bouteghmè didn't know what it was. He took the exam to enter Sciences Po, a prestigious feeder school to the E.N.A. Most students spend several years in a preparatory course; Bouteghmè had prepared on his own. It wasn't enough. His parents weren't keen on his studying philosophy, impractical as it was, and friends from La Courneuve tried to dissuade him, too -- studying Western, Christian-based philosophy was, they warned, haram, forbidden. (Everyone in La Courneuve had been affected by fundamentalism, even if there had been fewer departures for Syria from here than from neighboring towns.)

To Bouteghmè, the hysteria in France about Islam, on display most recently in the ''burkini'' controversy, smacked of the anti-Semitism of the '30s. ''They are attacking people who don't represent what people are saying they represent,'' he said. Women in head scarves had become symbols, flash points, everything except individuals with complicated personal reasons for expressing themselves in a particular way. Even for the people who did turn to fundamentalism, religion was often a question of economic and political exclusion. Solve the economic problems -- find people jobs, help them educate their families -- the ''woman question'' would resolve itself.

The banlieues have a singular geographic and demographic makeup. There are the town centers, whose residents tend to be wealthier and more European in origin, and there are the stereotypical, gargantuan Le Corbusier-inspired buildings. Constructed primarily in the 1960s and subjected to an urban-renewal program in the '80s that involved demolishing some developments on live television, most were built for the city's working-class population, which exploded after World War II, and later housed the foreign guest workers who arrived around the same time.

In the 1960s, there were more than 80 bidonvilles, or shantytowns, sheltering an estimated 30,000 guest workers from Spain, Portugal, North Africa and elsewhere, often organized by country or region; Algerians from Oran, for example, would live together. But La Campa in La Courneuve, one of the poorest, was always a mix of nationalities, as the architectural historian Jacob Paskins details in a recent book, ''Paris Under Construction,'' and it often accommodated those rejected from their ethnic bidonvilles. The town has maintained that diversity, though its composition is always changing -- from Italian and Spanish, to Algerian and Tunisian, to, most recently, Chinese and Pakistani. Sunday is market day, and when you emerge from the subway into the commercial plaza, its sidewalks crammed with tents and pedestrians, it's as if the entire borough of Queens had been squeezed into a single roundabout. You will hear Urdu and Tamil, Portuguese and Romanian, Wolof, Bambara and Sango, and as many dialects of Arabic as exist in the world. ''No one here is French,'' an Algerian municipal worker in a hot orange vest and aviator sunglasses, told me. You could buy goods there to feed, clothe and clean an entire household for a week for under 50 euros: bins of Polish leather slippers and nude-colored bras, cake pans, memory-foam pillows and child's dresses in turquoise leopard print, as well as Egyptian sweet potatoes, Moroccan mint and Italian fennel.

A 20-minute walk to the other side of town brings you to the Citées 4000, a cluster of towers that opened in 1962. Its barren landscaping and roadways are dotted with construction sites. The area has undergone a series of renovations since 2005, when the government enacted a ''plan for social cohesion.'' ''Sarkozy said he would clean it with a Karcher, and he did,'' Kamel Hamza, a conservative member of the La Courneuve City Council, told me. Hamza and his colleague Mustapha Benlafkih belong to Sarkozy's center-right party, Les Réublicains, a rare species in the banlieues, though less and less so. They offered to drive me around the 4000 in Benlafkih's gray Peugeot. ''You can see the sun now,'' Benlafkih said, pointing westward. The government had knocked down a massive tower built to house repatriated pieds-noirs (Europeans living in Algeria who were forced to leave during the war of independence) and replaced it with smaller rowhouses and apartment buildings. There were a few stores -- a supermarket, a Muslim butcher, a discount bazaar and Billy Exotique: Spéialité Africaines. But because residents could stay in the area without ever having to go to the livelier part of town with the cafes and kebab shops, Hamza said, the problems that destroying the towers was meant to address -- high unemployment, social isolation, the exhausting complications of poverty -- remained.

Decades of rule by the Communist Party had failed to help the situation, Hamza said. The local government doled out aid, public housing and jobs, on which the people were dependent; they became leftist voters for life; and the government could coast. Some residents hadn't left their cité in 30 years. ''You have to show them that people live better elsewhere,'' Hamza said. ''There are choices. Happiness is not La Courneuve.''

The French are obsessed with preventing ''communautarisme'' -- any division of the Republic into individual identity groups -- but if such a things exists, it is as much a result of city planning as cultural politics. People living in the older, wealthier centers of suburbs like La Courneuve sometimes regard newcomers with suspicion. First-generation French-born citizens of North African descent see businesses that used to be Italian and Tunisian becoming Pakistani and grow alarmed that things aren't as they were, that they are no longer ''chez nous'': a phrase that happens to echo a slogan of the National Front.

In a strange turn, the National Front has been gaining ground in the banlieues. In the 2014 European elections, the party came in first in more than half the towns in the 93. The party's candidate in La Courneuve came in second in the first round of the regionals in 2015. And in the first round of the presidential election, on April 23, Marine Le Pen won 11.6 percent of the vote in La Courneuve, coming in third. In some ways, the change reflects a larger trend: former strongholds of the left deserting the Socialist Party, whose leadership proved impotent over the last five years, for the economic protectionism and strong sense of identity of the National Front.

In Noisy-le-Grand, in the southeastern part of the 93, where nine people were arrested after the February demonstrations, I attended a National Front meeting at the back of a strip mall. Most of the hundred or so attendees were middle-aged or older; as at any National Front gathering, there was a lot of black leather and tattoos and a few ''FDNY'' T-shirts. But the party's representative for the 93 is Jordan Bardella, a suave 21-year-old who is always dressed in a suit and has established himself on social media as the guardian of social order in the banlieues. Bardella opened the meeting with a rousing address. ''The imminent revolution at the center of Marine's presidential program is first and foremost a daily battle that begins in our communities,'' he said. The attendees were the working-class ''linchpin'' of the party, who cohabitated the ''lawless zones'' that had put France into a state of ''submission.''

After the meeting, over plastic cups of orange Fanta, I met Sandrine Abdelkader, an effervescent security guard in her 40s from Aubervilliers with long blond hair. She had been a Socialist her whole life. Now there was no question: She would vote Le Pen. ''When you go into the cité, and you're white, you're French, you're treated like a slut,'' she told me. (In December, the TV station France 2 ran a news segment that followed two women with a hidden camera into a de facto all-male cafe in Sevran, where they appeared to be unwelcome, setting off a national uproar about ''no-go zones'' and women's rights.) ''It's true, there are cafes in Aubervilliers where, as a woman, I can't set foot inside,'' Abdelkader, who is half German, half North African, said. ''And I have North African roots, that's the worst part. The cité are about to explode. They're closed off. There's a foreign diktat. And a mentality that isn't ours. It's not our culture.'' I asked Abdelkader how Le Pen would solve these problems. ''First of all by redefining who we are,'' she said. ''Where we come from. Are we capitalists before all else? Or are we people born in a country with traditions, with a culture? We've forgotten who we are. So foreigners come in and they say: 'We're Maghréin, we're Muslim, but what are you? You're nothing.' ''

During the run-up to the election, Emmanuel Macron, the 39-year-old former economy minister, then the front-runner and now the president, declared there was no such thing as ''a French culture'' but rather ''culture in France,'' which is ''diverse.'' His remark provoked a delirious backlash. Françis Fillon belittled Macron for daring to deny Descartes, Molièe, Chateaubriand and Proust, as well as the educators who ''teach our children to speak the language of France, rather than that of the streets.'' ''If there's no French culture,'' Fillon concluded, ''then why is there France?''

The politics of French culture now seem intrinsic to the country's sense of itself, but it wasn't until the early 1980s, as Vincent Martigny, a political scientist at the Éole Polytechnique, notes in a new book, ''Dire la France,'' that ''culture'' became mixed with ''national identity.'' It was a theme of Françis Mitterrand's Socialist Party, a bid to recapture power. ''Without knowing it, they engendered a monster they could not control,'' Martigny says. The far-right took up the theme and unity became confused with uniformity. ''There is a gap between civic culture, the culture of the Republic, which is defending the principles of France, and the majority culture,'' he says. ''People think 'real France' is like us. It's not all these other people: 'Yeah, it's good if they claim that they are French, but they're not white, they're not from Christian families, they don't come from a small village, we don't have enough dead people buried in the same cemeteries.' ''

Kamel Hamza found himself exasperated by this ''civilizationist'' discourse. ''France is not just cathedrals,'' he said. ''They say they are secular, but today you have certain people preaching the France of cathedrals. My parents arrived in the 1960s, they helped build the country, they fought to defend it. I can't cut off this history from one day to the next in the name of a patriotism that, in fact, doesn't exist. I don't want to be the same as a French person from the north, and they don't want to be the same as me. What brings us together is not physical appearance or a religion, but the values of the Republic.'' What was funny, he said, was that in La Courneuve, a town with a constant flux of immigrants, Hamza and his peers, first-generation French of North African origin, had become the anchors of Republicanism. ''We are the new French in the neighborhoods that the françis de souche fled,'' he said, referring to those of longstanding French lineage. ''It's we who defend French traditions here. Whereas you go to other towns, and they call you a fundamentalist.''

For decades the far right has been obsessed with a speech that the Algerian revolutionary leader Houari Boumediene supposedly gave in the 1970s, in which he predicted that one day the famished masses would travel from the south to the north in a wave of immigration that would be ''neither fraternal nor pacifist.'' France has been so transformed by terrorism -- more than 230 deaths over nine attacks since 2015 -- that a significant part of the intellectual and cultural establishment is now comfortably aligned with the far right. The Figaro columnist Éic Zemmour, a ubiquitous presence on TV and a top-selling nonfiction writer, asserted that the French Army has a secret plan, called Operation Brambles, to clear out Muslims from the suburbs, developed in consort with Israeli military specialists who refined their technique in Gaza. The ostensibly liberal feminist Éisabeth Badinter recently denounced in an introduction to ''France in Submission,'' a collection of testimonies from local politicians and civil servants about their battles with Islam, the ''separatism, indeed secession'' sought by elements of society, and she encouraged the French to fight against ''those who aspire to impose their laws and values on us.''

In early March I attended a conference dedicated to de-Islamizing Europe. It was organized by a Catholic activist group and held in Béiers, a southern town whose famously provocative mayor, Robert Méard, warmly welcomed the attendees. The conference offered a daylong workshop in which to learn how to become a ''vector'' in society to fight against a plot cooked up by Islamic nations to set up colonies across Europe, by way of European Muslims, who were adherents of Sharia law. In attendance were a number of local officials from across the south, people who considered Marine Le Pen a liberal and were sworn devotees of her father. But there was also a couple sitting behind me who supported Fillon. They lived in Figeac, a small town north of Toulouse, and they had observed worrisome changes there over the last decade. There was more drug dealing, more crime, more incivility. The solution, they said, was to fight the spread of Islam.

More than elsewhere in France, apathy toward the presidential election was potent in the banlieues. Even if Marine Le Pen won, some Courneuviens said, well, things couldn't get much worse. The state of emergency had deepened social divisions. Everywhere in Paris, soldiers stalked the streets in tight quadrangles, assault rifles at the ready. A high-school teacher wrote in Libéation that while taking her students on a field trip, three of the five boys in the group were asked for their papers by the police; she had a feeling it wasn't a coincidence that one was of Moroccan origin, one Malian and one Comorian. One teacher from the banlieue told me that because of the state of emergency, he was not permitted to take a large group of students on public transport into central Paris. With the high cost of renting a bus, they organized trips elsewhere in the suburbs. He later discovered that students attending high school within the city limits faced no such restrictions.

The ambivalence that many residents of La Courneuve exhibited toward the presidential campaign was reciprocated. Most of the candidates on the left made some effort to meet with organizations and businesses in the suburbs, but the candidates on the right mostly didn't bother. Marine Le Pen suggested that many of the terrorist attacks of the last few years could have been prevented by getting rid of ''the birthright,'' automatic citizenship for anyone born on French soil.

Fighting a sense of inertia, Bouteghmè and the Éan Populaire Courneuvien decided to organize a grand déat for the banlieues, five days ahead of the first round of voting. They invited each of the presidential candidates to send a representative to La Courneuve, a request to which most of the left-leaning ones and none of the right-leaning ones assented. On a chilly Tuesday evening, in a meeting room on the ground floor of an Escheresque 1970s-era cité Bouteghmè was setting up a sound system. By 7 p.m., when the debate was to begin, only four people had shown up. The debaters dutifully introduced themselves. Most were from marginal parties on the eclectic French left that everyone knew would never win. But Emmanuel Macron had sent his representative for the 93, Alexandre Aïara, a polished man of Senegalese origin. Dozens of people trickled in, and by 8:30 it was clear that they had come to have their say with Aïara, who delivered Macron's ideas in clean bullet points: For each person hired from the banlieues, a company would be relieved of certain taxes; companies that discriminated would be subjected to a public ''naming and shaming'' campaign; and so on.

An activist named Salima Yenbou was there, representing Jean Lassalle, the eccentric founder of something called the Resist! party. Yenbou grew up in Aulnay-sous-Bois, where the supposed police assault took place in February, and had a broad view of the traps laid by the ''banlieue question'' in French civic life. ''We talk about the residents in a condescending manner: insertion, integration, security, antiracism, equality of opportunity,'' Yenbou said to the audience. ''No one wants to come right out and say that here in France, one of our values, the second value of the country, equality, is in tatters.'' She was disturbed by the incessant calls to ''integrate,'' which she had been asked to do for the entirety of her 40 years. ''No matter what I do, no matter what I say, I don't even have the right to criticize my country,'' Yenbou continued. ''You know what someone said to me once?'' She had been at a teachers' conference and the panelists were talking about gender equality, four men and one woman. ''So I leaned over to my neighbor and said as a joke, 'They're very funny, they're talking about gender equality, there's four men and one woman.' Do you know what she said to me? She led me out and said very nicely, 'Do you think that gender equality exists in Morocco or Algeria?' ''

The remark made Yenbou want to cry. ''Why,'' she said, ''are you talking to me about Algeria and Morocco, I'm talking about my country, France. I was born French, my parents were born French, it became Algeria later on, my grandparents were French, my great-grandparents were French, and I ask again: I don't have the right to criticize France, my country?'' She realized that these kinds of reactions were not fully conscious, but that didn't make them excusable. ''Values'' were something that only the country's minorities were required to prove they understood. ''It's necessary that the idea of equality be taken into account, by everyone,'' Yenbou said. ''There was a directive for teachers to talk about the values of the Republic in school, O.K. But when I learned that in the rich neighborhoods, teachers don't talk about values, what did they tell me? They said, 'But there's no problem with Republican values here -- they know them.' Well, what about equality? Who will talk to these children in the rich neighborhoods about discrimination? Who will tell them that in our country, equality isn't real?''

Bouteghmè was pleased with the way the debate had gone -- more than one shouting match erupted -- but he knew it wouldn't necessarily get more Courneuviens out to vote. And he understood why. In the end, they knew that none of the candidates would offer them much. In 2012, Françis Hollande dangled numerous promises during his presidential campaign, including the right to vote in local elections for foreigners who had been in France and paying taxes for years; once the banlieues helped elect him, they heard little until the November 2015 ISIS-led attacks in central Paris, when Hollande proposed a terrorism-related constitutional amendment that would effectively turn dual nationals into second-class citizens. His promise to lower the national unemployment rate hadn't fared much better; in five years, and especially in the banlieues where the rate was far higher, the numbers had hardly budged.

The Courneuviens I spoke with that weekend didn't hold out much hope for Macron. They were convinced he would turn out to be a continuation of Hollande, or worse. Legislative elections in June would determine whether Macron would be able to garner the power in Parliament to change the country's economy as he said he would; Bouteghmè feared what Macron's plans to loosen regulations would do to the safety net, but he was loath to join the opposition of the aging far-left leader Jean-Luc Mééchon, who conducted politics as a personality cult and could be just as hostile to multiculturalism as other politicians of his generation. And if Le Pen won, well, one resident wondered whether it would ''be possible to see the bad among the bad.'' Deciding between the two candidates, he said, was ''like being asked to choose your own death.''

Emmanuel Macron and Marine Le Pen came in first and second respectively, and, two weeks later, on the Saturday before the final runoff, the neighborhood association that Bouteghmè works for organized a Fêe de la Cité a kind of spring block party for families in La Courneuve. It was raining on that early May afternoon, and when I arrived, Bouteghmè was soaked, his hair dripping and his T-shirt weighted down with water, but he was smiling. Kids were performing acrobatics on uneven bars with the help of a coach and jumping around with an inflatable sumo wrestler, pausing to eat skewers of strawberry-and banana-shaped marshmallows. These children, many of them first-generation French-born, were playing in a small park between several citéowers. The symbolism was almost too stark: The towers blocked the view of Paris -- they couldn't see it, and it couldn't see them.

For Bouteghmè, a Le Pen presidency would have endangered the entire Republican system, limiting his capacity to work for reforms that would bring Courneuviens inside French institutions. When Macron pulled through that evening, with 66 percent of the vote, he was relieved: not because he was optimistic about Macron -- the percentage of blank ballots in the banlieues was high -- but because it meant at least that his work could continue. At various points, he thought he might be wasting his time; he could have joined Macron's movement when a recruiter sought him out, or the Green Party. But he kept coming back to the original idea of the Éan Populaire Courneuvien. For him, French history explained what was happening. ''We had the revolution, then we had the Terror, then the return of the Republic, and then the empire,'' Bouteghmè said. ''And a lot of movements have been born that way, all of which started with the Enlightenment. But there was a lot of stumbling. After that was the generation of Kant, who provided a message, then Hegel, Marx, and then a lot happened in France post-Marx and post-Communism.'' Bouteghmè planted himself squarely within the history that much of the country saw as an impassable chasm between themselves and him. ''Marx allowed something to happen,'' Bouteghmè added. ''But it took 100 years. So maybe it will take 100 years for us to have a place here.''

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Elisabeth Zerofsky is a freelance writer living in Paris. This is her first article for the magazine.

Above: Supporters of Emmanuel Macron distributed pamphlets in La Courneuve in April. Right: Scenes in La Courneuve. (MM50-MM51); Mehdi Bouteghmè, a city councilor in La Courneuve, a suburb outside Paris. (MM53); A sign supporting Emmanuel Macron in La Courneuve. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALEX MAJOLI/MAGNUM, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM55) 

Document NYTF000020170611ed6b0007m



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Coalition Munition Use Is Scrutinized In Syria

By ANNE BARNARD; Reporting was contributed by Nada Homsi and Hwaida Saad from Beirut, Michael R. Gordon from Washington and an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria. 
778 words
11 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- Images and reports from witnesses in the northern Syrian city of Raqqa suggest that the United States-led coalition battling the Islamic State there has used munitions loaded with white phosphorus, the use of which in populated areas is prohibited under international law.

Photographs and video clips posted online showed blinding spots of light spreading outward on Thursday night over what residents said was eastern Raqqa. By day, the images showed low white puffs trailing tentacles of white smoke. Both are typical visual signatures of white phosphorus, which can be loaded into artillery shells.

Residents reached by text message reported similar bombardments on Friday.

The images were distributed by the Aamaq news agency of the Islamic State, as well as a monitoring group called Raqqa Is Being Slaughtered Silently. The Islamic State has made claims of use of white phosphorous by United States-led forces before as part of its efforts to discredit its enemies.

White phosphorus, along with other incendiaries, has been used by Syrian government forces battling insurgents in Aleppo and elsewhere.

It is not illegal under international law for militaries to possess and use white phosphorus, and the United States' and other Western militaries say they use it mainly to create smoke screens to hide troop movements. But it can also be used as an incendiary weapon, setting very hot fires. And like thermite and napalm, it is proscribed in civilian areas by international law.

A United States official acknowledged that American forces who are fighting the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, in Iraq and Syria have access to white phosphorus munitions, but he said it was not being used against personnel. The official spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the use of the munition.

The spokesman for the American-led task force that is fighting the militants, Col. Ryan Dillon, said that as a matter of policy he could not discuss the use of specific munitions. But he added that ''in accordance with the law of armed conflict, white phosphorus rounds are used for screening, obscuring and marking in a way that fully considers the possible incidental effects on civilians and civilian structures.''

It has not been determined whether the shells that appeared to contain white phosphorus landed in populated areas, but tens of thousands of civilians are believed to still be in Raqqa, even as many Islamic State leaders have fled south to Mayadeen in Deir al-Zour Province. Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund, warned that 40,000 children are believed to be trapped in the city.

Residents said that most of the Islamic State fighters left in Raqqa were local recruits, along with some foreign fighters, and that the most experienced commanders and fighters having decamped.

Abdullah, a Raqqa resident living in Beirut, said his relatives had seen what they believed was white phosphorus being used in the city. He also said that an internet cafe had recently been hit by missiles, killing around 20 people who were trying to reach relatives for possibly the last time after the Islamic State threatened to shut down all internet providers.

One of those killed in the cafe was an activist sending a report to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, according to the group's founder, Rami Abdulrahman.

The Islamic State has become increasingly restrictive about sharing information with the outside world, so residents spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals.

The assault on Raqqa is being carried out by the Syrian Democratic Forces, made up of Syrian-Kurdish and Syrian-Arab militias that are receiving arms, training and air support from the United States and its anti-Islamic State coalition.

Residents say they have received contradictory instructions from the coalition's recent leaflet drops, with the latest urging them to shelter in place after earlier warnings to leave the city.

Doctors Without Borders issued a statement warning that civilians faced dangers, whether staying or trying to flee.

''Parents have to make an impossible decision,'' an emergency coordinator with the group, Puk Leenders, said in a statement. ''Either they stay in Raqqa, subjecting their children to increased violence and airstrikes, or they take them over the front-line, knowing they will need to cross minefields and may be caught in crossfire.''

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020170611ed6b0008l



National Desk; SECTA
Frustrations And Blessings One Year Later

By LIZETTE ALVAREZ 
1,570 words
11 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
18
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ORLANDO, Fla. -- Leonel Melendez leans in as he sips coffee at his bagel shop here, and politely asks: ''What? I couldn't hear you.'' He is deaf in his left ear, and a hearing aid turbocharges his right one. But that's not all. His vision is faulty. His right foot and his left elbow are stitched up. His left kneecap is far from supple. And the thick U-shaped scar on the back of his head, where his hair won't grow back, is a permanent reminder of the sharp turn his life took on June 12, 2016.

That was the day Mr. Melendez lay in a puddle of blood on the floor of Pulse, the gay nightclub here, while Omar Mateen, motivated by the Islamic State, randomly riddled clubgoers with bullets from an assault rifle and a pistol. As Latin music blared, Mr. Mateen shot Mr. Melendez four times. One of the bullets slammed into the back of his head, a moment that turned him into a ''1 percenter.''

''That's what the doctors call me,'' said Mr. Melendez, a Nicaraguan immigrant and 39-year-old divorced father, summing up the odds of surviving the trauma that put him in a coma for nearly three weeks.

''Losing all that blood, with my head shot, and my brain is not affected at all?'' He stopped. ''I'm a strong believer in God, faith, your drive and positivity.''

In the largest mass shooting in American history, Mr. Mateen, a security guard who targeted the club on Latin Night, killed, injured and terrorized Pulse patrons for 3 hours 13 minutes before the police shot him dead.

In the end, 49 clubgoers died -- 13 of them holed up as hostages in bathrooms -- and 58 others were injured. So many people required medical care that the police used pickup trucks to ferry them to hospitals.

One year later, the massacre's aftermath -- filled with moments of anguish and healing for the victims, their families, the city, and its gay and Latino communities -- has resonated with touchstones large and small. In the 10 months after the shooting, more than $31 million in donations streamed into the city's OneOrlando Fund for victims and their families. The former nightclub -- a site residents and tourists visit every day to lay flowers, take photos and write messages outside its doors -- will be reborn as a memorial and museum.

And Orlando's gay community, badly shaken by the attack, rallied fiercely, offering help and counseling to victims. Just as important, it extended a strong hand to gay Latinos, who have sometimes struggled with anti-gay cultural traditions and had felt alienated from mainstream gay life. As a result, a Latino gay rights group, QLatinX, emerged.

''Hundreds were traumatized by this, but I am so impressed by the way that everyone has come together,'' said Patty Sheehan, a city commissioner, who is openly gay. ''This man meant to destroy us and stab at our hearts, and all he did was bring us closer and unite us.''

The shooting also led to frustration and debates about police action, gun control, what should happen to the memorial, how private donations should be distributed and whether the attack could have been prevented.

After the shooting, the Orlando Police Department, which engaged in hostage negotiations with Mr. Mateen, faced criticism about why it waited more than three hours to raid the club and kill him. During that time, wounded people were trapped in the bathroom and more victims were shot. The short answer, the police say, is that officers were told that Mr. Mateen had threatened people with explosives, which he did not have.

A recent article by three officials with the Police Foundation, a nonpartisan group that works on improving policing, said the Orlando police had followed protocol for hostage negotiations. The article in The CTC Sentinel, a monthly publication put out by the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, praised the department's performance amid ''chaos and unimaginable devastation.''

But the writers concluded that new protocols may be required to deal with terrorist attacks, ones that involve more specialized training for police patrols and a quicker response when hostages are present.

James A. Gagliano, a former member of the F.B.I.'s hostage rescue team, agreed, saying terrorists seek to kill as many people as fast as possible. They want headlines, not a deal.

''The ISIS-inspired terrorists of today tend not to be interested in negotiating their way out,'' he wrote in The CTC Sentinel, using an acronym for the Islamic State.

Orlando's police chief, John Mina, said his protocols were constantly evolving to take shifting antiterrorism policies into account. The negotiations with the gunman, he said, bought his department time to rescue the wounded on the dance floor and in other rooms of the club, and to plan its counterattack.

''What happened at Pulse a year ago was the most unique, difficult and complex mass shooting, terrorist-hostage situation that law enforcement has faced in U.S. history,'' said Chief Mina, who has been cooperating with the Police Foundation, the group in charge of the after-action report. ''There is not a policy or word on a piece of paper or sentence that would have changed the outcome.''

Chief Mina also said the F.B.I. had not yet completed its report on whether any victims had been killed or hurt by police bullets in the barrage of gunfire inside the club. But, he said, the F.B.I. has told him that ''to this point there is no indication of friendly fire.''

After the shooting, private donations poured in to four separate organizations. The money was consolidated into the OneOrlando fund and given to those who were in the club. The largest payouts went to families of the dead, followed by people who were hospitalized and then the others. A final audit of the fund is nearly complete, city officials said.

For the first time in such cases, a new wrinkle arose: Gay longtime partners of some of the dead wound up wrangling with their partners' parents over the OneOrlando money.

''We had probably a dozen claims where this tension loomed large,'' said Kenneth R. Feinberg, the OneOrlando administrator, who has worked on other high-profile funds, including ones related to the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, and on the Boston Marathon in 2013. ''In most cases we were able to work it out.''

For some, the money has been crucial in their long recovery.

Mr. Melendez remembers little about that night. He can hear the gunshots amid the thumping bass of the speakers. He recalls screams and his good friend, Javier Jorge-Reyes, telling him, ''Throw yourself on the floor.''

That was when Mr. Melendez felt searing pain in his leg. Then he blacked out.

Mr. Jorge-Reyes did not survive. Mr. Melendez spent two weeks in a coma and an additional week drifting in and out. When he arrived at the hospital, he had lost two-thirds of his blood.

His mother, a housekeeper who lives in New Orleans, knew only that he had been at the club and wasn't answering the phone. She grabbed only her purse and headed for the airport.

Mr. Melendez went unidentified for two days. Officials told his mother that he was presumed dead. His mother knew better. She told them to look for his favorite oversized black watch on his wrist. It was there. She spent six weeks in the hospital with him, praying all the while.

Mr. Melendez, an optimist who has worked 17 years for Gucci, was blessed, he said. He collapsed near the club's entrance, so he was rescued quickly. The bullet missed critical parts of his brain. His family has rallied during his recovery, which still requires frequent physical therapy for his leg. His 7-year-old daughter, Bella, inspires him, he said.

The police even found his phone, out of hundreds left behind. When an F.B.I. agent handed it to him, his mother cried. The message on its case read: ''What doesn't kill you makes you stronger.''

Frustrations linger, though. He can't drive yet because of his vision and hearing. He still can't work. But he pushes himself. He recently attended a wedding in Mexico and a large brunch in Orlando.

When asked about his thick head scar, he is vague. ''I had an accident,'' said Mr. Melendez, who joined a lawsuit against G4S, the security firm that employed Mr. Mateen. ''Or it's a long story.''

Moments of angst still hit hard.

''Why me, and why did this happen?'' Mr. Melendez asked. ''I'm hoping that one day, I'll know. Time heals. Time gives answers.''

Leonel Melendez, left and top, walking toward the pool at his apartment complex in Orlando, Fla. A bullet that struck the back of his head during the Pulse nightclub shooting on June 12, 2016, gravely wounded him, leaving him with hearing loss, faulty vision and a thick scar. Three other bullets also hit him. Above, tributes could be seen last week outside Pulse, where 49 patrons were killed and 58 others were injured on Latin Night. The gay nightclub will be reborn as a memorial and museum. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ZACK WITTMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170611ed6b00087



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Shrinking Turf, Wider Reach: The  ISIS  Plan

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI and LAURE FOURQUET; Katrin Bennhold contributed reporting from London, and Thomas Erdbrink from Tehran. 
1,849 words
11 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON -- In the weeks after Islamic State operatives struck Paris in November 2015, the group released a prerecorded video of the killers. They stared into the camera, waved serrated knives, raged at the West and specifically warned Britain: You're next. Footage showed scenes of London through a gunsight.

For the next 13 months, the Islamic State and those inspired by the group killed and maimed in Brussels, Berlin, Nice and Normandy as well as across the Atlantic in California and Florida. Yet the rhetoric against Britain began to feel like the frothy threats made by the group toward other countries that had avoided attacks, including Iran: loud and menacing but ultimately empty.

Until now. The strikes in the past week against the capitals of the United Kingdom and Iran followed back-to-back attacks in recent months in Britain, by an assailant who used an S.U.V. to smash into pedestrians on Westminster Bridge in March and a suicide bomber at a pop concert in Manchester in May. ''This is for Allah!'' the attackers were heard screaming in the latest bloodshed in London as they plunged knives into their victims.

From a publicity standpoint, the attacks in Britain and Iran are a lift to the Islamic State as it loses ground steadily in Syria, Iraq and Libya. Some analysts have interpreted the strikes as a bid by the group to demonstrate its resilience, even as its territory-holding caliphate slowly disappears.

But a review of court records and statements by officials suggests that the violence in London and Tehran was more than just a message. It reflected persistent efforts by the Islamic State since its rise in 2014 to hit targets once thought unassailable -- especially in Britain. During this period, officials there intercepted and foiled more than a dozen plots, including five in the past three months.

The number of disrupted plots appears to be far greater in Iran, a Shiite-majority country loathed by the militant Sunni extremists of the Islamic State, which has aimed to hit Iran since at least 2007. A day after the deadly assault last week on the Parliament building and the tomb of Iran's revolutionary founder, Iranian intelligence officials said they had thwarted 100 terrorist plots in the past two years.

Hours after the violence in Iran, the Islamic State released its glossy, online magazine, directly challenging skeptics who have questioned the group's stamina as its territory shrinks. ''What many of these analysts failed to admit, however, is that losing territory was nothing new for the Islamic State,'' the article said, referring to the group's near-defeat in 2011 at the hands of United States forces in Iraq.

''The reality faced by the Crusaders today is that despite their claims that the Islamic State has been weakened,'' it said, ''strikes in the heart of the Crusaders' strongholds in the West will continue to occur just as suddenly and unexpectedly.''

While few details have been shared with the public about thwarted attacks in Iran, plots neutralized in Britain show how the Islamic State's reach grew with each attempt. The techniques used by the frustrated attackers, the types of targets they chose and the kind of coaching they received broadly follow the arc of the group's evolution as it struck repeatedly elsewhere in Europe.

The earliest instances involved would-be attackers who had ideological affinity for the Islamic State but no direct communication with the group. They took their direction from the many YouTube videos they had watched showing Islamic State atrocities, and from detailed instructions delivered online by Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, the group's spokesman.

The messages initially called recruits to travel to the group's territory, but as those journeys became more perilous, Mr. Adnani exhorted adherents to stay put and wage violence at home.

That shift is seen in a note riddled with typos scrawled by an 18-year-old suspect in Peckham arrested with a backpack concealing a hammer and knife: ''Because I have no means ov gettin there I will wage war against the british government on this soil,'' the suspect, Brusthom Ziamani, wrote in June 2014, according to a definitive report by the expert Raffaello Pantucci on the growing terrorism threat. ''The british government will have a taste ov there own medicine they will be humiliated this is ISIB Islamic States of Ireland and Britain.''

Initially seen as the acts of disaffected youth with no real connection to the Islamic State, these plots did not at first cause alarm, officials say. But in the space of a year, they began to morph into something more complex, as young perpetrators began making online contact with the militant group.

''The rules of engagement changed,'' said Max Hill, a British barrister who has prosecuted several high-profile terrorism cases and is now the country's independent reviewer of antiterrorism legislation.

''We moved from a traditional understanding that there needs to be a trainer -- a radicalizer -- who is physically present into an era where there may be some remote encouragement coupled with fast access to radical material,'' Mr. Hill said. ''Those factors alone are enough.''

Just months after the Islamic State declared its territory-holding caliphate in 2014, the authorities began to see suspects who were in contact with British nationals who had traveled to join the militants.

Such was the case for three men who lived near Southall, a suburb of London, and who maintained contact with a friend who had slipped across the Syrian border, according to court records.

While their friend joined the ranks of the Islamic State, the three remained stuck in Britain, where they increasingly steeped themselves in the group's propaganda. In September 2014, when the militants' spokesman, Mr. Adnani, broadcast an audio recording inciting followers to kill in any way possible -- ''smash the disbeliever's head with a rock or slaughter him with a knife, or run him over with your car'' -- the young men felt as if he was talking to them, the records show.

The three began obsessively shopping for knives, discussing different models in chats punctuated by the sharing of graphic videos. ''How was it? ... Like butter?'' wrote one of the three, Haseeb Hamayoon, after posting a clip of the beheading of a British aid worker, according to a transcript of the message. ''Any moaning? Niceeeee.''

The men were arrested in November 2014, after two of them were seen walking into a Kitchen Ideas store, where they bought a Victorinox knife and a sharpener, according to documents from their trial.

It is unclear if their contact inside the Islamic State played a role in their progression toward violence, or if he merely acted as a point of inspiration. But by 2015, investigation records reveal, plotters began tapping the inner core of a network of Islamic State online coaches. These coaches spent their days sitting behind computer screens in Raqqa, the Syrian city that is the group's de facto capital, moving the impressionable men they met on the internet like chess pieces.

They were part of an organized unit nicknamed ''The Legion'' by the F.B.I., which began tracking them and picking them off in American drone strikes when it became apparent how involved they had become in remotely inciting attacks, including in the United States, Canada, Australia and Britain. One of its best-known members was Junaid Hussain, a British citizen who was among the Islamic State operatives believed to have been in touch with one of the men involved in the first successful ISIS attack in America, messaging the shooter as he drove to a community center in Garland, Tex., in May 2015, where he would open fire.

In the summer of 2015, Mr. Hussain used the encrypted app Surespot to reach a 24-year-old named Junead Khan in Luton who had fallen under the spell of the Islamic State. Mr. Hussain's stated purpose for reaching out to Mr. Khan was to inform him that a friend of his who had joined the militants had been killed in Syria in an American drone strike, said Mr. Khan's lawyer, Andrew Hall.

Mr. Hall believes that was a ruse. ''The purpose of the call was to use it to call for revenge,'' he said. ''By coming to Syria and taking his place. Or, alternatively, by doing an action in England.''

Mr. Hussain offered Mr. Khan addresses of British soldiers and a nine-page guide to building a backpack bomb. Court transcripts also show that the young man was obsessed with knives.

''He had a longstanding fascination with a particular sort of knife,'' Mr. Hall said. ''He kept looking at it on Amazon.'' Naming an Islamic State executioner who decapitated Western hostages, the lawyer said, ''It was the sort of knife rumored to be used by Jihadi John.''

Counterterrorism experts say the number of foiled Islamic State plots represents the tip of the iceberg. At least 500 people are under active surveillance in Britain, they say, raising the question of whether all can be stopped.

''Everyone is saying enough is enough, but what can you actually do?'' said David Wells, who until 2013 worked for the Government Communications Headquarters, Britain's version of the National Security Agency.

''My view is that there is some tinkering around the edges that you could do,'' he said, ''But the foreign fighter community being as large it is in Europe, it's a 20- or 30-year problem -- and no one wants to hear that right now.''

The authorities suspected Mr. Khan, along with an uncle, Shazib Khan, had been plotting to attack the R.A.F. Lakenheath air base, home of United States Air Force 48th Fighter Wing, according to Mr. Pantucci, the terrorism expert. He tracked the evolution of Islamic State plots in Britain in a report for West Point's Combating Terrorism Center. But court records show Mr. Khan had been planning not just to crush people with a van but also to stab them, following the instructions outlined in Islamic State publications.

Several months before they were arrested, Shazib Khan recorded a video of a car driving past the House of Commons in Westminster. He uploaded it to YouTube under the title ''ISIS drives around Westminster.''

The footage was set to a chant addressed to the leader of the Islamic State, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, and included the lyrics, ''The virgins are calling, record me for my martyrdom.''

The location filmed was a five-minute walk from where another Briton aligned with the Islamic State, Khalid Masood, killed four people in March at Westminster Bridge. That was the Islamic State's first successful attack in Britain.

The Islamic State has long wanted to strike in British and Iranian territory. In March there was an attack at Westminster Bridge, above. Last week the Parliament in Tehran was hit, left. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TOBY MELVILLE/REUTERS; REUTERS) (A10) 

Document NYTF000020170611ed6b0006w



NONFICTION
Book Review Desk; SECTBR
The Terror Hydra

By CHARLIE SAVAGE 
1,353 words
11 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
19
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ANATOMY OF TERROR

From the Death of bin Laden to the Rise of the Islamic State

By Ali Soufan

359 pp. W. W. Norton & Company. $27.95.

About a year and a half ago, the former British prime minister Tony Blair made a penetrating, if bleak, observation about the West's 21st-century attempts to deal with the Arab world and the miseries that keep bursting out from its ceaseless contest between corrupt autocrats and Islamist zealots. In a CNN interview, Blair had found himself on the defensive against the accusation that the Iraq war of 2003, which he had helped the Bush administration lead, was a primary cause of the rise of the Islamic State. He responded, among other things, with this: ''We have tried intervention and putting down troops -- in Iraq. We've tried intervention without putting in troops -- in Libya. And we've tried no intervention at all but demanding regime change -- in Syria. It's not clear to me that, even if our policy did not work, subsequent policies have worked better.'' Indeed, each of the three major options that seem to be available for addressing the dysfunctional region whose sufferings incubate and inspire 21st-century Sunni Islamist radicalism -- occupation and nation-building, providing light-footprint support to local partners or just staying out of it -- has been a demonstrable failure. Without forgetting the West's 20th-century meddling in the Middle East as a contributing factor to its woes, the depressing implication, 15 years after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, is that perhaps there is no solution. Even if matters can be temporarily improved in one spot, they only worsen in another -- and periodically there will always be another attack like the one in Manchester.

Into this moment of counterterrorism policy despair, Ali Soufan, one of America's original terror warriors, has returned to help us take stock. Soufan is a Lebanese-born Muslim former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent. He gained fame as one of the most important law enforcement officials going after Al Qaeda in the period surrounding its 2000 suicide attack on the naval destroyer Cole and the 9/11 attacks. In 2011, six years after leaving the F.B.I., he published a memoir, ''The Black Banners,'' that recounted his interrogations of important terrorist captives -- and his battles with the C.I.A., whose hoarding of intelligence he blamed for preventing the F.B.I. from breaking up the 9/11 plot, and whose subsequent use of torture he opposed. Soufan has now written ''Anatomy of Terror.'' It serves as a valuable guide to the story so far and offers some predictions about what the next chapter may look like, after the Islamic State is forced back into a mere insurgency.

''Anatomy of Terror'' contains a few first-person moments that read like outtakes from ''The Black Banners.'' But it is generally much more the detached work of a historian and analyst, aggregating and synthesizing materials available elsewhere. Despite its subtitle, Soufan retells the Qaeda story from the beginning, enriching that now oft-told tale with newer materials, including some from the trove of communications seized in the 2011 raid on Osama bin Laden's compound. His approach is to explain the movement through the eyes of a few key terrorist figures -- the better, he writes, ''to help point the way to a deeper understanding of their worldview, their motivations and how best to combat the destructive ideology they represent.''

Several of the characters he selects for this purpose are perhaps overly familiar, like Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi, the Jordanian street thug turned zealot who founded Qaeda's particularly sociopathic affiliate in Iraq before American bombs killed him in 2006. Zarqawi was already the principal subject of Joby Warrick's Pulitzer Prize-winning 2015 book, ''Black Flags: The Rise of ISIS.'' But the best and most interesting parts of Soufan's book center on a less famous figure: Saif al-Adel, a pragmatic Egyptian ex-soldier who devoted his professional life to the post-Cold War global Sunni Islamist movement and played a secondary role, Zelig-like, in most of the important events in Qaeda's history. Although loyal to bin Laden, whom he served as security chief, he was also frustrated by upper-management decisions; in particular, he argued against the 9/11 plot as a reckless mistake that would bring disastrous repercussions to the organization and its haven in Taliban-ruled Afghanistan. Al-Adel managed to survive -- in part because he spent seven years in Iranian custody -- and is back with the original Qaeda organization as it regroups today.

Interspersed with such narratives, Soufan offers lucid explanations of a worldview that to casual Western eyes may seem mindlessly nihilistic, but is coherent within its own terms of seeking to establish a caliphate -- a theocratic state. The coldblooded strategy behind terrorist attacks on fellow Muslims in the Middle East is to create zones ''within the Muslim world so lawless and chaotic that the authority of the state would collapse. Al Qaeda could then rush in to fill the vacuum left by governmental failure, providing the people with much-needed services like education, water and electricity and ruling in accordance with its version of Islam.''

And Soufan shows how even among those committed to the Islamist ideology, there are fierce internal debates. Bin Laden and the core of Al Qaeda believed in pursuing their strategy slowly and methodically over generations, avoiding holding territory while the United States remained capable of military pushback, and in the meantime promoting good relations with tribal hosts. The splinter organization that became the Islamic State believed in speeding up that timetable, immediately declaring a caliphate and brutally enforcing austere social rules on the luckless Iraqi and Syrian civilians under its control. This dispute led to the 2014 split between the two groups, but Soufan predicts that after the Islamic State no longer holds territory, making the issue moot, they may reunite -- perhaps under the leadership of Hamza bin Laden, the son of the slain founder, who seems to be being groomed for the role.

So where does this leave the West? Near the end of his book, Soufan invokes the Hydra -- the multiheaded serpent that, whenever Hercules chopped off one head, grew two in its place. In the myth, Hercules defeats the monster after figuring out that cauterizing the stumps would prevent regeneration. The counterterrorism analogy Soufan offers is for the West not to depend on military solutions, but to use force sparingly to hold back the bad guys in order to ''provide time and space in which to build the institutions necessary for lasting peace,'' using ''all the tools of diplomatic, political and economic support at your disposal.''

But to date, efforts to build the institutions of a healthy society in places like Afghanistan and Iraq have not achieved much enduring success. Elsewhere, Soufan himself dismisses the prospect of transforming the Arab world's tribal patriarchies into ''Madisonian utopias anytime soon,'' writing that they too often have a ''cavalier disregard for education'' and ''relatively little openness to the wider world,'' which in turn produces ''legions of young men confused about their identity, angered by the hobbling of their prospects and incapable of critical thought -- the kind of people most acutely vulnerable to demagogues like Osama bin Laden and Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi.'' Against that backdrop, Soufan observes: ''As the seemingly limitless flow of recruits to the Islamic State attests, Zarqawi and men like him seem to constitute an endlessly renewable resource.''

ANATOMY OF TERROR

From the Death of bin Laden

to the Rise of the Islamic State

By Ali Soufan

359 pp. W. W. Norton & Company.

$27.95.

Charlie Savage is a Washington correspondent for The Times. A revised and updated edition of his latest book, ''Power Wars: The Relentless Rise of Presidential Authority and Secrecy,'' appears in paperback this month.

A news conference in Baghdad after the killing of Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi, leader of Al Qaeda in Iraq, 2006. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALI HAIDER /EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) 

Document NYTF000020170611ed6b0004o



world
Long Before It Lost Turf,  ISIS  Was Already Targeting Britain

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI and LAURE FOURQUET 
1,887 words
10 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON —n the weeks after Islamic State operatives struck Paris in November 2015, the group released a prerecorded video of the killers. They stared into the camera, waved serrated knives, raged at the West and specifically warned Britain: You’e next. Footage showed scenes of London through a gunsight.

For the next 13 months, the Islamic State and those inspired by the group killed and maimed in Brussels, Berlin, Nice and Normandy as well as across the Atlantic in California and Florida. Yet the rhetoric against Britain began to feel like the frothy threats made by the group toward other countries that had avoided attacks, including Iran: loud and menacing but ultimately empty.

Until now. The strikes in the past week against the capitals of the United Kingdom and Iran followed back-to-back attacks in recent months in Britain, by an assailant who used an S.U.V. to smash into pedestrians on Westminster Bridge in March and a suicide bomber at a pop concert in Manchester in May. “his is for Allah!”he attackers were heard screaming in the latest bloodshed in London as they plunged knives into their victims.

From a publicity standpoint, the attacks in Britain and Iran are a lift to the Islamic State as it loses ground steadily in Syria, Iraq and Libya. Some analysts have interpreted the strikes as a bid by the group to demonstrate its resilience, even as its territory-holding caliphate slowly disappears.

But a review of court records and statements by officials suggests that the violence in London and Tehran was more than just a message. It reflected persistent efforts by the Islamic State since its rise in 2014 to hit targets once thought unassailable —specially in Britain. During this period, officials there intercepted and foiled more than a dozen plots, including five in the past three months.

The number of disrupted plots appears to be far greater in Iran, a Shiite-majority country loathed by the militant Sunni extremists of the Islamic State, which has aimed to hit Iran since at least 2007. A day after the deadly assault last week on the Parliament building and the tomb of Iran’ revolutionary founder, Iranian intelligence officials said they had thwarted 100 terrorist plots in the past two years.

Hours after the violence in Iran, the Islamic State released its glossy, online magazine, directly challenging skeptics who have questioned the group’ stamina as its territory shrinks. “hat many of these analysts failed to admit, however, is that losing territory was nothing new for the Islamic State,”he article said, referring to the group’ near-defeat in 2011 at the hands of United States forces in Iraq.

“he reality faced by the Crusaders today is that despite their claims that the Islamic State has been weakened,”t said, “trikes in the heart of the Crusaders’trongholds in the West will continue to occur just as suddenly and unexpectedly.”

While few details have been shared with the public about thwarted attacks in Iran, plots neutralized in Britain show how the Islamic State’ reach grew with each attempt. The techniques used by the frustrated attackers, the types of targets they chose and the kind of coaching they received broadly follow the arc of the group’ evolution as it struck repeatedly elsewhere in Europe.

The earliest instances involved would-be attackers who had ideological affinity for the Islamic State but no direct communication with the group. They took their direction from the many YouTube videos they had watched showing Islamic State atrocities, and from detailed instructions delivered online by Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, the group’ spokesman.

The messages initially called recruits to travel to the group’ territory, but as those journeys became more perilous, Mr. Adnani exhorted adherents to stay put and wage violence at home.

That shift is seen in a note riddled with typos scrawled by an 18-year-old suspect in Peckham arrested with a backpack concealing a hammer and knife: “ecause I have no means ov gettin there I will wage war against the british government on this soil,”he suspect, Brusthom Ziamani, wrote in June 2014, according to a definitive report by the expert Raffaello Pantucci on the growing terrorism threat. “he british government will have a taste ov there own medicine they will be humiliated this is ISIB Islamic States of Ireland and Britain.”

Initially seen as the acts of disaffected youth with no real connection to the Islamic State, these plots did not at first cause alarm, officials say. But in the space of a year, they began to morph into something more complex, as young perpetrators began making online contact with the militant group.

“he rules of engagement changed,”aid Max Hill, a British barrister who has prosecuted several high-profile terrorism cases and is now the country’ independent reviewer of antiterrorism legislation.

“e moved from a traditional understanding that there needs to be a trainer — radicalizer —ho is physically present into an era where there may be some remote encouragement coupled with fast access to radical material,”r. Hill said. “hose factors alone are enough.”

Just months after the Islamic State declared its territory-holding caliphate in 2014, the authorities began to see suspects who were in contact with British nationals who had traveled to join the militants.

Such was the case for three men who lived near Southall, a suburb of London, and who maintained contact with a friend who had slipped across the Syrian border, according to court records.

While their friend joined the ranks of the Islamic State, the three remained stuck in Britain, where they increasingly steeped themselves in the group’ propaganda. In September 2014, when the militants’pokesman, Mr. Adnani, broadcast an audio recording inciting followers to kill in any way possible —“mash the disbeliever’ head with a rock or slaughter him with a knife, or run him over with your car”—he young men felt as if he was talking to them, the records show.

The three began obsessively shopping for knives, discussing different models in chats punctuated by the sharing of graphic videos. “ow was it? …ike butter?”rote one of the three, Haseeb Hamayoon, after posting a clip of the beheading of a British aid worker, according to a transcript of the message. “ny moaning? Niceeeee.”

The men were arrested in November 2014, after two of them were seen walking into a Kitchen Ideas store, where they bought a Victorinox knife and a sharpener, according to documents from their trial.

It is unclear if their contact inside the Islamic State played a role in their progression toward violence, or if he merely acted as a point of inspiration. But by 2015, investigation records reveal, plotters began tapping the inner core of a network of Islamic State online coaches. These coaches spent their days sitting behind computer screens in Raqqa, the Syrian city that is the group’ de facto capital, moving the impressionable men they met on the internet like chess pieces.

They were part of an organized unit nicknamed “The Legion”y the F.B.I., which began tracking them and picking them off in American drone strikes when it became apparent how involved they had become in remotely inciting attacks, including in the United States, Canada, Australia and Britain. One of its best-known members was Junaid Hussain, a British citizen who was among the Islamic State operatives believed to have been in touch with one of the men involved in the first successful \b ISIS\b0  attack in America, messaging the shooter as he drove to a community center in Garland, Tex., in May 2015, where he would open fire.

In the summer of 2015, Mr. Hussain used the encrypted app Surespot to reach a 24-year-old named Junead Khan in Luton who had fallen under the spell of the Islamic State. Mr. Hussain’ stated purpose for reaching out to Mr. Khan was to inform him that a friend of his who had joined the militants had been killed in Syria in an American drone strike, said Mr. Khan’ lawyer, Andrew Hall.

Mr. Hall believes that was a ruse. “he purpose of the call was to use it to call for revenge,”e said. “y coming to Syria and taking his place. Or, alternatively, by doing an action in England.”

Mr. Hussain offered Mr. Khan addresses of British soldiers and a nine-page guide to building a backpack bomb. Court transcripts also show that the young man was obsessed with knives.

“e had a longstanding fascination with a particular sort of knife,”r. Hall said. “e kept looking at it on Amazon.”aming an Islamic State executioner who decapitated Western hostages, the lawyer said, “t was the sort of knife rumored to be used by Jihadi John.”

Counterterrorism experts say the number of foiled Islamic State plots represents the tip of the iceberg. At least 500 people are under active surveillance in Britain, they say, raising the question of whether all can be stopped.

“veryone is saying enough is enough, but what can you actually do?”aid David Wells, who until 2013 worked for the Government Communications Headquarters, Britain’ version of the National Security Agency.

“y view is that there is some tinkering around the edges that you could do,”e said, “ut the foreign fighter community being as large it is in Europe, it’ a 20- or 30-year problem —nd no one wants to hear that right now.”

The authorities suspected Mr. Khan, along with an uncle, Shazib Khan, had been plotting to attack the R.A.F. Lakenheath air base, home of United States Air Force 48th Fighter Wing, according to Mr. Pantucci, the terrorism expert. He tracked the evolution of Islamic State plots in Britain in a report for West Point’ Combating Terrorism Center. But court records show Mr. Khan had been planning not just to crush people with a van but also to stab them, following the instructions outlined in Islamic State publications.

Several months before they were arrested, Shazib Khan recorded a video of a car driving past the House of Commons in Westminster. He uploaded it to YouTube under the title “ISIS drives around Westminster.”

The footage was set to a chant addressed to the leader of the Islamic State, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, and included the lyrics, “he virgins are calling, record me for my martyrdom.”

The location filmed was a five-minute walk from where another Briton aligned with the Islamic State, Khalid Masood, killed four people in March at Westminster Bridge. That was the Islamic State’ first successful attack in Britain.

Katrin Bennhold contributed reporting from London, and Thomas Erdbrink from Tehran.

PHOTOS: The Islamic State has long wanted to strike in British and Iranian territory. In March there was an attack at Westminster Bridge, above. Last week the Parliament in Tehran was hit, left. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TOBY MELVILLE/REUTERS; REUTERS) (A10)

* At Least 12 Killed in Pair of Terrorist Attacks in Iran

* At Least One London Assailant Was on Police Radar, Exposing Gaps

* Not ‘one Wolves’fter All: How \b ISIS\b0  Guides World’ Terror Plots From Afar

Document INHT000020170612ed6a0000c



News Analysis
World; Asia Pacific
Philippine Leader, Focused on War on Drug Users, Ignored Rise of  ISIS 

By RICHARD C. PADDOCK 
1,631 words
10 June 2017
23:55
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA —t was classic bravado from the Philippines’ough-guy president, Rodrigo Duterte.

The Maute Group, a militant Islamist band fighting government troops near the southern Philippines city of Marawi last year, had asked for a cease-fire.

The president rejected the overture.

“hey said that they will go down upon Marawi to burn the place,”r. Duterte recounted in December. “nd I said, ‘o ahead, do it.’”

He got his wish.

Hundreds of militants belonging to the Maute Group and its allies fighting under the black flag of the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0 , seized Marawi three weeks ago, leading to a battle with the Philippine armed forces and the biggest test yet of Mr. Duterte’ leadership during his tumultuous first year in office.

A president who has focused on a deadly antidrug campaign that has claimed the lives of thousands of Filipinos seems to have been caught unprepared for a militant threat that has been festering in the south for years.

“he government has largely been in denial about the growth of ISIS and affiliated groups,”aid Zachary M. Abuza, a professor at the National War College in Washington who specializes in Southeast Asian security issues. “uterte has been preoccupied with his campaign of gutting the rule of law by using police and other security forces for the extrajudicial killing of drug pushers.”

Government forces have been unable to dislodge the militants despite deploying ground troops and bombing the city of 200,000 people from the air. More than 200 people have been killed, including 24 civilians, 58 soldiers and police officers, and at least 138 militants, according to the Philippine military.

Tens of thousands of civilians have fled, and much of the city center lies in ruins. The military says that it has cleared 90 percent of the city but that militants remain in three neighborhoods in the center. Analysts say the military has less experience fighting on an urban battlefield, where the militants are mixed in with hundreds of civilians.

Mr. Duterte has declared 60 days of martial law for the southern island of Mindanao, which includes Marawi and his hometown, Davao City. He has twice set deadlines for troops to retake Marawi, the country’ largest predominantly Muslim city, but each deadline has passed with the battle still raging.

On Friday, Brig. Gen. Restituto Padilla predicted that the government would retake Marawi by Monday, Philippines Independence Day. On Saturday, 13 Philippine marines were killed in a clash with militants there.

The militants’eizure of the city, a bold attempt to establish an Islamic State caliphate in Southeast Asia, marks a significant advance for the Middle East-based terrorist group as well as an apparent reordering of the militant threat in the southern Philippines.

For the first time, it puts the Philippines on the map with failed states such as Libya and Afghanistan as places where Islamic State allies have sought to seize territory for a caliphate, giving the group another regional flash point in its effort to spread its influence globally.

The Islamic State has urged fighters who cannot reach Syria to join the jihad in the Philippines instead, said Sidney Jones, director of the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict. Fighters from Indonesia, Malaysia, Chechnya, Yemen and Saudi Arabia were among those killed in the battle for Marawi.

Mindanao has long been a hotbed of insurgencies, with numerous armed groups operating outside government control. Until the siege at Marawi, the best-known internationally was Abu Sayyaf, an ostensibly Islamist group that specialized in kidnapping for ransom, nearly single-handedly turning Southeast Asia into the world’ piracy capital, edging out the Horn of Africa.

The Marawi siege also heralds the rise of Isnilon Hapilon, a longtime leader of Abu Sayyaf who had grown more ideologically minded over the years. Last year, Mr. Hapilon, 51, was named by the Islamic State as its emir in Southeast Asia. Previously based on the island of Basilan, he is on the F.B.I.’ list of most-wanted terrorists and the United States has offered a $5 million reward for his capture.

Various factions have come together behind Mr. Hapilon, notably the Maute Group, led by the brothers Omar and Abdullah Maute. Educated in the Middle East, the Mautes are based in the Marawi area and recently accepted Mr. Hapilon’ leadership as emir.

The Mautes are believed responsible for bombing a market in Davao City in September that killed 15.

Mr. Duterte is the first president from Mindanao, and he ran last year as the candidate who could bring peace to the region. The bombing of his hometown may have inspired his angry challenge to the Mautes in December.

“t’ the usual Duterte brand of bravado,”aid Roilo Golez, a former national security adviser to President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, who left office in 2010. “t’ a way of intimidating the opposition. It works most of the time.”

It hasn’ with the Islamists in Mindanao.

After a clash between his military and Abu Sayyaf in April, Mr. Duterte suggested that the way to stop the militants was to eat them. “ake me mad,”he taunted. “et me a terrorist. Give me salt and vinegar. I will eat his liver.”

In May, the Philippine military got a tip that Mr. Hapilon had arrived in Marawi to join up with the Maute brothers. When soldiers raided the house where Mr. Hapilon was believed to be, hoping to capture him and claim the $5 million reward, they were surprised to find dozens of well armed militants arrayed against them.

A video later recovered by the military and published by The Associated Press shows the militant leaders plotting their takeover of Marawi days before the military learned of Mr. Hapilon’ presence there. Hundreds of fighters who had gathered in preparation for seizing the city quickly put their plan into effect, burning schools and churches, taking hostages and taking over central Marawi.

Mr. Duterte’ declaration of martial law helped lead to the capture of Cayamora Maute, the father of the Maute brothers, along with other family members on Tuesday at a military checkpoint in Davao City. Some fear that the temporary martial law order in Mindanao could be expanded nationwide, an idea Mr. Duterte has openly toyed with so that he could use the military in his antidrug campaign.

“here is a sense of dread and fear that this will build support for martial law,”aid Richard Javad Heydarian, a political analyst and author of the forthcoming book “uterte’ Rise.”“his could strengthen the feeling of isolation by the Muslim minority.”

Muslims make up only about 5 percent of the country’ population over all but a larger proportion, estimated at 20 to 40 percent, on Mindanao.

Historic grievances among the Muslim Moro people there, widespread poverty and large lawless areas have helped create an opportunity for the Islamic State. A peace process pursued by Mr. Duterte’ predecessor, President Benigno S. Aquino III, faltered in 2015 and has remained deadlocked under Mr. Duterte.

“t was not the spread of ISIS in Iraq and Syria that fueled ISIS cells in the Philippines, but the collapse of the peace process,”aid Mr. Abuza of the National War College.

The growing threat in the south will most likely compel Mr. Duterte to improve his relations with the United States, a process that had already begun with the election of President Trump.

Mr. Duterte has raged against the United States for daring to criticize his antidrug campaign and, when President Barack Obama was in office, called for a “eparation”rom Washington. But Mr. Trump has shown a willingness to overlook the killings, and has praised Mr. Duterte for doing an “nbelievable job on the drug problem,”according to a transcript of a call between the two leaders.

Leaders of the Philippines armed forces prevailed on Mr. Duterte not to reduce military cooperation, including a longstanding United States program to provide training, equipment and intelligence to fight terrorism. Since 2001, the United States has maintained a rotating force of 50 to 100 troops in the southern Philippines to combat Abu Sayyaf.

American Special Forces are assisting the Philippine military in Marawi, the United States Embassy said on Friday, although officials would not provide further details.

“ur military relationship with the Philippines remains robust and multifaceted,”aid Emma Nagy, a spokeswoman for the embassy in Manila. “.S. Special Forces have been providing support and assistance in the southern Philippines for many years, at the request of several different Filipino administrations.”

If the battle in Marawi ends on Monday, as the military hopes, the rebellion in the south is still far from over. The audacity of the rebel takeover, even if it ultimately fails, will probably draw recruits from across the region, including members of other Islamist groups still disaffected and dissatisfied with a moribund peace process.

“f Duterte doesn’ deal with that, then this whole problem is going to fester for a very long time,”r. Abuza said. The “ngoverned space”n Mindanao, he said, “s a regional security threat, not just a Philippine security threat.”

Sol Vanzi contributed reporting.

Security forces in Marawi, the Philippines, on Wednesday. | Jes Aznar/Getty Images | A Philippine Air Force plane during a bombing in Marawi on Friday. | Aaron Favila/Associated Press | The Air Force dropped bomb in Marawi on Tuesday. | Noel Celis/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | A funeral on Friday for a Muslim boy who was hit by a stray bullet at a mosque. | Romeo Ranoco/Reuters | An evacuation center in Mindanao on Thursday. | Noel Celis/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170610ed6a0050l



World; Middle East
Beyond Raqqa, an Even Bigger Battle to Defeat  ISIS  and Control Syria Looms

By ANNE BARNARD 
1,642 words
10 June 2017
19:46
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon —merican-backed forces have begun an assault on Raqqa, the Islamic State’ hub in northern Syria, and signs are that they could capture the long-sought target with relative ease. Yet the militant group’ commanders, who have already withdrawn their toughest forces from the city, and most everyone else in Syria’ multifaceted war are looking ahead to an even more decisive battle in the south.

There, a complex confrontation is unfolding, with far more geopolitical import and risk. The Islamic State is expected to make its last stand not in Raqqa but in an area that encompasses the borders with Iraq and Jordan and much of Syria’ modest oil reserves, making it important in stabilizing Syria and influencing its neighboring countries.

Whoever lays claim to the sparsely populated area in this 21st-century version of the Great Game not only will take credit for seizing what is likely to be the Islamic State’ last patch of a territorial caliphate in Syria, but also will play an important role in determining Syria’ future and the postwar dynamics of the region.

With the stakes so high, the United States, Iran and Russia are all scrambling for advantage. They are building up their forces and proxy fighters and, increasingly, engaging in inflammatory clashes that threaten to escalate into a larger conflict.

On Thursday, an American pilot shot down an Iranian-made drone as big as an American Predator, which had fired on American-backed Syrian fighters and American Special Forces advisers.

All have their eyes on the province of Deir al-Zour, where Islamic State forces surround an estimated 200,000 people in a government-held section of the provincial capital of the same name.

The contested area also includes desert regions farther south that include several border crossings, including the critical highway connecting Damascus and Baghdad —oveted by Iran as a land route to Lebanon and its ally, the Shiite militia Hezbollah.

But what is really at stake are even larger issues. Will the Syrian government re-establish control of the country all the way to its eastern borders? Will the desert straddling the Syrian-Iraqi border remain a no man’ land ripe for militant control? If not, who will dominate there —orces aligned with Iran, Russia or the United States? Which Syrian factions will wield the most influence?

The moment is a “ajor crossroads”n the conflict, said Kamel Wazne, who studies Hezbollah, the United States and the Middle East and teaches at the American University of Beirut.

The Americans want to prevent the establishment of a “hiite crescent”f influence from Iran to Lebanon, Mr. Wazne said, and to maintain “ piece of what is taking place in Syria.”

“hey will not allow the Iranians and those they support to have a victory at the expense of the Americans in the whole region,”e added.

That, Mr. Wazne said, puts the United States at loggerheads with the pro-government alliance in Syria, especially Hezbollah and Iran. With President Trump and his newly emboldened Sunni partners in Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf turning up the heat against Iran, Tehran and its allies will be determined, he said, to show they cannot be intimidated.

“hey can drive the confrontation,”e said. “his camp is actually more determined to carry through with the fight, in their minds the ultimate confrontation.”

Indeed, on Friday, pro-government forces struck what could be a major blow to American plans, making a surprise advance to the Iraqi border that cut off American-backed troops, blocking their way to the front against Islamic State in Deir al-Zour.

The lineup of combatants is dizzying. Moving east from the heart of Syria is the alliance backing President Bashar al-Assad, consisting of the Syrian Army and Iran-backed militias, supported by Russian air power and Iranian advisers. Some reports even suggest that Russian advisers are active on the battlefield.

Moving north from the Jordanian border are Syrian rebels who have long fought the government but are now being trained to fight the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, by American, British and Norwegian forces. They have a garrison near the Jordanian and Iraqi borders and the Baghdad highway, and receive air support from the United States-led, anti-ISIS coalition.

Then there is a different American-backed force, the one attacking the Islamic State in Raqqa. There are signs that to take Raqqa without an all-out fight, they will let more Islamic State fighters escape to the south. And their leaders have voiced ambitions to follow the fight south to Deir al-Zour.

That is a problematic prospect because the force, known as the Syrian Democratic Forces, is led by Syrian Kurdish militias that have established a semiautonomous Kurdish zone farther north and are distrusted by many Arabs. American officials have sought to allay those concerns by noting the force is half Arab and saying it will hand over retaken areas to civilian local councils.

Finally, in Iraq, Iran-backed Iraqi Shiite militias have pushed west to the border with Syria.

With all these forces on a collision course, several recent escalations have raised fears of a direct confrontation between the United States and Iran, or even Russia.

While saying it does not seek confrontation with the Syrian government or its allies, the United States has begun deliberately bombing them, something it had not done before in the war, hitting Iranian-backed militias it deemed too close to Tanf, the site of the American and rebel garrison.

But the pro-government alliance has not backed down. It has denounced the American presence as illegal and continued to confront the allied forces, culminating in Thursday’ drone strike.

That episode showed that Iranian advisers, or perhaps even Iranian proxies like Hezbollah, are operating full-size drones in Syria and are willing to risk clashes with the United States.

Looming over everything is the question of how far Russia is prepared to back Iran — tactical ally but one with which it differs strategically on major issues like Israel and the United States. American generals believe that the answer is “ot far.”ecretary of Defense James Mattis even said Russia had tried to persuade the Iranian-backed forces not to approach the American base.

But diplomats in Beirut say Russia may be saying the opposite to its allies in Syria, and may see little reason to halt what could be an awkward test for the United States, which insists it does not want to get more deeply involved in Syria. Will it risk war to protect a small base?

One diplomat who was briefed on the Russian position said Moscow wanted to see that the American-backed rebels left the area.

The rising tensions reflect increased strains in the region. The Trump administration has vowed to push back against Iran. Israel, saying it will not tolerate a Hezbollah presence abutting its territory, has been striking pro-government forces in the south.

Saudi Arabia, emboldened by Mr. Trump, has increased the pressure, isolating Qatar in part for its cordial relations with Iran. Islamic State attacks in Tehran on Wednesday further inflamed sentiments, and Iran said Saudi Arabia, Israel and the United States were ultimately to blame.

Now, into that volatile mix, toss a battle that will reveal the unsustainable contradictions of the fight against the Islamic State as the forces arrayed against it jockey against one another.

As always, the Deir al-Zour arena is a rat’ nest of contradicting alliances. As they converge, something will have to give.

For instance, the United States is working indirectly in Iraq with Iranian-backed Iraqi Shiite militias —ome of the very ones that it has fired on in Syria’ southeastern desert.

Islamic State fighters are besieging Syrian government forces in the provincial capital, Deir al-Zour, so by routing them, the United States would be helping Mr. Assad, whom it opposes.

Mr. Assad says that Syria’ sovereignty is paramount and that he will retake all lost territory, but he cannot do so without the help of Iran and Russia, which exercise a striking degree of autonomy and authority in Syria. Nor can he prevent the United States from operating there.

The Kurdish militias have so far hedged, neither directly confronting the pro-government forces nor openly collaborating with them, to avoid alienating Arab opposition allies. But they may have to choose, as the forces come into contact.

The dangers were underscored by a Syrian member of a Hezbollah-trained militia that took part in the recent drone attack on the American garrison. He said Shiite militiamen and technicians from Iran were monitoring the base with a drone, which American planes then destroyed on the ground. Five people, including two Iranians, were injured.

A second drone shot at the rebels and the Americans, said the fighter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. “his is a message to the Americans,”e said. “hey can’ tell us there are places we’e not allowed to approach.”

Reporting was contributed by Eric Schmitt from Washington; Hwaida Saad and Nada Homsi from Beirut; Maher Samaan from Paris; and a Times employee from Damascus, Syria.

* U.S.-Backed Forces Begin Assault on Raqqa, \b ISIS\b0  Stronghold in Syria

* U.S. Says It Shot Down Drone That Attacked Fighters in Syria

* \b ISIS\b0  Leaders Are Fleeing Raqqa, U.S. Military Says

* White House Accepts ‘olitical Reality’f Assad’ Grip on Power in Syria

Syrian Democratic Forces, made up of an alliance of Kurdish and Arab fighters, unloading ammunition supplied by the American-led coalition in an area north of Raqqa. | Delil Souleiman/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170610ed6a004ed



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Iranian Kurds Implicated In Dual Attacks in Tehran

By THOMAS ERDBRINK 
1,118 words
10 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

TEHRAN -- The Iranian authorities arrested 41 people Friday in connection with the twin terrorist attacks in Tehran this week, the semiofficial Fars News Agency reported, as evidence mounted that Iranian Kurds affiliated with the Islamic State had carried out the assault.

The men who made their way through the Parliament building on Wednesday, shooting assault rifles, throwing grenades and searching for a way into the main hall, were probably Iranian Kurds, security sources say, though only one has been identified. One of the two assailants at a shrine is understood to be an Iranian Kurd, the security sources said.

The Ministry of Intelligence identified one gunman, Serias Sadeghi, as an Iranian Kurd from the city of Paveh in the country's west near the Iraqi border. In 2014, the Democratic Party of Kurdistan Iran, an opposition party, published a report about increasing Islamic State activities in Iranian Kurdistan that singled him out as a prominent recruiter who, at times, held sessions in a local mosque.

One website, KhabarDena.Ir, on Friday quoted Mamusta Molla Ghader Ghaderi, a community leader from Paveh, as saying that some of the attackers were from there.

A video posted Thursday on the ISIS media channel Amaq News shows a group of five men with their leader, possibly Mr. Sadeghi, dressed in black with his face masked, claiming responsibility for the attacks in both Arabic and Kurdish.

''This is a message from the soldiers of Islamic State in Iran, soldiers of the first brigade of Islamic State in Iran which, God willing, won't be the last,'' the man says. ''This brigade will mark the start of jihad in Iran, and we call on our Muslim brothers to join us.''

He concluded his message with a threat to Saudi Arabia, saying that it, too, would be targeted.

Publicly, the Iranian leadership has sought to cast blame on its favorite targets: Saudi Arabia, the United States and Israel. The assaults ''will only increase hatred for the governments of the United States and their stooges in the region like the Saudis,'' Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, said.

While evidence that this week's sieges were carried out by Iranian Kurds is becoming irrefutable, the Iranian authorities are typically reluctant to admit to having homegrown terrorists or to reveal their ethnic backgrounds. Both would indicate a degree of instability and tensions that the leaders would rather not acknowledge. The fact that the attackers were in all likelihood Iranian Kurds, Sunnis from inside the country, is a source of concern, one analyst said.

''The border towns and villages and tribes along Iran's east, west and southern borders are poor and vulnerable to extremism,'' said Mashallah Shamsolvaezin, an Arabic affairs analyst. ''Young unemployed men can be wooed and recruited.''

Scanners, body checks and heavily armed security forces are typically rare sights in Tehran, which had seemingly been immune in recent years to the terrorism plaguing much of the Middle East and Europe.

But on Friday, two days after the attacks at the city's landmark Parliament building and the golden, domed mausoleum of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the founder of the Islamic Republic, heavily armed police officers and soldiers were everywhere.

Three members of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps stood at every metro station entrance, checking bags and watching for suspicious people. Plainclothes agents, recognizable by their government-issued walkie-talkies, paced the streets, stopping anyone who looked out of the ordinary.

For average Iranians, the initial shock had largely faded into mourning. ''I'm just so sad,'' said Hamed Heidari, 28, who said he had come to pay his respects at a tribute in Parliament to the 16 victims killed there.

Like a number of others who had gathered, he could not get in. Security was tight, and only those on lists were allowed in to participate in the ceremony. Mr. Heidari, who said he made handicrafts for a living, waited outside in the hot summer sun, along with dozens of others.

''We just never thought something like that could happen here,'' he said.

Just behind him, several windows in the Parliament building that had been shot out remained as evidence of the prolonged firefight between the three attackers and the security forces. ''It was right in the middle of Ramadan,'' Mr. Heidari said. ''What Muslim would do such a thing?''

A Muslim with the Islamic State, apparently. The extremist group issues yearly exhortations to its members to instigate attacks during Ramadan against its enemies in Europe and in the Middle East.

During Friday Prayer in Tehran, worshipers shouted, ''Death to Saudi Arabia'' and ''Death to the United States, Britain and Israel.'' One speaker, a moderator who leads the crowds in chanting slogans, also blamed the United States and Saudi Arabia.

''America and Saudi Arabia could not get anything from their proxy wars, so they decided to bring the war here, inside Iran,'' he said.

Later the prayer leader, Kazem Sadigi, said, ''These terrorists are the byproducts of the arrogant powers.'' In Iran's revolutionary language, ''the arrogant powers'' refers to the United States and its allies.

Outside of the Friday Prayer venue, on Enghelab, or Revolution Street, mourners gathered around trucks using trailers to carrying the coffins of some of those who died in Wednesday's attacks. One carried three coffins with three names: Ali Toudehfallah, Ali Gholizadeh and Reza Sabeti.

The trailers were decorated with flowers and wreaths. One had a banner reading ''Death to America'' and ''Death to Israel'' on its grille. An angry man slammed the banner, shouting, ''Damn you!''

A military band sat in the sweltering sun, also on top of a trailer, waiting for the procession to start driving through downtown Tehran.

Along the route two women were waiting to pay their final respects to a colleague, who had been shot dead while in a waiting room outside the main hall of Parliament. The victim, Hanieh Akbarian, 37, who taught adults to read and write, had come to Tehran to ask her local lawmaker to help her with insurance. She was among the first people killed.

''She just loved her job, helping people, teaching them to read,'' Faezeh Mirzaei said.

''I can't believe she is dead,'' said her friend Firouzeh Naghdizadeh.

They held up a banner they had made for Ms. Akbarian. It read, in formal Persian, ''We send our condolences for this painful death.''

Mourners attended a funeral in Tehran on Friday for some of the victims of sieges by terrorists this week at the Parliament building and a shrine to Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the republic's founder. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY EBRAHIM NOROOZI/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170610ed6a0004p



World; Middle East
Iranian Kurds Are Implicated in Terrorist Attacks in Tehran

By THOMAS ERDBRINK 
1,143 words
9 June 2017
20:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

TEHRAN —he Iranian authorities arrested 41 people Friday in connection with the twin terror attacks this week, the semiofficial Fars news agency reported, as evidence mounted that Iranian Kurds affiliated with the Islamic State extremist group had carried out the assault.

The men who made their way through the Parliament building on Wednesday, shooting assault rifles, throwing grenades and searching for a way into the main hall, were probably Iranian Kurds, security sources say, though only one —n Iranian Kurd —as been identified. The two people who attacked a shrine are understood to be an Iranian-Kurd and a man whose background is unknown, the security sources said.

The man identified by the Ministry of Intelligence, Serias Sadeghi, is a Kurdish Iranian from the city of Paveh in western Iran near the Iraqi border. In 2014, the Democratic Party of Kurdistan Iran, an opposition party, published a report about increasing Islamic State activities in Iranian Kurdistan that singled out Mr. Sadeghi as a prominent recruiter who, at times, held sessions in a local mosque.

One website, KhabarDena.Ir, on Friday quoted a community leader from Paveh, Mamusta Molla Ghader Ghaderi, as saying that some of the attackers were from Paveh. A video posted on the \b ISIS\b0  media channel Amaq News on Thursday shows a group of five men, with their leader, possibly Mr. Sadeghi, dressed in black with his face covered by a mask, speaking in both Arabic and Kurdish, claiming responsibility for the attacks.

“his is a message from the soldiers of Islamic State in Iran, soldiers of the first brigade of Islamic State in Iran which, God willing, won’ be the last,”he man says. “his brigade will mark the start of jihad in Iran, and we call on our Muslim brothers to join us.”

He concluded his message with a threat to Saudi Arabia, saying that it, too, will be targeted.

Publicly, the Iranian leadership has sought to cast blame for the attacks on its favorite targets: Saudi Arabia, the United States and Israel. The assaults “ill only increase hatred for the governments of the United States and their stooges in the region like the Saudis,”ran’ supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, said.

While evidence that this week’ attacks were carried out by Iranian Kurds is becoming irrefutable, the Iranian authorities are typically reluctant to admit to having homegrown terrorists or to reveal their ethnic backgrounds. Both would indicate a degree of instability and tensions that the Iranian leadership would rather not acknowledge. The fact that the attackers are in all likelihood Iranian Kurds, Sunnis from inside the country, is a source of concern, one analyst said.

“he border towns and villages and tribes along Iran’ East, West and Southern borders are poor and vulnerable to extremism,”aid Mashallah Shamsolvaezin, an Arabic affairs analyst. “oung unemployed men can be wooed and recruited.”

Scanners, body checks and heavily armed soldiers or police have been rare sights in Tehran, which has seemingly been immune in recent years to the terror attacks plaguing much of the Middle East and Europe.

But on Friday, two days after the attacks at the city’ landmark Parliament building and the golden, domed mausoleum of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the founder of the Islamic Republic, heavily armed police and soldiers were everywhere.

Three members of Iran’ Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps stood at every metro station entrance, checking bags and keeping an eye out for suspicious people. Plainclothes agents, recognizable by their government issued walkie-talkies, paced up and down the streets, stopping anyone who looked out of the ordinary.

For average Iranians, the initial shock had largely faded into mourning. “’ just so sad,”aid Hamed Heidari, 28, who said he had come to pay his respects at a tribute in the Parliament to the 16 people who died there in the attack.

Like a number of others who had gathered there, he could not get in. Security was tight, and only those on lists were allowed in to participate in the ceremony inside the building. Mr. Heidari, who said he made handicrafts for a living, waited outside in the hot summer sun, along with dozens of others. “e just never thought something like that could happen here.”

Just behind him, several windows in the Parliament that had been shot out remained as evidence of the prolonged firefight between the three attackers and the security forces. “t was right in the middle of Ramadan, Mr. Heidari said. “hat Muslim would do such a thing?”

A Muslim with the Islamic State, apparently. The extremist group issues yearly exhortations to its members to instigate attacks during Ramadan against its enemies in Europe and in the Middle East.

During the weekly Friday prayers, worshipers shouted “eath to Saudi Arabia”nd “eath the United States, Britain, and Israel.”ne speaker, a moderator who leads the crowds in chanting slogans, also blamed the United States and Saudi Arabia.

“merica and Saudi Arabia could not get anything from their proxy wars, so they decided to bring the war here, inside Iran,”e said. “hese terrorists are the byproducts of the arrogant powers,”he Friday prayer leader, Kazem Sadigi, said later. In Iran’ revolutionary language, “he arrogant powers”efers to the United States and its allies.

Outside of the Friday prayer venue, on Tehran’ Enghelab, or revolution street, mourners gathered around trucks using trailers to carry the coffins of some of those who died in the attack on Wednesday. One carried three coffins with three names: Ali Toudehfallah, Ali Gholizadeh and Reza Sabeti.

The trailers were decorated with flowers and wreaths. One had a banner reading “eath to America”nd “eath to Israel”n its grill. An angry man slammed the banner, shouting “amn you!”

A military band sat in the sweltering sun on chairs, also on top of a trailer, waiting for the procession to start driving through downtown Tehran.

Along the route two women were waiting to pay their final respects to a colleague, who was shot dead while in a waiting room outside the main hall of the Parliament. The victim, Hanieh Akbarian, 37, who taught adults to read and write, had come to Tehran to ask her local lawmaker to help her with insurance. She was among the first people killed.

“he just loved her job, helping people, teaching them to read,”aid Faezeh Mirzaei. “ can’ believe she is dead,”aid her friend, Firouzeh Naghdizadeh. They held up a banner they had made for Ms. Akbarian. It read, in formal Persian: “e send our condolences for this painful death.”

Mourners attended a funeral in Tehran on Friday for some of the victims of two attacks by terrorists aligned with the Islamic State. | Ebrahim Noroozi/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170609ed690048v



World; Australia
Australia to Tighten Parole Laws After Deadly Siege

By JACQUELINE WILLIAMS 
707 words
9 June 2017
14:39
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

SYDNEY, Australia —aws across Australia will be tightened to ensure that people with links to terrorism are not granted bail or parole, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said on Friday.

The Council of Australian Governments, which brings together federal, state and territorial leaders, reached agreement on the plan after a deadly siege in Brighton, a suburb of Melbourne, on Monday, for which the Islamic State has claimed responsibility.

Mr. Turnbull said the council had agreed at a meeting on Friday in Hobart, the capital of Tasmania, that laws would be changed to ensure that there would be “ presumption that neither bail nor parole will be granted to those who have demonstrated support for or have links to terrorist activity.”

“iolent criminals with terrorist links should not be walking the streets,”e said.

The siege in Brighton, in which a gunman shot a man dead and took a woman hostage before being killed by the police, led Mr. Turnbull to question how the assailant, who had a criminal record and was on a terrorism watch list, could have been granted parole.

The police identified the gunman as Yacqub Khayre, 29, an Australian citizen who had come to the country from Somalia as a child refugee. He was charged with planning a suicide attack against a Sydney army base in 2009 but was acquitted. Mr. Khayre had served time in prison for arson and violent crimes unrelated to terrorism and was on parole at the time of the Brighton attack, said Graham Ashton, the chief police commissioner for Victoria State.

“his terrorist attack by a known criminal, a man who was only recently released on parole, is a shocking cowardly crime,”r. Turnbull said at a news conference on Tuesday. That people “ith known records of violence”nd those “ith known terrorist connections or at least connections with extremists”ad been released on parole was a real issue that needed to be addressed, he added.

On Friday, Reuters reported that the counterterrorism police in Australia had conducted raids in Melbourne and were questioning three men they said were suspected of providing weapons used in the attack.

In the siege on Monday, the police were called to an apartment building after reports of gunfire. When they arrived, the building’ receptionist, a Chinese citizen, was found dead in the lobby. Mr. Khayre had taken a woman hostage, the police said, and, after exchanging fire with the authorities, he was fatally shot. The woman was rescued unharmed; three police officers were wounded.

The Islamic State issued a statement calling Mr. Khayre a soldier of the terrorist group who had been responding to calls to fight the coalition, which includes Australia, that is trying to defeat it in Iraq and Syria. The police initially said that nothing suggested Mr. Khayre had been acting on instructions from overseas, though the investigation is continuing.

The possible link to terrorism first emerged with a call to a television station during the siege, in which a man said, “his is for I.S.,”resumably a reference to the Islamic State, and, “his is for Al Qaeda.”he station, 7 News Melbourne, said that it and the police believed that the call had come from inside the building where the siege was taking place. A woman could be heard screaming in the background, 7 News said.

Ever since a spokesman of the Islamic State, Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, “ade his worldwide call to arms in September 2014, a number of unstable individuals with histories of violence have launched lone attacks,”aid Andrew Zammit, a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Melbourne who researches terrorism. “hayre looks like yet another example.”

* \b ISIS\b0  Says It’ Behind Hostage Siege and Killing in Australia

* Arrest of \b ISIS\b0  Suspect in Rural Town Puts Australia on Edge

* \b ISIS\b0  Fighter’ Australian Citizenship Is Revoked Under Antiterror Laws

* Australian Police Say 2 Teenagers Planned ‘mminent Attack’

Police officers searching the home of Yacqub Khayre, identified as the gunman in a deadly siege in Australia this week, in Melbourne on Tuesday. | David Crosling/European Pressphoto Agency | Mr. Khayre leaving a court in Melbourne in 2010. | Julian Smith/European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170609ed69002l8



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Killed 231 Civilians In Mosul, U.N. Says

By NICK CUMMING-BRUCE 
619 words
9 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

GENEVA -- Islamic State fighters shot and killed hundreds of residents in the Iraqi city of Mosul in the past two weeks, the United Nations said on Thursday, describing an increasingly desperate drive by the jihadists to prevent civilians from fleeing.

Iraqi forces, backed by airstrikes from a United States-led coalition, have made advances into the city, and the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, has responded in brutal fashion to halt the flight of civilians they want to use as human shields, the United Nations said.

The deadliest attack came June 1, when at least 163 civilians, including women and children, were killed near a Pepsi factory as they headed out of the Shifa neighborhood of Mosul, the United Nations' human rights office in Geneva said.

''They were gunned down as they were fleeing,'' said Ravina Shamdasani, a spokeswoman for the human rights office, which reported that, as of two days ago, the bodies of the victims were still lying in the streets.

About 200,000 civilians were still trapped in desperate conditions in the old city of Mosul, targeted by jihadists and suffering heavy casualties from coalition bombing and artillery fire.

Iraqi forces had been advising Mosul residents to stay in their houses because of the street-by-street fighting and aerial bombing, but government aircraft have dropped leaflets in recent days urging residents of the old city to flee.

The United Nations reported that the Islamic State had shot and killed at least 231 civilians in the past two weeks, but Ms. Shamdasani said that many other people were missing and that the actual death toll was almost certainly higher.

Fighters killed 27 civilians in the Shifa area last month. On Saturday, they shot 41 more in the same neighborhood as they tried to reach positions held by advancing Iraqi forces, Ms. Shamdasani said.

Since Iraqi forces opened their campaign to retake western Mosul more than three months ago, the Islamic State has herded thousands of civilians into locations near the fighters' positions to form a human shield.

The militants have also positioned snipers on rooftops to shoot residents who try to flee, along with other steps to prevent their escape.

Civilians who have managed to get out have told of fighters killing men who were planning to leave and shooting fugitives fleeing through the streets, Amnesty International reported on Thursday.

Ms. Shamdasani said that the Islamic State ''is getting increasingly desperate and increasingly overwhelmed by Iraqi forces, and their response to this is to up the cost of trying to flee.''

In another episode at the end of May, Islamic State fighters locked nine civilians in a basement of a hospital. As government forces neared the hospital, the militants killed the civilians and then set fire to the building, Ms. Shamdasani said.

The mounting toll from Iraqi and coalition airstrikes prompted human rights organizations on Thursday to call on those forces to make greater efforts to avoid civilian casualties, and to halt the use of heavy weapons and munitions in densely populated areas.

The United Nations said it was investigating reports that airstrikes on Islamic State positions in the Zanjilly neighborhood of Mosul had killed as many as 80 civilians.

The episode is believed to be one of the worst of its kind since an airstrike in March hit a booby-trapped building where the Islamic State was keeping civilians, killing approximately 140 people.

Civilians fled clashes in Mosul, crossing an area of the Rifai neighborhood targeted by a sniper. The United Nations estimated hundreds were killed in two weeks. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170609ed690006e



Foreign Desk; SECTA
As Toll Rises, Iran Says  ISIS  Recruited Attackers From Within Country

By THOMAS ERDBRINK; Prashant S. Rao, Michael Wolgelenter and Rick Gladstone contributed reporting. 
948 words
9 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

At least five assailants in the deadly Tehran attacks were recruited by the Islamic State from inside Iran, the government said Thursday, a strong indication they were Iranian citizens.

The new detail about the assailants, who were killed during the attacks on Wednesday, came as the Iranian news media reported that the civilian casualty toll had risen to 17 dead and 52 wounded, and as the police presence in the Iranian capital increased noticeably.

The assaults' aftermath also was punctuated by new acrimony between Iranian leaders and the Trump administration, which expressed condolences on Wednesday coupled with an assertion that their country had fallen ''victim to the evil they promote.'' The assaults also coincided with Senate action advancing new sanctions on Iran.

Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif described the American response in a Twitter message as ''repugnant.''

Repugnant WH statement & Senate sanctions as Iranians counter terror backed by US clients.Iranian people reject such US claims of friendship -- Javad Zarif (@JZarif) June 8, 2017

Five men and a woman armed with rifles and explosives carried out simultaneous assaults on Tehran's Parliament building and the tomb of Iran's revolutionary founder in broad daylight, surprising security forces and causing panic and mayhem that lasted for hours. The Islamic State, the Sunni extremist group, asserted responsibility.

Official Iranian news accounts said the men were killed and the woman blew herself up.

It was Iran's worst episode of terrorism in years, exposing security lapses and undermining government assertions that the country is a beacon of calm in the volatile Middle East.

The attacks also appeared to be the first time that Iran, a predominantly Shiite Muslim nation, had been successfully targeted by the Islamic State, which considers Shiites to be religious traitors.

A government statement issued Thursday about the attacks said the male assailants had left Iran at an unspecified time to fight for the Islamic State in Mosul, Iraq, and in Raqqa, Syria, the group's de facto capital.

They returned to Iran last July or August under the leadership of a commander with the nom de guerre Abu Aisha, the statement said, and had ''intended to carry out terrorist operations in religious cities.''

The statement did not specify whether they were Iranian citizens or provide further information about the female assailant.

But Reza Seifollahi, deputy chief of the Supreme National Security Council, was quoted by the independent newspaper Shargh as saying the men were Iranian.

If true, that would be an unusual acknowledgment, given the antipathy between the Islamic State and Iran. Most of Iran's 80 million people are Shiites, although sizable Sunni minorities inhabit some border regions and the Islamic State has sought to recruit from among them.

In March, the Islamic State released a video featuring Iranian fighters, in which it called on Sunnis in Iran to form cells and attack Shiite forces, according to the SITE Intelligence Group, which analyzed the video.

Several witnesses to the attacks reported that the assailants had spoken Arabic with an Iranian accent, suggesting that they were ethnic Arabs living in Iran.

In Khuzestan, an oil-rich province that borders Iraq and that is home to many Arabs, both Sunni and Shiite, a video emerged two weeks ago of men in black carrying weapons and shouting slogans on the streets of Ahvaz, the provincial capital. They were arrested the next day, the Intelligence Ministry said.

A southeastern province, Sistan and Baluchistan, is home to several extremist Sunni groups that have committed bombings, assassinations and other attacks on Iranian security forces and officials in recent times. Iran's intelligence minister, Mahmoud Alavi, said on Thursday that Iran had broken up ''a hundred terrorist plots'' over the past two years, according to the news site Asr-e Iran. Former inmates of Evin Prison in Tehran have said they saw dozens of incarcerated Sunni extremists, often Kurds and Baluchis. Several of them have been hanged.

Mr. Alavi suggested the assailants killed on Wednesday had affiliations with the ultraconservative form of Sunni Islam practiced in Saudi Arabia, Iran's regional rival, but stopped short of directly blaming the Saudis.

''There is this belief in the world that Saudi Arabia is the ideological source of these terrorist movements, but it is too soon to say Saudi Arabia was behind the attack because we don't want to make statements without evidence,'' Mr. Alavi was quoted by the Iranian Students' News Agency as saying during a visit to victims at a Tehran hospital.

Saudi Arabia has denied any complicity in the attacks.

Statements of support for Iran continued to pour in on Thursday.

Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq expressed his condolences in a message to President Hassan Rouhani.

President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, who has received crucial support from Iran during his country's six-year-old civil war, spoke by telephone with Mr. Rouhani and affirmed his determination to fight ''terrorists and their supporters,'' according to a report from Syrian state media. Both Iran and Syria portray the war as a conflict against Western- and gulf-sponsored terrorism.

The Lebanese militant group Hezbollah, which serves as a proxy for Iran in Syria and Lebanon, also condemned the attacks, calling them part of an ''international, destructive plan.''

Security forces, above, on Wednesday during the attack outside Parliament in Tehran, the capital. At left, a gunman is shown on closed-circuit television entering the building, where a victim lies prone. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TASNIM NEWS AGENCY, VIA REUTERS; ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN BROADCASTING, VIA REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020170609ed690005n



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Military Says It Shot Down Drone That Attacked American Allies in Syria

By MICHAEL R. GORDON 
863 words
9 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- An American warplane shot down a ''pro-Syria regime'' drone on Thursday after the drone attacked United States-backed fighters in southern Syria, the American military said.

The confrontation was the latest clash in a potential proxy war in Syria that pits Iranian-backed militias that support President Bashar al-Assad against Syrian fighters who have been trained by American, British and other coalition military advisers.

Their ultimate goal, many analysts say, is to link up with Iranian-backed militias in Iraq and establish a supply corridor that runs from Syria to Iraq and, eventually, to Iran.

The episode occurred when the drone, which United States officials said appeared to be Iranian-made, dropped a munition near the Syrian fighters, who were accompanied at the time by advisers from the American-led coalition.

The ordnance missed, and an F-15E fighter shot down the drone, which was similar in size to an American Predator and was still armed with other weapons.

The area in southeastern Syria is becoming increasingly crowded as Iranian-backed militias, including the Lebanese group Hezbollah, have moved to extend their reach. Their initial goal appears to be to seize the area around the city of Deir al-Zour, which has been held by the Islamic State.

Their push eastward has brought them into proximity with American-backed Syrian fighters, who are being trained to battle the Islamic State and are operating out of a garrison at al-Tanf, a Syrian town close to the intersection of the Syrian, Iraqi and Jordanian borders.

Tensions in southeastern Syria have been running high, but the drone episode was the first time that pro-government forces there had fired on the American-backed fighters and their coalition advisers.

''That was the first time that we saw them actually firing or shooting at coalition forces,'' Col. Ryan Dillon, the spokesman for the American-led task force that is fighting the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

The United States Central Command, which oversees military operations in the Middle East, said in a statement that it wanted to keep the focus on fighting the Islamic State and was not looking for a confrontation with the Assad government -- or with the Russian and Iranian-backed forces that are supporting it.

''The coalition's mission is to defeat ISIS in Iraq and Syria,'' the Central Command said. ''The coalition does not seek to fight Syrian regime, Russian or pro-regime forces partnered with them. The demonstrated hostile intent and actions of pro-regime forces near coalition and partner forces in southern Syria, however, continue to concern us, and the coalition will take appropriate measures to protect our forces.''

But some analysts say the operations by the American-backed Syrian fighters also serve the secondary purpose of denying important terrain to Iran's proxy forces.

''Iran's strategic goal is to capture a major border crossing and establish a land route from Syria to Iraq and, ultimately, to Iran as the Islamic State crumbles,'' said Amir Toumaj, a research analyst with the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, a Washington-based policy center.

''Even though the United States is careful to say that it is only fighting ISIS, its strategy also appears to be intended to deny the Iranians that land corridor,'' he said.

There is no question that the situation in southeastern Syria has heated up in recent weeks. To protect the garrison at al-Tanf, the United States has warned Iranian-backed militias and Syrian forces to stay out of the ''deconfliction'' zone it has declared around the base.

On May 18, American planes bombed a tank, a bulldozer and an excavator that the Iranian-supported militias were using to build an outpost within the restricted zone. That action was taken after the United States military failed to get the militias to reverse course by buzzing their convoys with aircraft firing a warning.

The garrison at al-Tanf has since been reinforced, and the Americans have dropped leaflets urging the pro-Assad forces to stay out of the zone, but that message has been ignored. On June 6, the American-led coalition again bombed Iranian-backed fighters that ventured inside of the restricted area. On Thursday morning, the coalition stuck again, bombing two armed pickup trucks inside the zone.

The episode involving the drone, however, occurred outside the zone in an area northeast of al-Tanf. An American official said that the zone was intended to keep pro-Assad forces at a safe distance from the al-Tanf garrison but that the American-backed Syrian fighters and their coalition advisers patrolled and operated beyond the buffer area.

The Americans have not been only ones issuing warnings. On Wednesday, the media arm of Hezbollah issued a statement warning that it would strike at the Americans if they crossed any ''red lines,'' which it did not define. It said that only ''self-restraint'' was keeping it from attacking American forces.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170609ed690004z



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Germany Arrests Syrian Linked to  ISIS  News Arm

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
1,129 words
9 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON -- The authorities in Germany announced on Thursday that they had arrested a 23-year-old Syrian who is suspected of working for the Islamic State's news agency, which announces claims of responsibility for the group's attacks, including the most recent ones in London and Tehran.

According to a statement from the federal prosecutor's office, the Syrian -- a man identified only as Mohammed G., who was arrested on Wednesday -- arrived in Germany in September 2015. ''Once he arrived, he acted as a contact person between the news agency Amaq, which is considered part of Islamic State, and possible assailants of the terror organization,'' the statement said.

If proved, the presence of a member of Amaq in Western Europe would help answer a riddle: How is it that the Islamic State has continued to run a media empire, one that rapidly turns to social media to issue claims of responsibility for attacks, despite its losses of territory in Iraq and Syria?

Analysts had long suspected that the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, had media operatives on different continents and across time zones, both because of the rapid response of its statements and because its claims are frequently translated into numerous languages, including German.

''There was an assumption all along that at least a small chunk of ISIS media is run by people in the West,'' said Amarnath Amarasingam, senior research fellow at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue. ''This is an interesting confirmation of something people always suspected. So it's quite important.''

Experts on terrorism first noticed Amaq in 2014, during the drawn-out battle for the town of Kobani in Syria, a prolonged confrontation that dragged out over months. They began by posting small updates on battlefield skirmishes. But they soon became the go-to outlet for the terrorist group's claims of responsibility, posting their ''bulletins'' across a distinctive blue electronic backdrop, which are then uploaded to their chat rooms, or channels, on the messaging app Telegram.

It was on Amaq that ISIS first claimed a couple's shooting rampage in San Bernardino, Calif., in 2015, and the deaths of 49 people at an Orlando, Fla., nightclub in 2016. In the last week it claimed a terrorist attack in London; a hostage-taking in Melbourne, Australia; and a pair of deadly assaults in Tehran.

The arrest in Germany could also shed light on another little-understood aspect of the news media arm of ISIS.

In most of its claims of responsibility, Amaq attributes the information to ''a security source.'' For example, after three Islamic State followers carried out a van and knife attack in London on Saturday night, Amaq sent out this statement a little more than 24 hours later: ''Security source to the Amaq Agency: A detachment of Islamic State fighters carried out the London attack yesterday.''

Analysts have been puzzled by this reference to so-called sources, with many casting doubt that the terrorist group's media operatives had any actual contacts, and suspected that Amaq was instead waiting for the mainstream new media to announce whether the assailant was Muslim.

The statement from the prosecutor explains that Mohammad G. had been communicating via social media with a man who went on to carry out a 2016 arson in Sweden.

Mohammad G. contacted his source after the attack to confirm details of what had happened, according to the statement. ''One day after this attack, the accused demanded from his contact person (in Sweden) a personal claim of this deed,'' the prosecutor's office said. ''The background was that Amaq did not want to issue a report about the attack without such a claim.''

The statement continued: ''After that, IS claimed the attack in the al-Naba newspaper which it publishes,'' referring to the group's weekly newsletter, which occasionally claims attacks ahead of Amaq.

The attack in question occurred in October 2016 in Malmo, Sweden, when a 30-year-old Syrian man threw a Molotov cocktail at a community center.

According to an English-language news organization, The Local, investigators found an image of the Islamic State flag, videos showing ISIS members killing people and instructions on how to make a detonator on the man's computer. The events led to a debate, with one district court judge initially dismissing the violence as arson and not terrorism. Many in Sweden and beyond used social media to say that ISIS's assertion of responsibility showed that ''they claim anything.''

In fact, the German statement gives an indication of the fact-checking process that was carried out in at least one case before ISIS makes a claim.

''We've all assumed that they are reading news reports, and then saying, 'Our guy did this.' But this is interesting because this does show that they clearly have someone, who is one of their guys, and who is getting verification and confirming that this attack was in our name,'' said Shiraz Maher, the deputy director of the International Center for the Study of Radicalization at King's College, London, cautioning that the news release mentioned only a single example.

Despite a widespread view that the Islamic State opportunistically claims attacks with which it has little genuine connection, its track record -- minus a handful of exceptions -- suggests a more rigorous protocol.

At times, the Islamic State has gotten details wrong, or inflated casualty figures, but the gist of its claims is typically correct. The group has made it clear that it considers itself responsible both for acts carried out by its own personnel, as well as acts carried out by people who lack direct ties to the group but were inspired by its propaganda.

In several instances, moreover, the Islamic State has claimed attacks before the identities of the killers were known.

For example, it was not until Monday evening -- one day after ISIS claimed the London attack -- that police identified two of the three attackers, and it was only on Tuesday that the name emerged of the third attacker, who had been stopped at an Italian airport in possession of ISIS propaganda.

Similarly, Amaq claimed the shooting in the Orlando nightclub before police released the transcript of the 911 tape, which showed that the gunman, Omar Mateen, had repeatedly told the phone dispatcher and later a police negotiator that he was carrying out the violence in the name of the Islamic State.

''Much like with any media, or journalist, they thrive on credibility,'' said Mr. Amarasingam. ''It doesn't make any sense that they would just go out and claim every garbage can that gets kicked over. It doesn't work that way.''

Follow Rukmini Callimachi on Twitter @rcallimachi.

Document NYTF000020170609ed690003l



Foreign Desk; SECTA
A Balancing Act In the Mideast

By DAVID E. SANGER, MARK LANDLER and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,341 words
8 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Rarely has the Trump administration spoken of Iran other than to condemn it as the world's chief sponsor of terrorism and an aspiring nuclear weapons state. So when the White House woke on Wednesday to images of a possible Islamic State attack on Tehran, it prompted a sharp quandary: How does President Trump condemn the violence without seeming to embrace the victims?

Several administration officials said it took most of the day for the White House to work out the terse, curt wording of a statement that sought to show sympathy for the Iranian public even as it pointedly suggested that the behavior of Tehran's clerical leaders made its people a target.

''We grieve and pray for the innocent victims of the terrorist attacks in Iran, and for the Iranian people, who are going through such challenging times,'' Mr. Trump wrote. ''We underscore that states that sponsor terrorism risk falling victim to the evil they promote.''

The statement capped a day during which Mr. Trump thrust himself into the messy politics of Persian Gulf states, trying to also play peacemaker in a bitter dispute between Qatar and other Sunni Muslim neighbors that threatens to splinter a Middle Eastern alliance fighting the Islamic State.

For the administration, Wednesday served as a reminder that the world does not operate in the black-and-white terms that Mr. Trump used on the campaign trail and on Twitter , one in which the Sunni-dominated Islamic State and Shiite Iran are part of a continuum of ''radical Islamic extremism.''

''This is an illustration of the competing priorities and contradictions facing this administration, which will prove hard to reconcile,'' said Robert Malley, the top Middle East policy official for the Obama administration. ''You can't be all-out against Iran, all-out against ISIS and terrorism, and maintain 'America First' -- another way of saying keeping a light footprint in the region.''

Just a day earlier, on Tuesday, Mr. Trump posted a series of tweets taking credit for Saudi Arabia's move to isolate Qatar and appearing to ally with Riyadh. The president also asked King Salman of Saudi Arabia in a call to draw up a list of grievances for Qatar to address, according to a senior administration official.

That call followed several by Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson , who knows the Sunni gulf leaders from his days as chief executive of Exxon Mobil. He asked Saudi officials to list the demands they want Doha to meet in return for an end to the dispute, and lift a newly imposed embargo against Qatar by Saudi Arabia, Egypt and several other states.

Inside the administration, Mr. Tillerson and Defense Secretary Jim Mattis repeatedly noted that the United States could not afford a rupture between Saudi Arabia and Qatar. There are roughly 11,000 American troops at Al Udeid Air Base, outside Doha, where the air war against the Islamic State is managed.

The Qataris were shocked at the contradiction between evenhanded statements from the State Department and Pentagon, and Mr. Trump's tweets castigating the tiny Gulf state. They began asking American officials whether their longtime alliance was in peril.

By Wednesday, Mr. Trump offered to invite both sides to the White House and suggested Mr. Tillerson as a mediator. The president also called the Qatari emir, Sheikh Tamim bin HamaAl-Thani, to repeat his urgings on Twitter to cut off financing of extremist groups. While Qatar's support for those groups -- including the Muslim Brotherhood , which the Saudis and the Egyptians consider a serious threat -- is without question, the same charge could be leveled at the Saudis, who have allowed funds to flow to other Sunni extremists.

Analysts said Mr. Trump's public support for Saudi Arabia emboldened the kingdom and sent a chill through other Gulf states, including Oman and Kuwait, that fear that any country that defies the Saudis or the United Arab Emirates could face ostracism as Qatar has.

''Everyone in the region is looking over their shoulder, thinking, 'This is potentially us,''' said Gerald M. Feierstein, a former ambassador to Yemen who was the State Department's second-ranking diplomat for Middle East policy from 2013 to 2016.

Mr. Feierstein, now the director for gulf affairs at the Middle East Institute, said that ''the bottom line for us is, we have to come out of all this with a consensus on combating terror finance and not blowing the G.C.C. to smithereens,'' he said, referring to the Gulf Cooperation Council , the loose association of Sunni Arab states.

Among the Saudi complaints about Qatar -- mostly that it finances extremists and hosts Al Jazeera , the Arab news channel that is frequently critical of the Saudis -- is its episodic cooperation with Iran. That may add to Mr. Trump's suspicions about Qatar.

Ultimately, Mr. Trump told the Saudi and Qatari leaders that the campaign against the Islamic State would be more effective with a unified alliance. Mr. Trump also spoke on Wednesday with Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al-Nahyan, the crown prince of Abu Dhabi in the U.A.E., underscoring G.C.C. unity to promote regional stability, ''but never at the expense of eliminating funding for radical extremism or defeating terrorism,'' according to an administration statement.

Mr. Trump's hesitant response to the terrorist attack in Iran underscored that the hurdles to pursuing a unified strategy come from Washington as well.

The Trump administration is divided about how to deal with Tehran, and two White House reviews of Iran policy have been grinding ahead for weeks.

The carefully bifurcated White House statement about the onslaught in Iran, which killed 12 and wounded 46, was issued shortly before 4 p.m. in Washington. More than three hours earlier, the State Department issued its own statement to stoutly condemn the attacks.

''We express our condolences to the victims and their families, and send our thoughts and prayers to the people of Iran,'' said a State Department spokeswoman, Heather Nauert. ''The depravity of terrorism has no place in a peaceful, civilized world.''

One faction in the National Security Council has been pressing to find ways to sanction Iran, hoping to reimpose economic penalties against Tehran that were lifted after the 2015 nuclear agreement between world powers and the Islamic republic. But that strategy risks blowing up the accord, which others in the administration -- including Mr. Mattis and the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster -- want to preserve to keep Iran from quickly developing a nuclear weapon. To date, Iran has complied with the agreement.

But there appears to be no chance, administration officials say, that the Trump administration will try to find common cause with Tehran on fighting the Islamic State. Nor does there appear to be a strategy yet for managing the growing competition between Saudi Arabia and Iran for dominance of the Middle East.

The result is that while the Trump administration now finds itself in the middle of the Saudi-Qatari dispute, it may soon find itself caught between the Saudis and Iran. On Wednesday, Tehran accused the Saudis of likely being behind the terrorist attack against the Parliament in Tehran, despite no evidence of such responsibility so far.

''It's in U.S. interests to try and compel Tehran and Riyadh to address their differences and cooperate against ISIS,'' said Karim Sadjadpour , a senior fellow in the Middle East Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . ''Acrimony and distrust between Iran and Saudi Arabia only causes more civilian casualties in Syria and Yemen, more refugees pouring into Europe, and more Sunni and Shia radicalism.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

President Trump on Wednesday, when he tried to play peacemaker in a dispute between Qatar and other Sunni Muslim neighbors, offering to invite both sides to the White House. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AL DRAGO/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A11) 

Document NYTF000020170608ed680004u



World; Middle East
U.S. Says It Shot Down Drone That Attacked Fighters in Syria

By MICHAEL R. GORDON 
930 words
8 June 2017
21:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —n American warplane shot down a “ro-Syrian regime”drone on Thursday after the drone attacked United States-backed fighters in southern Syria, the American military said.

The confrontation was the latest clash in a potential proxy war in Syria that pits Iranian-backed militias that support President Bashar al-Assad against Syrian fighters who have been trained by American, British and other coalition military advisers.

Their ultimate goal, many analysts say, is to link up with Iranian-backed militias in Iraq and establish a supply corridor that runs from Syria to Iraq and, eventually, to Iran.

The episode occurred when the drone, which United States officials said appeared to be Iranian-made, dropped a munition near the Syrian fighters, who were accompanied at the time by advisers from the American-led coalition.

The ordnance missed, and an F-15E fighter shot down the drone, which was similar in size to an American Predator and was still armed with other weapons.

The area in southeastern Syria is becoming increasingly crowded as Iranian-backed militias, including the Lebanese group Hezbollah, have moved to extend their reach. Their initial goal appears to be to seize the area around the city of Deir al-Zour, which has been held by the Islamic State.

Their push eastward has brought them into proximity with American-backed Syrian fighters, who are being trained to battle the Islamic State and are operating out of a garrison at al-Tanf, a Syrian town close to the intersection of the Syrian, Iraqi and Jordanian borders.

Tensions in southeastern Syria have been running high, but the drone episode was the first time that pro-government forces there had fired on the American-backed fighters and their coalition advisers.

“hat was the first time that we saw them actually firing or shooting at coalition forces,”ol. Ryan Dillon, the spokesman for the American-led task force that is fighting the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

The United States Central Command, which oversees military operations in the Middle East, said in a statement that it wanted to keep the focus on fighting the Islamic State and was not looking for a confrontation with the Assad government —r with the Russian and Iranian-backed forces that are supporting it.

“he coalition’ mission is to defeat ISIS in Iraq and Syria,”he Central Command said in a statement. “he coalition does not seek to fight Syrian regime, Russian or pro-regime forces partnered with them. The demonstrated hostile intent and actions of pro-regime forces near coalition and partner forces in southern Syria, however, continue to concern us, and the coalition will take appropriate measures to protect our forces.”

But some analysts assert that the operations by the American-backed Syrian fighters also serve the secondary purpose of denying important terrain to Iran’ proxy forces.

“ran’ strategic goal is to capture a major border crossing and establish a land route from Syria to Iraq and, ultimately, to Iran as the Islamic State crumbles,”aid Amir Toumaj, a research analyst with the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, a Washington-based policy center.

“ven though the United States is careful to say that it is only fighting ISIS, its strategy also appears to be intended to deny the Iranians that land corridor,”r. Toumaj added.

There is no question that the situation in southeastern Syria has heated up in recent weeks. To protect the garrison at al-Tanf, the United States has warned Iranian-backed militias and Syrian forces to stay out of “econfliction”one it has declared around the base.

On May 18, American planes bombed a tank, a bulldozer and an excavator that the Iranian-supported militias were using to try and build an outpost within the restricted zone. That action was taken after the United States military failed to get the militias to reverse course by buzzing their convoys with aircraft firing a warning.

The garrison at al-Tanf has since been reinforced, and the Americans have been dropping leaflets urging the pro-Assad forces to stay out of the zone, but that message has been ignored. On June 6, the American-led coalition again bombed Iranian-backed fighters that ventured inside of the restricted area. On Thursday morning the coalition stuck again, bombing two pickup trucks carrying weapons that were inside the zone.

The episode involving the drone, however, occurred outside the zone in an area northeast of al-Tanf. American official said that the zone is intended to keep pro-Assad forces at a safe distance from the al-Tanf garrison but that the American-backed Syrian fighters and their coalition advisers patrol and operate beyond the buffer area.

The Americans, however, have not been only ones issuing warnings. On Wednesday, the media arm of Hezbollah issued a statement warning that it would strike at the Americans if they crossed any “ed lines,”hich it did not define. It said that only “elf-restraint”as keeping it from attacking American forces.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* U.S.-Backed Forces Begin Assault on Raqqa, \b ISIS\b0  Stronghold in Syria

* U.S. Warplanes in Syria Hit Pro-Government Militia Convoy

* White House Accepts ‘olitical Reality’f Assad’ Grip on Power in Syria

The drone, which was still armed, was shot down by an F-15E fighter similar to the one shown here. | Larry MacDougal/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170608ed68006y1



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Dual Sieges by Terrorists Shatter Calm in Tehran

By THOMAS ERDBRINK and MUJIB MASHAL; Reporting was contributed by Fahim Abed, Anne Barnard, Mona Boshnaq, Rukmini Callimachi, Sewell Chan, Nada Homsi, Isabel Kershner, Salman Masood, Rod Nordland, Hwaida Saad, Eric Schmitt, Jawad Sukhanyar, Nour Youssef and Rick Gladstone. 
1,766 words
8 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Armed assailants, including some disguised as women, stunned Iran on Wednesday with brazen attacks on the Parliament building and the tomb of its revolutionary founder, the worst terrorist strike to hit the Islamic republic in years.

At least 12 people were killed and 46 were wounded in the near-simultaneous assaults, which lasted for hours, clearly took Iran's elite security forces by surprise and shattered the self-proclaimed image of calm in a turbulent region.

The six known attackers also were killed, official news media said, and five suspects were reported detained. Their identities were not made clear.

''We will avenge the blood of those martyred in today's terrorism attacks,'' said Brig. Gen. Hossein Salami, deputy commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, the country's powerful paramilitary force.

In a statement, the Revolutionary Guards appeared to blame Saudi Arabia and the United States for the assaults even as responsibility for them was asserted by the Islamic State, the Sunni extremist group that has taken credit for terrorist attacks around the world in the past few weeks.

If the Islamic State's claim is true, that would be its first successful attack in Iran, which is predominantly Shiite Muslim and regarded by Sunni militants as a nation of heretics. Iranian-backed forces in Iraq and Syria are helping battle the Islamic State.

Eleven people died in the Parliament building assault, and one at the mausoleum of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, father of the 1979 revolution, whose shrine is a magnet for visitors. Four of the assailants were killed at the Parliament building, official news media said, and two at the mausoleum. Five were men, and one mausoleum assailant was a woman.

The audacity of the assaults, and the hours it took to end them, suggested that Iranian security officials had been caught unprepared -- especially for what seemed like a coordinated plan conceived well in advance.

''It's very clear that for this group to be able to mount such attacks it must have had a network inside the country that was not put in place yesterday, an infrastructure that took time to develop,'' said Randa Slim, an analyst at the Middle East Institute in Washington.

Tensions in the Middle East were already high after a visit by President Trump last month, in which he exalted and emboldened Saudi Arabia, Iran's regional rival. Saudi Arabia and several Sunni allies led a regional effort on Monday to isolate Qatar, the tiny Persian Gulf country that maintains good relations with Iran.

Expressions of sympathy from world leaders for the victims poured in after the assaults. But hours elapsed before a condolence statement was issued by the Trump administration, which has called Iran the leading state sponsor of terrorism.

''The United States condemns the terrorist attacks in Tehran today,'' the statement from the State Department said, adding, ''The depravity of terrorism has no place in a peaceful, civilized world.''

Afterward, however, the White House press office issued a modified version with a swipe at Iran's government. ''We underscore that states that sponsor terrorism risk falling victim to the evil they promote,'' the statement said.

On Thursday, the Iraqi foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, denounced the statement on Twitter. ''Repugnant WH statement & Senate sanctions as Iranians counter terror backed by US clients. Iranian people reject such US claims of friendship,'' he said.

The Saudis rejected Iran's accusation of complicity. Foreign Minister Adel al-Jubeir, speaking in Germany, said that he did not know who was responsible and that ''we condemn terrorist attacks anywhere they occur.''

Hours earlier, Mr. Jubeir said Iran should be punished for what he called its interference in the region.

In their public pronouncements, Iranian leaders sought to belittle the assailants and their acts, emphasizing that the Parliament chamber itself had never been breached.

''The Iranian nation is moving forward and advancing; even these firecrackers that were set off today will not impact our nation's will; everyone must know this,'' Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the nation's supreme leader, said on his official website.

The speaker of Parliament, Ali Larijani, called the attacks a ''minor incident,'' saying that ''some cowardly terrorists'' had infiltrated the legislative complex.

But accounts of lawmakers and journalists stuck inside the Parliament building suggested panic and mayhem, and state news media video showed some people escaping through windows.

The attacks started around 10:30 a.m., when men armed with assault rifles and suicide vests -- some of them dressed as women -- descended on the Parliament building, killing at least one guard and wounding and kidnapping other people. That standoff lasted until midafternoon.

In a sign that elite security forces had trouble containing the situation, one attacker left the Parliament building after an hour, ran around shooting on Tehran's streets, then returned to the building -- where at least one assailant blew himself up on the fourth floor as others fired from the windows.

''I cannot talk, I'm stuck here, and the situation is really dangerous, the shooting is continuing, we are surrounded, and I cannot talk,'' an Iranian journalist, Ehsan Bodaghi, said by phone from inside the building during the standoff.

Korosh Karmpur, a member of Parliament, said in an account reported by the Tasnim News Agency that he had played dead to avoid getting shot after leaving the hall to receive an arriving guest. He was chatting with a guard, Mr. Karmpur said, when gunfire erupted.

''As soon as one guard fell, a person screaming 'Allahu akbar' started firing on people and a second person followed and kept firing with a Kalashnikov,'' Mr. Karmpur said. ''I didn't have a weapon, so I dropped to the floor so the terrorists would think I also was hit.''

He said the assailants kept shooting in a failed effort to enter the parliamentary chamber, then headed for lawmaker offices on a different floor.

Mohammad Ali Saki, editor of The Tehran Times, said in a phone interview that the Parliament building assailants had ''targeted guards, cleaners, employees of the administrative and finance sections,'' but had ''never got near the Parliament chamber itself.''

The assailants were armed with AK-47s and hand grenades and wore what appeared to be explosive vests, he said.

Mohammed Abasi, a photographer who arrived as the attack was unfolding, said that he saw security forces ''firing at the attackers from outside'' and that some reporters and photographers covering the Parliament session were stuck inside awaiting rescue.

''Naturally, for a few hours a terrorist attack like this leaves a shock: Our countrymen were killed, and this was a terrorist attack,'' he said. ''But I already see that it is uniting Iranians -- there is a sense of fight.''

The Islamic State released a graphic 24-second video showing a bloodied man lying in the Parliament building while a gunman shouted in Arabic: ''Thank God! Do you think that we are going to leave? We will remain here, God willing.''

The assault on the Khomeini mausoleum, about 10 miles south of Parliament, lasted for about 90 minutes, state news media reported.

Two assailants entered the west wing of the sprawling compound. According to local news agencies, at least one attacker detonated explosives in the western entrance. Another was reported to have committed suicide by swallowing a cyanide pill, although another account said the militant had been shot to death by security forces.

Mohammed Ali Ansari, overseer of the mausoleum, said that militants who appeared to have explosives strapped to them ''started shooting blindly and without a target.''

In the view of many in Iran, the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, is inextricably linked to Saudi Arabia. ''ISIS ideologically, financially and logistically is fully supported and sponsored by Saudi Arabia -- they are one and the same,'' said Hamidreza Taraghi, a hard-line analyst.

One Iranian security official said the attacks had been a message from Saudi Arabia meant to teach Iran a lesson. He also said the assaults were intended to test Iran's reaction.

While terrorist attacks have become more frequent in Europe and in much of the Middle East, Iran had remained comparatively safe. During May's election campaign, President Hassan Rouhani often lauded the country's security forces and intelligence agencies for their vigilance.

For many years, however, the country endured a bitter campaign of attacks by an armed opposition group, the Mujahedeen Khalq or M.E.K., which for decades had been supported by the former Iraqi dictator, Saddam Hussein.

In many M.E.K. attacks, members would take cyanide when cornered. In 2012, the group was taken off the United States' list of terrorist organizations with the support of conservative Republicans who sought to recast it as a legitimate political opposition organization, which also goes by the name of the National Council of Resistance of Iran.

Some Iranian analysts suggested that the M.E.K. may have been connected to the Wednesday assaults, partly because of the targets: M.E.K. leaders had said Ayatollah Khomeini's tomb would be among their first. The use of a female attacker and cyanide pill to commit suicide also smacked of the M.E.K.'s past practices.

''This is not to say that the attack was an M.E.K. operation,'' said Rasool Nafisi, an Iranian-American scholar, ''but it is fair to say that the group's 'expertise' might have been utilized in training those terrorists who targeted Iran.''

The group condemned the attacks, denied involvement and accused Iran's leaders of having secretly welcomed them. Maryam Rajavi, president of the National Council of Resistance of Iran, said online that Ayatollah Khamenei was ''trying to switch the place of murderer and the victim and portray the central banker of terrorism as a victim.''

Follow Thomas Erdbrink @ThomasErdbrink and Mujib Mashal @MujMash on Twitter.

Iranian police officers helped civilians leave the Parliament building in Tehran on Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY OMID VAHABZADEH/FARS NEWS, VIA AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A1); Members of Iranian security forces in action outside the Parliament building in Tehran during Wednesday's terrorist attacks.; People ran out of the Parliament building during the attacks on Wednesday. The near-simulta- neous assaults lasted for hours, clearly taking Iran's elite security forces by surprise. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TIMA AGENCY, VIA REUTERS) (A11) 

Document NYTF000020170608ed680005c



NEWS ANALYSIS
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Assaults Pour Gas on Saudi Arabia's Rivalry With Iran and Qatar

By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK and ANNE BARNARD; David D. Kirkpatrick reported from Doha, and Anne Barnard from Beirut, Lebanon. 
1,427 words
8 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

DOHA, Qatar -- If the Islamic State did carry out the twin terrorist attacks on Wednesday in Iran, as the militant group claims, it struck at an opportune time to further the cause of chaos.

Iran rushed to blame Saudi Arabia, its chief rival in a contest for power playing out in proxy wars in at least two other countries in the region, Syria and Yemen.

Saudi Arabia, however, seemed too preoccupied to respond. Its state-run news media was dominated by criticism of its neighbor and ostensible ally, Qatar, after the Saudis and other Arab allies cut off ties to Qatar as part of a different struggle for power within the Persian Gulf.

The attacks in Tehran threatened to escalate the broader regional conflict between the two heavyweight powers, Iran and Saudi Arabia, at a time when the Western-allied gulf bloc is divided against itself. And Saudi Arabia, under the two-year-old reign of King Salman and his powerful son, Deputy Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, is demonstrating an unexpected willingness to plunge into risky multifront battles.

Turkey has long been a partner to the gulf monarchs in their proxy war against Iran in Syria. But in Ankara, the Turkish capital, on Wednesday, Parliament voted to authorize sending troops to Turkey's base in Qatar -- presumably to help defend against the Saudis.

What's more, the Saudis may actually risk driving Qatar -- the world's largest producer of natural gas, and home to the largest American air base in the region -- even closer to Iran.

Tehran has eagerly offered to provide Qatar with food and other supplies to make up for a closing of the vital overland shipping routes from Saudi Arabia.

Qatar has so far rebuffed the Iranian offer, saying it prefers to rely on supplies delivered by air from Turkey. But Qatari diplomats have also quietly stepped up dialogue with their Iranian counterparts, officials close to the Qatari foreign minister say.

''This is just a problem no one needs,'' said Michael Stephens, a researcher in London at the Royal United Services Institute.

It adds a new dimension to the raging conflicts between Western-allied Arab states and Iranian proxies in Syria and Yemen, Mr. Stephens said, and in Iraq between clients on both sides of the Saudi-Iranian conflict. It is a contrary result for Saudis, since they had justified their moves against Qatar in part by faulting it for dealing with Iran at all.

''It is best for British national interests and for American national interests if the Persian Gulf states were united,'' he said. ''So this is really not a helpful time.''

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, corroborated its claim for the Tehran attacks with a video that appeared to come from the scene. Iran, however, continued to blame Saudi Arabia and, as an accessory, President Trump.

''This terrorist attack happened only a week after the meeting between the U.S. president and the backward leaders who support terrorists,'' said Iran's military arm, the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, using its customary terminology, ''backward leaders,'' for Saudi Arabia, in a statement trumpeted across the Iranian news media.

There is little truth to the frequent Iranian assertion that the Islamic State is an arm of the Saudi government. The militant group has attacked Riyadh, the Saudi capital, several times, while this strike would be its first on Tehran.

But the attack on Wednesday, and the Iranian response, are likely to further inflame the kind of sectarian tensions that the Islamic State thrives on.

While both the Islamic State and the Saudi monarchy follow similarly puritanical Sunni Muslim theology, the Iranian government is a Shiite theocracy. The proxy struggles between the two regional powers have played out along sectarian lines in Syria, Yemen, Iraq, Bahrain and Lebanon.

Saudi Arabia had already stepped up its rhetorical attacks on Iran as a new rationale for its existing feud with Qatar. Just two hours before the Tehran attack on Wednesday, Saudi news organizations were reporting that the kingdom's foreign minister was renewing calls to punish Iran for destabilizing the region, just as other Persian Gulf neighbors had begun retaliating against Qatar.

The roots of the Saudi-Qatari rivalry, however, have little to do with Iran. Rather, they stem from decades of tensions between Saudi Arabia, as the giant of the Arabian Peninsula, and Qatar's desire for autonomy.

Members of the Qatari royal family, the Thanis, believe that in 1995 Saudi Arabia helped engineer a coup attempt in Doha. The emir at the time had recently carried out a coup against his own father, and the Qataris, who arrested several Saudi citizens in connection with the later coup attempt, believe that the Saudis were plotting to restore the father.

In the aftermath, Qatar gradually adopted the policy that its officials and analysts refer to as hedging. While embracing the overarching alliance with Washington and Riyadh, Doha has also opened relations with opposing players in the region, including the Muslim Brotherhood, Hamas, the Taliban and the Iranian-backed Hezbollah movement.

Although Qatar's ties with Iran were never as close as those of its Persian Gulf neighbor Oman, Doha has felt obliged to maintain relations with Iran in part because the two countries share a natural gas field.

But diplomats and analysts on both sides of the Qatari-Saudi feud say that the current tensions arise less from differences over Iran than from opposite bets on the Arab Spring revolts of 2011. Saudi Arabia and its allies -- most notably the United Arab Emirates -- backed the preservation or restoration of the old order; Qatar and its Pan-Arab satellite network, Al Jazeera, threw their weight behind the revolts in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya.

The conflict came to a head in 2013 in Egypt, where Qatar backed the Islamists from the Muslim Brotherhood who had won parliamentary and presidential elections in previous years. Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates backed the street protests and military takeover that overturned those elections.

In 2014, Saudi Arabia, the Emirates, Bahrain and Egypt temporarily broke diplomatic relations with Qatar over its willingness to harbor Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood members and provide them with favorable news coverage. The two sides settled their dispute that year, and Qatar agreed to close an Egyptian affiliate of Al Jazeera known for its sympathetic coverage of the Brotherhood.

But Saudi Arabia and the Emirates grew increasingly frustrated that Qatar did not live up to the spirit of the reconciliation. Doha remains hospitable to Islamist exiles, and Al Jazeera's coverage remains sharply critical of Saudi and Emirati clients in Egypt, Libya and elsewhere.

''Qatar did not follow through, and this irritated the Saudis,'' said Islam Hassan, a researcher in Persian Gulf politics at Georgetown University's campus in Doha. But Qatar, he said, is still determined to chart an independent foreign policy because the monarchy believes that ''a way of regime survival here is to have recognition on the regional and international level.''

Now, while the Iranians are busy blaming Saudi Arabia for the Tehran attack, Doha is considering accusing Saudi Arabia of, in effect, favoring Iran over Qatar by closing the border.

The final weeks of Ramadan are about to begin, a time when many Muslims make a pilgrimage to holy sites in Saudi Arabia. An official of Qatar's Al Jazeera network said it might broadcast footage of Qatari pilgrims stranded at the closed border, juxtaposed with images of Iranian Shiites traveling freely to Mecca.

The combination of the attack in Tehran with the split among the gulf monarchies ''is another layer of fissure and confrontation in the region,'' said Randa Slim, a veteran of informal diplomacy in the region and a scholar at the Middle East Institute, in Washington.

The result, she said, would benefit only the forces of mayhem, like the Sunni militants of the Islamic State or the Shiite militants of the Iranian-backed Kataib Hezbollah in Iraq.

''It will create opportunities for groups like ISIS, or for Kataib Hezbollah on the other side of the aisle, to do things at the behest of their sponsors,'' she said, adding chaos ''to a region that is already volatile.''

Security personnel outside the mausoleum of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini after the terrorist attacks on Wednesday. Iran rushed to blame Saudi Arabia. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EBRAHIM NOROOZI/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170608ed680005d



Foreign Desk; SECT
How the Iran Terror Attacks Unfolded at Two Sites

By RUSSELL GOLDMAN 
301 words
8 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Suicide bombers and gunmen wielding assault rifles attacked Iran's Parliament building and the mausoleum of the country's founder on Wednesday in a bloody siege that left at least a dozen people dead.

The attack on Parliament

On Wednesday morning, gunmen carrying Kalashnikov rifles entered Tehran's imposing Parliament building, which was under renovation for security improvements.

As lawmakers were meeting in the building's main chamber, one attacker detonated an explosive device and blew himself up elsewhere in the building, Iranian state television reported.

ISIS claims responsibility

The Islamic State, the radical Sunni group, said in a short video posted by its Amaq News Agency that it was behind the attack against Shiite-majority Iran. It was the first time the group took responsibility for an attack in Iran.

The Islamic State said a video was filmed inside Parliament during the attack.

The video shows a bloody body on the floor next to a desk. An Iranian member of Parliament said the images in the video were from inside his office, and he said the victims were his ''colleagues.''

A voice on the video is heard in Arabic saying: ''Do you think we will leave? We will remain, God willing.''

A second attack hits mausoleum

Soon after the attack on the Parliament began, two assailants entered the west wing of a sprawling compound about 10 miles south. The compound houses the tomb of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the spiritual leader of the 1979 revolution.

According to Iranian news agencies, one attacker detonated explosives, killing one person. Another was reported to have killed himself by swallowing a cyanide pill, although another account said the militant had been shot to death by security forces outside the mausoleum.

Document NYTF000020170608ed680005b



World; Middle East
Trump Has Busy Day in Vortex of Middle East Relations

By DAVID E. SANGER, MARK LANDLER and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,409 words
8 June 2017
03:24
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —arely has the Trump administration spoken of Iran other than to condemn it as the world’ chief sponsor of terrorism and an aspiring nuclear weapons state. So when the White House woke on Wednesday to images of a possible Islamic State attack on Tehran, it prompted a heated debate: How does President Trump condemn the violence without seeming to embrace the victims?

Several administration officials said it took most of the day to work out the terse, curt wording of a White House statement that mixed sympathy with the suggestion that Iran’ own behavior made it a target.

“e grieve and pray for the innocent victims of the terrorist attacks in Iran, and for the Iranian people, who are going through such challenging times,”r. Trump wrote. “e underscore that states that sponsor terrorism risk falling victim to the evil they promote.”

The statement capped a day during which Mr. Trump thrust himself into the messy politics of Persian Gulf states, trying also to play peacemaker in a bitter dispute between Qatar and other Sunni Muslim neighbors that threatens to splinter a Mideast alliance fighting the Islamic State.

For the administration, Wednesday served as a reminder that the world does not operate in the black-and-white terms that Mr. Trump used on the campaign trail and on Twitter, one in which the Sunni-dominated Islamic State and Shiite Iran are part of a continuum of “adical Islamic extremism.”

“his is an illustration of the competing priorities and contradictions facing this administration, which will prove hard to reconcile,”aid Robert Malley, the top Middle East policy official in the Obama White House. “ou can’ be all-out against Iran, all-out against ISIS and terrorism, and maintain ‘merica First’—nother way of saying keeping a light footprint in the region.”

Just a day earlier, on Tuesday, Mr. Trump posted a series of tweets taking credit for Saudi Arabia’ move to isolate Qatar and appearing to ally with Riyadh. In a quick turnabout, however, Mr. Trump called King Salman of Saudi Arabia and asked him to draw up a list of grievances for Qatar to address, according to a senior administration official.

That call followed several by Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson, who knows the Sunni gulf leaders from his days as chief executive of Exxon Mobil. He asked Saudi officials to list the demands they want Doha to meet in return for an end to the dispute, which has spurred an embargo against Qatar by Saudi Arabia, Egypt and several other states.

In conversations inside the administration, Mr. Tillerson and Defense Secretary Jim Mattis repeatedly made the point that the United States cannot afford a rupture between Saudi Arabia and Qatar. There are roughly 11,000 American troops at Al Udeid Air Base, outside Doha, where the air war against the Islamic State is managed.

The Qataris were shocked at the contradiction between the evenhanded statements issued by the State and Defense Departments and Mr. Trump’ tweets castigating the tiny gulf state, and began asking American officials whether a longtime alliance was in peril.

By Wednesday, Mr. Trump offered to invite both sides to the White House, if necessary, and suggested Mr. Tillerson could act as a mediator. The president also called to the Qatari emir, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, to drive home his tweeted urgings to cut off financing of extremist groups. While Qatar’ support for those groups —ncluding the Muslim Brotherhood, which the Saudis and Egyptians consider a serious threat —s without question, the same charge could be leveled at Saudis, who have allowed funds to flow to other Sunni extremists.

Analysts said Mr. Trump’ public statements and tweets supporting Saudi Arabia had emboldened the kingdom and sent a chill through other gulf states, including Oman and Kuwait, that fear that any country that defies the Saudis or the United Arab Emirates could face the same ostracism as Qatar has experienced this week.

“veryone in the region is looking over their shoulder, thinking, ‘his is potentially us,’”aid Gerald M. Feierstein, a former ambassador to Yemen who was the State Department’ second-ranking diplomat for Middle East policy from 2013 to 2016.

Mr. Feierstein, now the director for gulf affairs at the Middle East Institute, said that “he bottom line for us is, we have to come out of all this with a consensus on combating terror finance and not blowing the G.C.C. to smithereens,”e said, referring to the Gulf Cooperation Council, the loose association of Sunni Arab states.

Among the Saudi complaints about Qatar —hich focus mostly on charges that it finances extremists and hosts Al Jazeera, the Arab news channel that is frequently critical of the Saudis —s its episodic cooperation with Iran. That may add to Mr. Trump’ own suspicions about Qatar.

Ultimately, Mr. Trump told leaders of Saudi Arabia and Qatar that the campaign against the Islamic State would be more effective if the Persian Gulf was unified. Mr. Trump also spoke on Wednesday with Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al-Nahyan, the crown prince of Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates, to underscore G.C.C. unity as a way to promote regional stability, “ut never at the expense of eliminating funding for radical extremism or defeating terrorism,”ccording to an administration statement.

Mr. Trump’ hesitant response to the terrorist attack in Iran underscored that the hurdles to pursuing a unified strategy come from Washington as well.

The Trump administration is divided about how to deal with Iran, and two White House reviews of Iran policy have been grinding ahead for weeks. (One focuses on the future of the Iran nuclear deal, the other on the overall future of America’ dealings with the Islamic republic.)

One faction in the National Security Council has been pressing to find ways to sanction Iran, hoping to reimpose economic penalties against Tehran that were lifted after the 2015 nuclear agreement between world powers and the Islamic republic. But that strategy risks blowing up the accord, which others in the administration —ncluding Mr. Mattis and the national security adviser, H. R. McMaster —ave said should be preserved to keep Iran from racing to develop a nuclear weapon. The agreement, which Iran has complied with to date, forestalls that ability by 10 to 15 years.

But there appears to be no chance, administration officials say, that the Trump administration will seize any opportunity to find common cause with Tehran on fighting the Islamic State. Nor does there appear to be a strategy yet for managing the growing competition between Saudi Arabia and Iran for dominance of the Middle East.

The result is that while the Trump administration now finds itself in the middle of the Saudi-Qatari dispute, it may soon find itself caught between the Saudis and Iran. On Wednesday, Tehran accused Saudis of likely being the terror attack against the Parliament in Tehran, despite no evidence of such responsibility so far.

“t’ in U.S. interests to try and compel Tehran and Riyadh to address their differences and cooperate against ISIS,”aid Karim Sadjadpour, a senior fellow in the Middle East Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. “crimony and distrust between Iran and Saudi Arabia only causes more civilian casualties in Syria and Yemen, more refugees pouring into Europe, and more Sunni and Shia radicalism.”

“n lieu of a grand strategy,”e added, “ur Iran policy must be sophisticated and nimble enough to cooperate when possible, counter when necessary, and contain intelligently, until the Islamic republic’ internal contradictions force a course correction.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* Trump Takes Credit for Saudi Move Against Qatar, a U.S. Military Partner

* 5 Arab Nations Move to Isolate Qatar, Putting the U.S. in a Bind

* Trump’ Off-the-Cuff Tweets Strain Foreign Ties

President Trump on Wednesday, when he tried to play peacemaker in a dispute between Qatar and other Sunni Muslim neighbors, offering to invite both sides to the White House. | Al Drago/The New York Times | Defense Secretary James Mattis was greeted by military dignitaries as he arrived at Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar in April. | Jonathan Ernst/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170608ed680012x

