 


THE CARPETBAGGER
The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
Turning Racist Hecklers Into the Punch Line

By CARA BUCKLEY 
882 words
1 January 2018
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Kumail Nanjiani's movie ''The Big Sick'' was among the bigger indie hits of 2017, earning $55 million worldwide and holding steady at a 98 percent approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes.

It stars Mr. Nanjiani, previously known for the HBO series ''Silicon Valley,'' and tells a fictionalized version of the early stages of his relationship with his then-girlfriend, and now wife, Emily V. Gordon. She had been put into a medically induced coma after coming down with an extremely rare illness, adult-onset Still's disease.

At the time Mr. Nanjiani, a Pakistani-American, was hiding their relationship from his parents, who wanted him to enter into an arranged marriage. Mr. Nanjiani wrote the screenplay with Ms. Gordon, who is played onscreen by Zoe Kazan, and the film is a strong contender for various awards nominations.

Mr. Nanjiani sat down with me at the Lambs Club in Midtown Manhattan last week to talk about what it's like revealing a deeply personal story to the world, the challenges of bridging two cultures, especially when one is demonized in this country, and how he learned to shut down racist hecklers. Here are excerpts from our chat.

Was it when Emily was sick that you told your parents about your relationship?

It was pretty similar to how it happens in the movie, except it was on the phone.

And did they temporarily disown you the way they seem to in the movie?

No. In real life my mom was immediately very concerned about Emily, asking, ''Is she O.K.?'' And then as soon as Emily woke up, she was, like, ''Why did you do this to me? How could you?''

Was Emily on board from the beginning, to tell the story of your lives?

It took a little convincing. Emily's a therapist, so in a way she's very good at not revealing herself unless she wants to. And even though I had a big problem talking about myself, I'm weirdly less private. I remember we were sitting at Sundance, the first screening, 1,500 people, a real audience seeing the movie, and she was, like, ''This is the last time this story will be ours.''

One of the things that was so refreshing about the movie is how you were one step ahead of the racist hecklers in the audience. How did you get to that point?

''Go back to ISIS,'' that thing? I'd been heckled like that a few times in my stand-up, and at some point I realized, ''This is happening enough that I can't be rattled by it.'' Here's the problem. When someone's racist to you, even though you know it's their fault, it still hurts your feelings. It still flattens you. It still reduces you. You still feel weirdly bad about yourself. Onstage when you really need to be in control, when someone heckles you, it's a big loss of control. So I had anticipated the lines based on what people had yelled at me before, and I'd written comeback lines.

What was your response again?

The response was, ''That's right, I am a terrorist. I just do stand-up comedy on the side to keep a low profile.'' I had others. Before Osama [bin Laden] was caught they would yell, ''Where is Osama?'' And I would be, like, ''I don't know; he hasn't texted me in forever.''

That must be in your past now, right?

Yeah, it doesn't happen, mostly because most people come to see me now.

Why do you think people liked the movie so much? What are you hearing back?

I think first-generation or second-generation immigrants, people who are in my parents' position, connect to it because they understand the struggle of trying to hold onto a culture when you're in a culture where that culture is not valued, in fact is actively demonized and attacked. So that's, I think, a very noble struggle.

People connect to my situation, where you're negotiating the culture you're from and the culture you're in, and how you forge an identity that services both of those, which is sort of the current challenge of my life. People generally understand disappointing your parents. People connect to it because they've been sick or they know someone who's been sick. After the first screening at Sundance, as we were walking to our after-party, people were coming up to Emily and showing her their surgery scars, like, immediately.

You hear stories of people who opened a food truck together, where one of them is Pakistani, one of them is a white American person. You hear from people where the clash was too much, where it didn't work out.

It's a real American story, in the best sense.

What's been really satisfying is we gave up our story to the world, but then we got thousands of stories back.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Follow Cara Buckley on Twitter: @caraNYT.

(PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW WHITE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020180101ee110003g



World; Asia Pacific
Suicide Bomber Kills at Least 17 at Funeral in Afghanistan

By ZABIHULLAH GHAZI and FAHIM ABED 
454 words
31 December 2017
16:30
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan — suicide bomber walked into a cemetery in eastern Afghanistan on Sunday and blew himself up during the funeral of a local official, killing at least 17 people and wounding 14 others, an official said.

The attacker set off an explosive vest among mourners gathered for the funeral of Gul Wali, the former district chief of Haskah Menah, according to Attaullah Khogyani, a spokesman for the governor of Nangarhar Province.

The attack unfolded as a man on foot set upon Maqam Khan cemetery in the Bihsud District, near the provincial capital, Jalalabad. Mr. Khogyani said he expected the death toll to rise.

No one immediately claimed responsibility for the assault. But the Taliban and an Islamic State affiliate are both active in Nangarhar and routinely target local officials.

The bombing capped a bloody year in Afghanistan. More than 16 years after the war began, the government has struggled to cope with militant groups like the Taliban; the Haqqani Network, a brutal arm of the Taliban; and the Islamic State.

Militants have launched repeated attacks against Afghan Army outposts, police checkpoints and the American-led coalition, leaving towns and cities strewn with carnage and civilian casualties.

Afghan forces aided by United States airstrikes have claimed growing success against the militants, but attacks on civilian targets have continued.

In an unannounced visit to the country in December, Vice President Mike Pencereaffirmed the Trump administration’ support for the country’ beleaguered government as it struggled to fight the Taliban and tried to bring stability.

“e’e been on a long road together, but President Trump made it clear earlier this year that we are with you,”r. Pence said at the presidential palace in Kabul. He added, “e are here to see this through.”

The bombing came days after the Islamic State claimed responsibility for a bombing at a Shiite cultural center in Kabul on Thursday that left at least 41 people dead and dozens more wounded.

Elsewhere in Afghanistan this weekend, a sticky bomb exploded in a crowded neighborhood in the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif late Saturday, wounding 12 people, Gen. Abdul Raziq Qaderi, the deputy provincial police chief, told Reuters.

* Islamic State Claims Deadly Blast at Afghan Shiite Center

* Deadly Taliban Attacks on NATO Convoy and Police in Afghanistan

* Suicide Bomber Strikes Funeral in Afghanistan

* Bomber Kills at Least 25 at Afghan Funeral

* Afghan \b ISIS\b0  Branch Makes Inroads in Battle Against Taliban

Maqam Khan cemetery outside Jalalabad, Afghanistan, on Sunday after a bomber detonated an explosive vest during the funeral of a former district chief. | Ghulamullah Habibi/European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020171231edcv0018h



SpecialSections; SECTF
The Year From Above

By K.K. REBECCA LAI and TIM WALLACE 
259 words
31 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
2
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Major news events in 2017 were big -- often big enough to be seen from far above.

Women's March: On Jan. 21, millions of people joined women's marches across the United States and the world. Here are some of the roughly 500,000 people who marched in Washington, D.C. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AIRLIVE); Lights Out in Puerto Rico: In September, Hurricane Maria struck Puerto Rico, a commonwealth of the United States, leaving the island devastated and all but destroying its power grid. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION); Giant Algal Bloom: Lake Erie experienced one of the worst algal blooms in recent years, turning the lake bright green and alarming residents and local officials. At its peak, it stretched for miles south of Detroit, from Toledo to the shores of Ontario. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LANDSAT); ISIS Leaves Behind Ruined Cities: The Islamic State lost substantial territory in Iraq and Syria this year, including Raqqa, its de facto capital in Syria, and Mosul, its largest population center in Iraq. When the fighting subsided in these cities, entire neighborhoods had been leveled. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DIGITALGLOBE); Wildfires Across the Globe: Massive wildfires spread across parts of Chile; Western Canada and the United States; Portugal and Spain; France and even Greenland in 2017. California's Thomas Fire, below, was the largest wildfire of the year in the state. Active fires are highlighted in red and orange, using infrared data collected by the satellite. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY) 

Document NYTF000020171231edcv0003c



World
20 Great Reads You Probably Missed in 2017

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
1,635 words
30 December 2017
04:20
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

There was a lot of news in 2017 —ust take a look at the 750 breaking news alerts The New York Times sent this year, a 30 percent jump from last year. So we understand if you might have missed some of these great reads. Here’ a selection of some of our favorite somewhat-overlooked stories from the past year.

Inside Turkey’ Purge

As Turkey’ governing party expands the ranks of its enemies, life in a fragile democracy becomes stranger and stranger. Many Turks —ournalists, academics, Kurds and people accused of working for the exiled cleric Fethullah Gulen —ive in exile, having lost their livelihoods and their citizenship, and having been separated from their husbands and wives and children. By Suzy Hansen.

Stay, Hide or Leave? Hard Choices for Immigrants in the Heartland

Edith Rivera loved her life in Hampton, Iowa, but like many undocumented immigrants she faced a tough choice. She decided to return to Mexico, where her husband had been deported in 2015, with their American-born teenage son. Some politicians call it “elf-deportation.”he called it her family’ only hope of being together. By Jack Healy.

Can a Giant Science Fair Transform Kazakhstan’ Economy?

Kazakhstan wants to wean itself from a dependence on natural resources and transform itself into a financial hub, the Dubai of Central Asia. There are plans for a new stock exchange overseen by an independent judicial system. Tech start-ups will get the come-hither, too, with the hope of giving rise to Kazakhstan’ own version of Silicon Valley. But its president still has the trappings of an old-school authoritarian. By David Segal.

An Alabama Prison’ Unrelenting Descent Into Violence

Even by the standards of one of the nation’ most dysfunctional prison systems, the maximum-security St. Clair Correctional Facility in Alabama stood out for its violence. The prison is overcrowded, and the number of guards has plummeted. By Campbell Robertson.

Plunging His Pen Into the Dark Heart of 1980s Wall Street

With “unk,”he Pulitzer-winning playwright Ayad Akhtar examines financial chicanery in the 1980s —nd how it shaped the blind worship of affluence today. By Michael Sokolove.

Up Close With the Tribes of Ethiopia’ Imperiled Omo Valley

Home to seven main tribes, the Omo region in the southwestern corner of Ethiopia is now on the precipice. The Ethiopian government has recently completed the third of five proposed dams upriver. The dams threaten to alter the lives of the communities that have inhabited this valley for millennium and depend on the river’ moods for survival. By Andrew McCarthy.

‘hey Will Have to Answer to Us’

El Salvador’ gangs are trying to negotiate a way out of their bloody stalemate with the police. They created a gang coordination group for dialogue. They even asked a United Nations special envoy to initiate a dialogue with the government. By Azam Ahmed.

June Robles Birt, Whose Abduction at 6 Gripped the Nation, Is Dead at 87

The granddaughter of a prosperous cattle baron and real estate magnate, she vanished in broad daylight just after leaving her Tucson school on a spring day in 1934. Nineteen days later, June was found bewildered but alive in a makeshift wood-and-sheet-metal cage buried in the broiling desert. By Sam Roberts.

Things Boys Could Learn at Girl Scouts

Boy Scouts seem to emphasize doing things (activities like white-water rafting, welding and bugling) while Girl Scouts emphasize caring for others (being a good neighbor, a voice for animals, a social butterfly). As the Boy Scouts prepare to accept girls, it’ worth asking what they can learn from the Girl Scouts. By Claire Cain Miller.

Melting Arctic Ice Makes High-Speed Internet a Reality in a Remote Town

The receding Arctic ice has opened new passageways for high-speed internet cables. One of the fastest internet connections in America is arriving in Point Hope, a gravel spit in northwest Alaska, giving 700 or so residents their first taste of broadband speed. By Cecilia Kang.

With Loss of Its Caliphate, ISIS May Return to Guerrilla Roots

With the fall of its capital and loss of territory in Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State may be reeling, but it is far from vanquished. Its leaders signaled more than a year ago that they had drawn up contingency plans to revert to their roots as a guerrilla force. The group also continues to inspire so-called lone wolf terrorist attacks abroad. By Margaret Coker, Eric Schmitt and Rukmini Callimachi.

In a Rohingya Refugee Camp, Soccer Is a Joyful Escape

Soccer is a prized diversion that helps players and spectators forget about their exile, at least for a few hours. They are Rohingya, a Muslim ethnic group driven from Myanmar, now living in Bangladesh. By Nathan A. Thompson.

The ‘ion King’ffect: How a Broadway Smash Changed South African Lives

Over 20 years, more than 260 South Africans, many with little formal training in singing or acting, have been dispatched all over the planet to “ion King”roductions staged in numerous languages. By Michael Paulson.

How Sicily Cemented an Unlikely Friendship

A trip to Palermo meant getting to know the city —nd a new friend —uch better. By Jami Attenberg.

‘ Smell Cash’ How the A.T.F. Spent Millions Unchecked

What began as a way to catch black-market cigarette dealers quickly transformed into a nearly untraceable slush fund that agents from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives could tap. By Matt Apuzzo.

How a Seed Bank, Almost Lost in Syria’ War, Could Help Feed a Warming Planet

A plant conservationist from Syria and his colleagues are safeguarding seeds that might be crucial when more parts of the world become as hot and arid as the Middle East. By Somini Sengupta.

Loving the Bodega Downstairs

The neighborhood bodega, with its surprisingly large variety of foods, beverages and sundries packed into a small space, is a quintessential part of New York City living. By Ronnie Koenig.

The Inescapable Poet of Nicaragua

Across the country where he was born more than 150 years ago, Rubé Darí, who breathed new life into the Spanish language, is honored and remembered. By Tim Neville.

From Guerrilla Fighter to Myanmar Peace Negotiator

Min Zaw Oo left the jungle to pursue a Ph.D. in the United States. Two decades later, the government invited him back to try to end the war he once fought in. By Jon Emont.

‘lee at Once’ China’ Besieged Human Rights Lawyers

The last five years have brought severe setbacks for China’ lawyers —specially those who work on the rule of law. Following a 2015 crackdown, many of the remaining members of the legal community went underground or retreated from the work. By Alex W. Palmer.

A poster of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Istanbul. | VII for The New York Times | Edith Rivera with her son, Steven, in Hampton, Iowa. | Tim Gruber for The New York Times | The Nur Alem in Astana, Kazakhstan, has become the symbol and centerpiece of the country’ latest attempt at creating an “pen for business”ign. | Maxim Babenko for The New York Times | The segregation unit at Alabama’ St. Clair Correctional Facility houses inmates in solitary confinement. Many have come to see the unit as a haven from the prison’ general population. | William Widmer for The New York Times | The playwright Ayad Akhtar in New York in August. His new play, “unk,”oncerns Wall Street in the 1980s. | Vincent Tullo for The New York Times | Hamar tribespeople and tourists head to a bull-jumping ceremony in Ethiopia’ Omo Valley. | Andy Haslam for The New York Times | Santiago, a senior member of a gang called the 18th Street Southerners, in El Salvador. | Moises Saman/Magnum, for The New York Times | June Robles in an undated photograph. Her abduction in 1934 became a nationwide sensation. | Times Wide World Photos | Point Hope, Alaska, a town of about 700 residents, is one of the oldest continuously inhabited communities of North America. | Ruth Fremson/The New York Times | Syrian Democratic Forces fighters in Raqqa looking for Islamic State fighters. The Islamic State may be losing its capital but not its bite. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | Mohammed Ismail, a second-generation Rohingya refugee, during a soccer game in the Kutupalong refugee camp in Bangladesh this month. His parents fled violence in their native Myanmar. | Allison Joyce for The New York Times | Mduduzi Madela putting on his lion mask before going onstage as Simba in “he Lion King”n Broadway. | Sara Krulwich/The New York Times | The view through the Porta Nuova, an arch that dates to the 1500s, in Palermo in Sicily. | Susan Wright for The New York Times | A warehouse in Bristol, Va., used by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives during a seven-year undercover tobacco operation. | Jacob Biba for The New York Times | Ali Shehadeh, a plant conservationist from Syria who fled the war in his country, at work in Terbol, Lebanon. | Diego Ibarra Sanchez for The New York Times | Joseph Martinez lives upstairs from the Franklin Corner Cafe in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. | Dave Sanders for The New York Times | Rubé Darí’ homeland is a place of volcanoes and lakes, like the Concepció volcano and Lake Nicaragua, above. | Federico Rios Escobar for The New York Times | Min Zaw Oo, a peace negotiator, in Chiang Mai, Thailand, in July. Mr. Min returned to Myanmar in 2012 after 21 years in exile. | Adam Dean for The New York Times | Xie Yanyi, one of the lawyers detained in the 709 crackdown. | Giulia Marchi for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171230edcu00105



world
A Cage Fighter With a Soft Touch for Hard-Core Jihadists

By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK 
1,501 words
29 December 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Usman Raja, a burly 40-year-old and onetime pioneer of bare-knuckled mixed martial arts fighting, was back for a few rounds of sparring at his home gym in a town south of London. But before stepping into the ring he wanted to talk instead about his new vocation: the rehabilitation of Islamist militants.

“he biggest things these extremists get from it is community,”r. Raja said, ticking off the names of the convicted terrorists now working with him. “hey treat each other with love and they hate everybody else.”

These are boom times for Mr. Raja’ new line of business. The retreat of the Islamic State from its last Syrian strongholds is raising alarms about militants returning home to Britain and the West, and the British government has enlisted Mr. Raja to work with at least 30 Islamic State returnees. Groups as far-flung as the Los Angeles Police Department and the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point have sought out his advice on how to deal with violent extremists.

That is part of the reason he was back at the gym. “ can’ lose my Spartan warrior reputation,”e said. “hat is my legitimacy in the prisons.”

Over the last eight years, Mr. Raja and his group, the  Unity Initiative, have helped reintegrate more than 50 released prisoners convicted of terrorism offenses. He has counseled more than 180 young Muslims to shun radicalization, all of them referred to him either by members of their communities or law enforcement. None, so far, has gone on to commit a terrorist act.

“sman has taken on some of the most hard-core, extreme cases that the U.K. has to offer, and he has a very good success rate at getting them back into productive roles in society,”aid Douglas Weeks, a scholar who studies radicalization and provides unpaid advice to the Unity Initiative.

Most other counter-extremism or rehabilitation programs try to argue militants out of their ideology, often by disputing interpretations of the Quran. Mr. Raja works the other way around. He forms personal relationships with the young men at risk, usually spending five to eight hours a week, one-on-one, with each, sometimes meeting five days a week. He builds their sense of engagement in a community, and then watches for the ideological or religious arguments to fall away.

“hat is where the mixed martial arts come in,”r. Weeks said. “t gives him street cred, and a starting point to have some of these conversations.”

Mr. Raja might pass for one of the convicts he works with. He shaves his head, trims his thick beard back to his jawline and wears a braided leather cord close around his neck. A silver ring on his right hand is shaped like a talon, to double as a weapon.

He speaks in a thick East London-Cockney accent, and his words gush out in a jumble of enthusiasm, hopping from musings about the human condition to reflections on the history of Islam and anecdotes about the many jihadists he has known.

Like Ali Beheshti, a former top leader of a London-based extremist group, Al Muhajiroon. Mr. Beheshti once set fire to the house of a publisher who produced a novel about the Prophet Muhammad. That earned him four years in Belmarsh prison, which is where Mr. Raja first encountered him.

“li has a tattoo on his forearm that says, ‘nly God can judge me,’”r. Raja said. Most Muslims scholars say Islam forbids tattooing, but militants often pick and choose the scripture that fits their purpose.

Mr. Raja met with Mr. Beheshti five days a week for a year and a half, trained him in fighting and eventually brought him out to the gym to spar with a white British soldier.

“rom Ali’ point of view, ‘his is one of the guys I have been preaching to kill for years,’”r. Raja recalled. But the soldier told Mr. Beheshti, “ongratulations, we are really proud of what you are doing.”

Now, Mr. Beheshti volunteers to help the Unity Initiative, although he is not yet ready to help out the police. “e is still street-respect oriented in that respect,”r. Raja said.

Wahabi Mohammed, who was convicted in 2005 of withholding information about his brother’ failed attempt to bomb the London Underground, said in an interview that when he was imprisoned he met with numerous counselors who tried to argue him out of his extremist convictions.

“ felt like a guinea pig,”e said. “ gave them two hours a visit, and it never went further than that.”

He had heard from other prisoners about Mr. Raja’ cage fighting before he met him. “n prison, it definitely helps,”r. Mohammed said. “t says: ‘ am not just somebody from a university. I am from the streets, my perspective comes from a valid experience.’”

So he was surprised to get a hug from Mr. Raja the moment they met, in 2010, in a room in the prison. “ wasn’ sure how to take it, but it felt nice,”r. Mohammed recalled.

They began talking as peers, about the shared problem of “ow to be a Muslim, and how do you fit in the modern world?”r. Mohammed recalled.

Mr. Mohammed was released on probation in 2013 and now works in construction. He lives with his wife and five children in West London, and he, too, helps the Unity Initiative.

Mr. Raja is the son of Pakistani immigrants who had an arranged marriage in Britain when his mother was only 15. They were soon divorced, and Mr. Raja was raised by his single mother in a predominantly white, working-class town near the gym, in an area dominated by the British army base in Aldershot.

He learned his first lessons about fighting by brawling with the soldiers’ons, who used racial slurs about Pakistanis. By the mid-1990s, Mr. Raja was making a name for himself as a fighter and trainer in the gyms of East London, and young British Muslims hoping to join the jihad against the Bosnian Serbs sought out his coaching. Mr. Raja thought about joining them but instead became a disciple of a Malaysian Muslim scholar who preached a more pluralistic and tolerant understanding of the faith.

The American-led wars in Afghanistan and Iraq in the early 2000s furnished ample new material for jihadist preachers all over London, and Mr. Raja fell into a kind of voluntary social work. He mediated sectarian feuds, and befriended a small group of Kurdish immigrants who practiced what Mr. Raja called “angsterized Islam,”ustifying their street crimes by targeting non-Muslims. He tried to convince them that their faith required decency to all.

Mr. Raja’ street demeanor and liberal theology caught the attention of Quilliam, a counter-extremism group founded by British Muslims that was supported with millions in grants from the British government. He was hired to run outreach programs but quit after two years, finding the group too removed from the streets.

One evening in 2008 an officer from the Central Extremism Unit of the British police called to talk about Yassin Nassari, a British Syrian who had been convicted of terrorist plotting after being apprehended at Luton Airport with plans on his hard drive to build a rocket.

At that point, Mr. Nassari was up for parole, but he was refusing to talk to the government’ de-radicalization specialists. He had heard of Mr. Raja, however, from friends who had trained with him. He was the only one Mr. Nassari would work with, the officer said.

Mr. Raja started filing papers to create the Unity Initiative that night. He then immersed himself in Mr. Nassari’ life and trained him in mixed martial arts fighting. Mr. Nassari now works at a charity providing support for other Muslim ex-convicts.

Nine years after that call, Mr. Raja was climbing back into the ring again, in part to keep up his cage fighter mystique.

His sparring partner was Lyubo Kumbarov, a famed 33-year-old Bulgarian fighter and instructor. Within two seconds, he rammed his bullet-shaped head into the side of Mr. Raja’ neck, picked him up, spun him in the air like a top and threw him crashing down flat on his back.

“ake sure you note that Lyubo is a wrestling master,”r. Raja said, struggling to his feet and catching his breath.

PHOTOS: USMAN RAJA; Usman Raja, right, sparring with Lyubo Kumbarov, a famed Bulgarian cage fighter and instructor, at his home gym in a town south of London. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANDREW TESTA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

* This Is What Victory Over \b ISIS\b0  Looks Like

* In Brexit-Era London, a Mosque Sits Between Two Types of Hate

* \b ISIS\b0  Fighters Are Not Flooding Back Home to Wreak Havoc as Feared

Document INHT000020180103edct0000e



World; Middle East
Gunmen Attack Cairo Church, Killing at Least 9

By NOUR YOUSSEF 
762 words
29 December 2017
12:53
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

CAIRO —t least nine people were killed when gunmen opened fire on a Coptic Orthodox Church in Cairo on Friday, a church spokesman said, in the latest in a series of attacks on Egypt’ Christian minority.

The assault targeted the Mar Mina Church in the southern Cairo neighborhood of Helwan. At least one gunman was killed by the police, the spokesman, Boules Haliem, said by telephone.

“e did not manage to get in,”r. Haliem said of the gunman. Worshipers were attacked as they were leaving the church, he said, and at least eight were killed, along with one police officer. Eight more worshipers and a police officer were wounded.

“he church was full,”r. Haliem said. “hey were attending Mass.”hotographs showed several bullet holes in the facade of the church.

Two of the wounded were in critical condition, he said.

Coptic Christians make up about 10 percent of Egypt’ population of 96 million. This was not the first deadly assault on Christian worshipers in Cairo, but the capital is not accustomed to this sort of attack on civilians.

The Islamic State extremist group claimed responsibility for the attack in a statement that was circulated on the messaging app Telegram. The statement said that 10 people had been killed, and it described the victims as “rusaders”nd “postates.”he statement also said that one of the attackers had been killed.

The assault came just over a month after Egypt’ deadliest terror attack, in which more than 300 Sufi Muslims were killed at a mosque in the Sinai Peninsula, as the militant group steps up its campaign of violence against Egypt’ minorities.

The Islamic State declared its intention to attack Egyptian Christians last year as it seeks a stronger foothold in Egypt after defeats in Syria and Iraq. It has since killed more than 100 Egyptian Copts by bombing churches and attacking buses carrying pilgrims.

The group already had a strong presence in the northern half of the Sinai Peninsula, where it has been targeting police and military installations.

Militant attacks increased in Egypt after the military overthrew the country’ first democratically elected president, Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood, in 2013, and cracked down on his supporters and dissidents of all stripes.

The shooting on Friday is likely to rattle the government of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. To many, the assault is a disturbing reminder of the militants’xpanding activity in mainland Egypt.

Egyptian state media also reported the death of a gunman, and added that another assailant — gunman who also had a homemade bomb with him —as arrested later in the day.

The second man, who was riding a motorcycle, was armed with an automatic rifle, and the police were said to have restrained him just before he tried to throw the bomb into the church.

It remains unclear exactly how many assailants were involved. Officials gave conflicting accounts, with some saying that three men were involved and others calling it a lone wolf assault.

Separately on Friday, a gunman killed two people at an appliance shop in Helwan owned by a Coptic Christian, Mr. Haliem said.

The Egyptian Interior Ministry, which is in charge of the police, said in a statement that one man had been responsible for the slaughter on Friday. The man was in custody, the ministry said, describing him as “ne of the most prominent active terrorist elements”n the country.

A spokesman for the Egyptian police could not be immediately reached for clarification.

This month, Islamic State militants attacked an airport in Sinai during a visit by the country’ defense and interior ministers. The ministers were unharmed, but one military officer was killed.

President Trump called Mr. Sisi on Friday to offer his condolences, the Egyptian president’ office said in a statement. During the call, Mr. Trump “tressed the need to coordinate international efforts in order to combat terrorism,”r. Sisi’ office said.

Rukmini Callimachi contributed reporting from San Diego.

* Targeted by \b ISIS\b0 , Egyptian Christians Flee Violence

* Egypt’ Christians Say They Are at a ‘reaking Point’

* Egypt Declares State of Emergency, as Attacks Undercut Promise of Security

* After Church Bombings, Egyptian Christians Are Resigned but Resolute

Gunmen attacked the Mar Mina Church in Cairo on Friday. Experts believe the assault to be the work of the Islamic State. | Amr Abdallah Dalsh/Reuters | Egyptian police officers inspecting the site of the attack on Friday. | Samer Abdallah/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171229edct0025t



Foreign Desk; SECT
A Look at the Most Dangerous Places for Children in 2017

By PALKO KARASZ, JINA MOORE and CEYLAN YEGINSU 
1,248 words
29 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

In wars around the globe, thousands of children were front-line targets, used as human shields and recruited to fight this year on ''a shocking scale,'' Unicef said on Thursday. The United Nations agency warned against normalizing the brutality, a sentiment it has echoed in reports year after year.

Our correspondents have followed the plight of children caught up in war, as well as those suffering from the fall out of these conflicts. Here is a selection of their stories, from the countries outlined in Unicef's report.

Indiscriminate Violence in Afghanistan

At least 700 children were killed in the first nine months of the year in Afghanistan, Unicef said. As violence in civilian populated areas of the country intensified, children were often caught in the crossfire.

After an explosion at a playground killed five children, our correspondents reported on how ''indiscriminate improvised explosive devices'' are the biggest cause of casualties among children in Afghanistan.

Renewed Fighting in the Central African Republic

Fighting flared anew in the Central African Republic, forcing more than 150,000 people from their homes, the highest level since conflict in the country peaked three years ago. Children have been killed, raped, abducted or recruited by armed groups, Unicef said.

Separately, Ugandan troops, on a mission to catch Joseph Kony, the leader of the notorious Lord's Resistance Army, are facing accusations of rape, sexual slavery and exploitation of young girls.

Schools Offer Little Sanctuary in Congo

Conflict in the Kasai region of central Congo began in mid-2016, after the government refused to recognize the appointment of a new traditional chief. Unicef estimates that the fighting that has erupted since that time has forced 850,000 children to flee their homes.

Several hundred children were also killed in combat or held hostage by armed groups as human shields, a United Nations agency reported this year. More than 600 schools have been attacked, and hundreds of thousands of children are at risk of starvation because farmers have missed two planting seasons in a row, according to aid groups.

The fighting also has a political backdrop: Among President Joseph Kabila's strongest foes is Moïe Katumbi, a businessman from Kasai who has made no secret of his presidential ambitions. Mr. Kabila's second term as president of Congo expired at the end of 2016, but his government has twice punted the presidential poll, now scheduled for 2018.

Surviving Suicide Missions for Boko Haram

The story of the Chibok schoolgirls abducted by Boko Haram in 2014 ricocheted around the world. Some were freed in a prisoner swap, but the group's atrocities against children did not end with the release, and the victims embarked on a slow process of healing.

In northeast Nigeria and Cameroon, Boko Haram forced at least 135 children to act as suicide bombers this year, Unicef said. The New York Times tracked down and interviewed Maryam, 16, above, and 17 other girls who survived those missions.

Human Shields in Iraq

Our correspondents analyzed reports, which surfaced in March, that claimed scores of civilians -- many of them children -- had been killed by United States airstrikes in Mosul. An American-led coalition had been fighting in an attempt to take back Iraq's second-largest city from Islamic State fighters.

After the Iraqi government declared victory over the Islamic State in Mosul in July, a photographer for The New York Times documented the devastation caused by the brutal combat. He came across abandoned and traumatized children suspected of being used as human shields by ISIS fighters. Many of them had lost their families in the violence and were taken to camps for the displaced.

Lost Childhood in War-Torn Syria

As the Syrian civil war entered its sixth year in March, Unicef announced that 2016 had been the worst year for Syrian children, reporting at least 652 died as a result of intense bombardment and violence.

Children growing up in areas controlled by Islamic State militants have been exposed to astonishing levels of brutality. Our correspondents visited Syrian families in Beirut who described the violence their children witnessed while trying to flee from the extremist group and how they risked being recruited by their fighters.

On the first day of school in Syria in September, The New York Times looked at what it was like for children in rebel-controlled areas to return to classrooms amid destruction, with war still raging around them.

Life as Rohingya Refugees

Almost 60 percent of the more than half a million Rohingya people violently driven out of their homes in Myanmar's Rakhine State are children, Unicef said. Many of them were separated from their families or fled on their own after being attacked or having witnessed brutal violence.

A Times correspondent visited a refugee camp in Bangladesh near the border with Myanmar, where Rohingya refugees recounted the atrocities committed by Myanmar government soldiers.

One woman described how they had snatched her baby from her arms and threw him into a fire before raping her. Other survivors recalled seeing government soldiers stabbing babies, gang-raping girls and beheading young boys.

Child Soldiers in South Sudan

South Sudan, one of the world's youngest countries, is mired in conflict. What began as a feud between the country's two top politicians erupted four years ago into an outright war, often fought along ethnic lines. It is ripping the country apart.

Our correspondent visited South Sudan in February, where he witnessed a former child soldier, now a teenager, reuniting with his family. Unicef said more than 19,000 children had been recruited to fight and over 2,300 children had been killed or injured since the conflict began.

The conflict has displaced four million South Sudanese -- roughly one-third of the country's population. More than half of them are children.

Rise in Child Recruitment in Somalia

Nearly 200 children were brought into armed groups every month this year in Somalia, according to Unicef. That figure fits a trend that began in 2015, documented earlier by the United Nations Secretary General's Office, of an increase in the use of children by armed groups.

Some are recruited with promises of school fees or jobs; others are kidnapped and pressed into service. The vast majority of child soldiers are forced into the ranks of Al Shabab, which is allied with Al Qaeda, although 15 percent of known child soldiers are serving in the Somali National Army, according to the report.

Two Paths for Yemen's Children

Saudi Arabia and its allies have bombed Yemen for more than two years, hoping to oust Iranian-aligned rebels who seized power. The conflict has left the country in ruins and impoverished, and has starved its population. Many desperate families see two ways out for their children: selling them off as brides or allowing their recruitment as soldiers.

Unicef said the fighting left more than 5,000 children dead or injured, and 11 million in need for humanitarian assistance.

Explosives in Ukraine

Rebel-held eastern Ukraine is home to 220,000 children who live under the threat of mines and other explosives from nearly four years of conflict between separatists and the government in Kiev.

The fighting there escalated sharply in mid-December. A Ukrainian village and a town were hit with rocket-artillery barrages, wounding eight people and damaging about 50 homes.

Document NYTF000020171229edct0004k



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Claims Deadly Blast At Afghan Shiite Center

By FAHIM ABED, FATIMA FAIZI and MUJIB MASHAL; Fahim Abed and Fatima Faizi reported from Kabul, and Mujib Mashal from Colombo, Sri Lanka. 
1,001 words
29 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan -- At least 41 people were killed and dozens more wounded on Thursday in a bombing at a Shiite cultural center in Kabul that also houses a news agency, Afghan officials said. The Islamic State has claimed responsibility for the attack.

It was the latest in a series of mass-casualty attacks against Shiite targets by the militant group's Afghan affiliate. The United Nations mission in Afghanistan has documented more than a dozen attacks since January 2016, with hundreds of Shiites dead or wounded. One of the deadliest was in October, when suicide bombers killed at least 57 worshipers in a Shiite mosque in Kabul, the capital, and injured dozens more.

''I have little doubt that this attack deliberately targeted civilians,'' said Toby Lanzer, the acting head of the United Nations mission in Afghanistan. ''Today in Kabul we have witnessed another truly despicable crime in a year already marked by unspeakable atrocities.''

In the assault on Thursday, one suicide bomber entered the Tebyan cultural center during a group discussion for the anniversary of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and then detonated his explosive vest, said Sadiq Muradi, Kabul's deputy police chief. Two improvised explosive devices placed nearby went off shortly after that, officials said.

Wahidullah Majrooh, a spokesman for the Afghan Health Ministry, said at least 41 people were killed and 84 wounded in the attack. Workers at the Istiqlal hospital appeared overwhelmed by the number of victims, some of them lying in the corridors. Many were being treated for severe burns. Family members arrived to claim the bodies of loved ones.

The Shiite cultural center attacked on Thursday is believed to have leanings toward Iran; pictures of the country's supreme leader are often on display at its gatherings.

The cultural center's website and Facebook page showed it hosting discussions and gatherings on religious and political issues, many of them critical of the West's approach to the Middle East. At a recent event, members stomped on Israeli flags and burned pictures of President Trump.

Reza Khalili, a reporter for the Afghan Voice Agency, a news organization run by the center, said that the facility was a three-story building, with the news agency on the top floor, and the cultural center and a gathering hall in the basement.

''A suicide attacker entered the hall in the basement, where 150 to 200 people were gathered, and he blew himself up,'' Mr. Khalili said. ''Most of those killed were participants of the program.''

Hamid Paiman Azimi, 28, another reporter at the agency, was in the agency's third-floor offices when the suicide blast went off.

''Those who were in the first and second floors all were killed or wounded, no one remained,'' said Mr. Azimi, whose father was killed in the mosque attack in October. ''I did not see much blood, all the victims were burned by the fire caused by the explosion.''

A local extremist group claiming allegiance to the Islamic State emerged in 2014 in the eastern province of Nangarhar, and spread quickly to at least nine districts there. Sustained operations by American and Afghan security forces reduced its presence last year to three districts; efforts since then to eradicate the insurgents have stalled, although United States military officials said they had ''removed from the battlefield'' at least 1,600 of the group's fighters since March. The top American commander has likened the problem to a balloon -- when the group is squeezed in one district, it emerges in another.

In a statement on Thursday, the White House pledged to work with the government to bring the attackers to justice, saying ''the enemies of Afghanistan will not succeed in their attempts to destroy the country and divide the Afghan people.''

As Afghan and American officials were busy trying to tackle the affiliate in its stronghold in the east, urban attacks claimed by the group started increasing, particularly in Kabul. The city has long dealt with attacks from the Haqqani Network, a brutal arm of the Taliban, but officials have struggled to gain a clear picture of the Islamic State's urban cell -- such as whether suicide bombers can be traced to Nangarhar, or whether there are overlaps between the networks that facilitate such attacks for the Islamic State and the Haqqanis.

Borhan Osman, a senior analyst at the International Crisis Group who has closely studied militant groups in Afghanistan, said the Islamic State had claimed seven suicide bombings in Kabul since October, more than the Taliban. And yet with the focus of military operations in Nangarhar, which largely relies on airstrikes, there is little understanding of the cell that carries out such urban attacks.

''As far as I see, the leaders are veterans -- they were with the Haqqani Network, the Taliban, or Al Qaeda, and defected to Islamic State in Khorasan, bringing their expertise and network,'' Mr. Osman said. ''But most of those blowing themselves up are the young Salafis who are indoctrinated into jihadism and find in Islamic State a cool political ideology seeking to dominate the world.''

Also complicating the war in Afghanistan are broader tensions in the Middle East, with fears that Afghanistan could turn into the next proxy battleground between Saudi Arabia, which is predominately Sunni, and Iran, which sees itself as the defender of Shiites around the world. Afghans are already drawn into that rivalry in other battlefields: The Iranian government has openly sent thousands of Afghan Shiites to Syria to fight on behalf of the government of President Bashar al-Assad, while Afghan and Western officials believe Afghans are also fighting on behalf of Saudi allies in places like Yemen.

Women outside a hospital in Kabul, Afghanistan, after a bomb attack killed dozens on Thursday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHAH MARAI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020171229edct00035



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
Editorial Desk; SECTA
I Am Proud of Our Diplomacy

By REX TILLERSON 
1,104 words
28 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
23
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Over the past year, the United States has faced immense challenges in its dealings with North Korea, China and Russia, and in its efforts to defeat international terrorism. But Americans should be encouraged by the progress the State Department and United States Agency for International Development have made in pushing for global peace and stability.

When President Trump took office, he identified North Korea as the United States' greatest security threat. He abandoned the failed policy of strategic patience. In its place we carried out a policy of pressure through diplomatic and economic sanctions. This year, the United Nations Security Council unanimously adopted three of the strongest sanctions resolutions in history, including bans on a wide array of North Korean exports such as coal, iron, seafood and textiles.

The United States has asked allies and partners to exert unilateral pressure against North Korea in order to force the regime to change its behavior. Many have responded with positive steps like shutting down trade, severing diplomatic ties and expelling North Korean laborers. Our peaceful pressure campaign has cut off roughly 90 percent of North Korea's export revenue, much of which is used to fund illegal weapons development.

We hope that this international isolation will pressure the regime into serious negotiations on the abandonment of its nuclear and ballistic missile programs. A door to dialogue remains open, but we have made it clear that the regime must earn its way back to the negotiating table. Until denuclearization occurs, the pressure will continue.

A central component of our North Korea strategy is persuading China to exert its decisive economic leverage on Pyongyang. China has applied certain import bans and sanctions, but it could and should do more. We will also continue to pursue American interests in other areas of our relationship, including trade imbalances, intellectual property theft and China's troubling military activities in the South China Sea and elsewhere. China's rise as an economic and military power requires Washington and Beijing to consider carefully how to manage our relationship for the next 50 years.

Defeating terrorism remains one of the president's highest priorities. The administration's aggressive strategy to counter the Islamic State delegates greater authority to American military commanders on the battlefield, giving our forces more freedom and speed to do what they do best, in partnership with indigenous fighting forces. As a result, the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS has accelerated operations and has recaptured virtually all of previously held Islamic State territory in Iraq and Syria. While our military was helping clear Iraq and Syria of Islamic State forces, our diplomats were following up with humanitarian aid and assistance, such as clearing land mines, restoring water and power, and getting children back in school.

A commitment to stopping Islamist terrorism and extremism also motivated the administration's decision to adopt a new South Asia strategy, which focuses on Afghanistan. That country cannot become a safe haven for terrorists, as it was in the days before the Sept. 11 attacks. Pakistan must contribute by combating terrorist groups on its own soil. We are prepared to partner with Pakistan to defeat terrorist organizations seeking safe havens, but Pakistan must demonstrate its desire to partner with us.

On Russia, we have no illusions about the regime we are dealing with. The United States today has a poor relationship with a resurgent Russia that has invaded its neighbors Georgia and Ukraine in the last decade and undermined the sovereignty of Western nations by meddling in our election and others'. The appointment of Kurt Volker, a former NATO ambassador, as special representative for Ukraine reflects our commitment to restoring the country's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Absent a peaceful resolution of the Ukraine situation, which must begin with Russia's adherence to the Minsk agreements, there cannot be business as usual with Russia.

While we are on guard against Russian aggression, we recognize the need to work with Russia where mutual interests intersect. Nowhere is that more evident than in Syria. Now that President Vladimir Putin has committed to the United Nations-backed Geneva political process for providing a new future for Syria, we expect Russia to follow through. We are confident that the fulfillment of these talks will produce a Syria that is free of Bashar al-Assad and his family.

Lastly, the flawed Iran nuclear deal is no longer the focal point of our policy toward Iran. We are now confronting the totality of Iranian threats. Part of this strategy entails rebuilding alliances with our partners in the Middle East, and in November we helped re-establish diplomatic ties between Iraq and Saudi Arabia. We will continue to work with our allies and with Congress to explore options for addressing the nuclear deal's many flaws, while building a like-minded effort to punish Iran for its violations of ballistic missile commitments and its destabilizing activities in the region.

I am proud of what our State Department and Agency for International Development teams around the world have accomplished this year, and our progress will continue in 2018 and beyond. To that end, we have undertaken a redesign of the State Department to strengthen our teams' ability to deliver on our mission.

Our redesign doesn't involve simply shifting boxes on an organizational chart. Our changes must address root problems that lead to inefficiencies and frustrations. By making changes like streamlining our human resources and information technology systems, better aligning personnel and resources with America's strategic priorities, and reforming duplicative processes, we are giving our people more opportunities to flourish professionally and spend more time confronting the global problems they have dedicated their careers to solving.

When I wake up each morning, my first thought is, ''How can I and my colleagues at the State Department use diplomacy to prevent people around the world from being killed, wounded or deprived of their rights?'' In spite of the challenges, I remain optimistic about the power of diplomacy to resolve conflicts and advance American interests. My confidence comes from the knowledge that our efforts are carried out daily by patriotic and dedicated State Department employees who make sacrifices to serve with patience and persistence and who, by advancing democratic values the world over, are protecting our citizens' rights to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Gail Collins and Nicholas Kristof are off today.

Rex Tillerson is the secretary of state.

Document NYTF000020171228edcs00059



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
New York Crime Plunges to Level Unseen Since '50s

By ASHLEY SOUTHALL 
1,366 words
28 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

It would have seemed unbelievable in 1990, when there were 2,245 killings in New York City, but as of Wednesday there have been just 286 in the city this year -- the lowest since reliable records have been kept.

In fact, crime has fallen in New York City in each of the major felony categories -- murder and manslaughter, rape, assault, robbery, burglary, grand larceny, and car thefts -- to a total of 94,806 as of Sunday, well below the previous record low of 101,716 set last year.

If the trend holds just a few more days, this year's homicide total will be under the city's previous low of 333 in 2014, and crime will have declined for 27 straight years, to levels that police officials have said are the lowest since the 1950s. The numbers, when taken together, portray a city of 8.5 million people growing safer even as the police, under Mayor Bill de Blasio, use less deadly force, make fewer arrests and scale back controversial practices like stopping and frisking thousands of people on the streets.

''There is no denying that the arc is truly exceptional in the unbroken streak of declining crime,'' said William J. Bratton, who retired from his second stint as police commissioner last year.

But officials see one area of concern: an uptick in reports of rapes toward the end of the year. The increase, which officials said included a higher-than-normal number of attacks that occurred more than one year ago, coincided with the publication of accusations against powerful men like Harvey Weinstein, which gave rise to the #MeToo movement encouraging victims to come forward. City police officials have said they believed news coverage played a role in the spike in reports, though they also credited their own efforts combating domestic violence with encouraging victims to speak up.

And while rapes were down from last year by one, to 1,417, misdemeanor sex crimes -- a catchall for various types of misconduct that includes groping -- ticked up 9.3 percent to 3,585 so far.

The lower homicide numbers are still preliminary -- and include one announced on Wednesday night -- but they jibe with large drops in killings in major cities like Chicago and Detroit, while contrasting with sizable increases in killings in smaller cities like Charlotte and Baltimore.

The city today is a far cry from what it was when Mr. Bratton arrived in 1990 to become the head of the then-separate Transit Police. Not only were there 2,245 killings that year, but there were more than 527,000 major felony crimes and more than 5,000 people shot. Shootings have plunged to 774 so far this year, well below last year's record low of 998. And for the first time, fewer than 1,000 people have been hurt by gunfire: 917 as of Sunday.

The continued declines are a boon to Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat elected on promises of police reform -- promises that prompted warnings of mayhem to come by his opponents in 2013. But the opposite has happened, putting him on stronger footing as he pivots to a second term with a Police Department transformed to exercise greater restraint as it focuses on building trust in the city's neighborhoods.

Franklin E. Zimring, a professor at University of California, Berkeley, School of Law, said the downturn was an ''astounding achievement,'' but it raised another question: How long and low will crime fall?

''We don't know when we've exhausted the possibilities of urban crime decline, and we won't know unless and until New York scrapes bottom,'' said Mr. Zimring, who analyzed the first 20 years of New York's historic crime reduction and expounded on it in a book.

Mr. de Blasio and the police commissioner, James P. O'Neill, credit recent drops in crime to the Police Department's emphasis on going after the relatively small groups of people -- mostly gangs and repeat offenders -- believed to be responsible for most crime, while also building relationships in communities where trust has been strained.

Mr. Bratton applauded political support for the police from the mayor, who provided funding for investments in officer hiring, training, equipment and overdose-reversal drugs.

One of the results is that police officers are using deadly force less often. As of Dec. 20, police officers intentionally fired their service guns in 23 encounters, a record low, down from 37 in 2016. The Police Department said officers were relying more on stun guns, which were used 491 times through November, compared with 474 times during the same period in 2016. More than 15,000 officers have been trained how to use them.

But criminologists differ about the cause of the continued declines. Mr. Zimring said that while better policing accounted for much of the decline in crime since 1990, it was no longer a primary driver. New York is ''tiptoeing'' toward a 90 percent crime decline for reasons that remain ''utterly mysterious,'' he said.

More broadly, research suggests that crime trends are closely tied to economic conditions. Interest rates, inflation and unemployment are among the macro-level factors influencing crime, according to James Austin, the president of the JFA Institute, a criminal justice policy nonprofit.

''What the Fed does will have more of an impact than any sentencing or police reforms,'' Mr. Austin said.

The reductions in New York are a part of what the Brennan Center for Justice expects will be a 2.7-percent decline in crime rates and 5.6-percent drop in murder rates across the country's largest cities. After record-high bloodshed last year, killings in Chicago have declined 15 percent.

Through August, rape was down in New York City 7 percent compared with last year, but a small increase in September was followed by spikes in October and November. The New York Times first published accusations against Mr. Weinstein on Oct. 5.

Reports of rapes that had occurred in a previous year, meanwhile, were up almost 12 percent through November. In response, the Police Department is adding investigators to its Special Victims Unit and has modernized the techniques detectives use to investigate claims.

''We can't answer definitively'' what is driving the rise, Commissioner O'Neill told reporters at a crime briefing this month. ''At least I can't. But we're seeing people coming forward and having faith in the N.Y.P.D. And that's what we want to happen.''

Whatever the reason for New York's crime reductions, the statistics do not capture the complete picture of public safety. Some crimes are not represented fully or at all: acts of domestic violence, sexual assaults, identity thefts, hate crimes, and shootings that don't result in injuries or damage.

In some cases, the data annotates horrible crimes: an ISIS-inspired truck rampage on a Manhattan bike lane on Halloween that left eight people dead; the ambush killing of a police officer, Miosotis Familia, 48, who was shot in the head on July 4 while sitting in her R.V.-style command post in the Bronx; the death of Timothy Caughman, 66, a black man, at the hands of a sword-wielding white supremacist on March 20.

Increasingly, officers are receiving calls to help people in emotional crises. The police responded to 157,000 such calls in 2016. But only 7,000 officers have received crisis intervention training for handling those situations.

While most police encounters are resolved without officers resorting to deadly force, fatal police shootings of people in emotional distress -- including Dwayne Jeune on July 31 in Brooklyn and Miguel Richards on Sept. 6 in the Bronx -- have drawn scrutiny. A police sergeant, Hugh Barry, was indicted on murder charges in May for the fatal on-duty shooting of a mentally ill woman, Deborah Danner, in October 2016. His trial is scheduled to begin in January.

Police recruits being sworn in at Madison Square Garden in October. Crime in New York City has declined for 27 straight years. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TIMOTHY A. CLARY/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A20) 

Document NYTF000020171228edcs0003r



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Fight Against  ISIS  In Afghan Region Bedevils the U.S.

By MUJIB MASHAL; Fahim Abed and Zabihullah Ghazi contributed reporting. 
1,834 words
26 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KHOGYANI, Afghanistan -- When the American military dropped the largest bomb in its arsenal on an Islamic State cave complex here in eastern Afghanistan in April, the generals justified it as part of a robust campaign to destroy the group's local affiliate by year's end.

Its force had been reduced to 700 fighters from 3,000, they said, and its area of operation diminished to three districts from 11.

But as the year comes to a close, the Islamic State is far from being vanquished in eastern Afghanistan, even as the group is on the run in its core territory in Iraq and Syria. It has waged brutal attacks that have displaced thousands of families and forced even some Taliban fighters, who had long controlled the mountainous terrain, to seek government protection.

The shifting dynamic has, in turn, threatened the American-backed government's tenuous hold on the region.

And two years into the joint United States-Afghanistan operation, a clear understanding of the Islamic State affiliate, the latest enemy in the long Afghan war, still evades even some of those charged with fighting it.

Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., the top American and NATO commander in Afghanistan, recently said that 1,400 operations and airstrikes had ''removed from the battlefield'' more than 1,600 Islamic State fighters since March -- more than double the estimate from early in the year.

Some Afghan and other Western officials question whether those numbers are inflated, but the Americans say they are an indication that the group continues to replenish its ranks with new fighters.

Part of the reason the two-year joint operation by the United States and Afghanistan against the Islamic State has made little progress is simply that the two forces are operating in a terrain where they have had little control for years. Airstrikes and commando operations bring bursts of pressure, but the militants have release valves all around them. On one side is the porous border with Pakistan, where many of the fighters come from. Elsewhere is largely Taliban country.

''It's like a balloon,'' General Nicholson said. ''We squeeze them in this area, and they'll try to move out elsewhere.''

A visit this month to Khogyani, a district in the east where Islamic State fighters have shifted, showed the increasing complexity of the Afghan conflict, and underlined how daunting a task it will be to defeat the Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

The Afghan government's authority in Khogyani, in a remote region of Nangarhar Province, has long been confined to the district compound and the immediate surroundings. The Taliban ruled the rest. Opium has been grown all around.

After years of war with no clear victor, the region had settled into a strange sort of calm as the Taliban and the government found ways to coexist, as has happened to varying degrees around the country.

Although the Taliban are known for their opposition to girls' education, in Khogyani, the militants here allowed schooling, showing a willingness to drop a demand that had lost them hearts and minds before. In return for having nominal control, the government has paid the salaries of teachers and health workers that the Taliban could not afford.

Abdul Jabar, who had been displaced from his home near the Pakistan border by recent battles between ISIS and the Taliban, said there was a two-story high school for girls close to his new home, with an enrollment of up to 1,600. Mir Haidar, who distributes vaccinations, said the three clinics there employed women, despite the Taliban's past opposition to women in the workplace.

So established was Taliban rule in Khogyani that when Islamic State fighters started shifting there, many people said they trusted in the Taliban's protection.

Then the Taliban lines started to buckle.

''The Taliban were puffing their chest -- 'We are strong, don't go, we will take care of you,' '' said Abdul Qadeem, a father of 13. ''Then,'' he said, the Islamic State ''arrived at night, and we left with nothing but this shawl on my shoulder.''

The Islamic State's local affiliate in Afghanistan first emerged in 2014, swiftly gaining ground across Nangarhar Province. It quickly drew the attention of the United States military, which had scaled down its presence in Afghanistan to a small counterterrorism mission against Al Qaeda and a larger NATO mission to train Afghan forces to hold their ground against the Taliban.

American and Afghan officials now have little reason to believe that the Afghan group, despite pledging allegiance to ISIS, maintains regular contact or receives directions from the Islamic State operating in Iraq and Syria. Instead, they say, the Islamic State in Afghanistan is largely made up of Pakistani militants pushed across the border by military operations in that country.

The militants used the Afghan mountains simply as a safe haven at first, before embracing the Islamic State and turning their weapons on Afghanistan. Opinions are divided on how and why.

Some officials believe it was only a matter of time before extremists seeking relevance would be attracted to the Islamic State. Others say the Afghan and American militaries miscalculated and fostered a new enemy by going after Pakistani militants seeking safe havens in Afghanistan in the hopes that the Pakistanis would reciprocate with Afghan Taliban leaders on their soil.

A third theory blames the cynical designs of Pakistan's intelligence agency, which Afghans have long accused of trying to destabilize their government.

No matter who they are, the militants have brought more violence and suffering to Afghan civilians. In Khogyani, American airstrikes intended to destroy the Islamic State may have temporarily depleted its forces, but they have also upended the relative peace.

Afghan officials say they believe the fighting between the Islamic State and the Taliban has little to do with ideology.

''The reason they are fighting each other is over resources, and over territory,'' said Mohammed Gulab Mangal, the governor of Nangarhar Province, who says both groups ''drink from the same spring'' -- a subtle reference to their perceived Pakistani origins.

People in Khogyani say the Islamic State militants are better armed and fight harder than the Taliban.

''If you tie a Taliban fighter to the trunk of this tree, and then you tell him ISIS is coming, he will run so hard that he will uproot the tree with him,'' said Malik Makee, a tribal elder who runs a militia of several dozen men in support of the government, helping to maintain a buffer around the district center.

Mr. Makee is an example of how fluid alliances can be here. He lived under Taliban rule for years, without much problem, until they killed one of his sons. He retaliated by killing six Taliban, and then packing up to join the government.

Mr. Makee -- who admits to growing opium, as many in the district do -- is one of the three men running the war in Khogyani on behalf of the government. All three are veterans of many previous conflicts.

The busiest of them these days is a potbellied intelligence operative in his 50s who is trying to peel away Taliban commanders and foot soldiers fleeing the Islamic State. His agents make a simple argument to potential defectors: You have no escape from the Islamic State, so come to us for protection. About three dozen have.

On a recent afternoon, the operative completed a deal with two Taliban over tea and raisins in a dark room of the district compound. The men, both of whom fought the government for six years, were disarmed of a rocket-propelled grenade, a Kalashnikov and a pistol.

When the operative asked if the two Taliban had government IDs, they pulled them out, neatly wrapped in plastic sheets. Asked how they had obtained the documents, one of the men, who gave his name as Zabihullah Ghorzang, replied:

''My uncle was the district governor here.''

Putting his hand on Mr. Ghorzang's knee, the operative said the men's decision to join the government's side was patriotic. The government had forgiven their wrongdoings. The deal complete, Mr. Ghorzang was given back his pistol.

But Mr. Makee, who was at the meeting, couldn't keep quiet. ''The government can forgive you for all it wants,'' he told the two Taliban. ''But if I find out that you had done anything wrong against my men, I swear I will chase you wherever you hide.''

Lt. Col. Noor Agha, the third of the three men fighting ISIS here, is a district police chief who cuts a soft-spoken, fatherly figure. He has been in charge of the last line of defense against ISIS: This far into Taliban country, there were no Afghan commandos or American special forces to help out.

Colonel Agha has only about 170 regular police officers under his command, 30 of them not present for duty, and about as many militiamen, such as the ones Mr. Makee commands.

As residents started fleeing last month from the fighting between the Islamic State and the Taliban, it suddenly appeared that the government could lose even its nominal control if ISIS fighters reached a strategic hill.

Colonel Agha carved a road from the district center to the top of the hill, a path made for the first time, 16 years into the war. He cobbled together about 50 men, 20 of them from the army, and they made their way through the poppy fields to establish outposts on the hill.

Many of the men on the hill slept under the open sky. They lacked heavy weaponry. As they looked down, it was Taliban to the right, Taliban to the left, Taliban at the foot of the hill. In the distance was the Islamic State, its fighters heavily armed with machine guns and rocket launchers, Col. Agha says. He knows that because his troops have been fired upon and taunted over the radio as infidels and American militias.

Letting down his pride for a moment, the colonel admitted they couldn't fire back.

''What can we hit them back with?''

In the end, Colonel Agha's fighters were saved from having to find out by additional Afghan Army units, who arrived to help clear ISIS from Khogyani. Local commanders in recent days say they have killed at least 50, and the rest have started shifting their base of operations -- again.

Follow Mujib Mashal on Twitter: @MujMash.

''If you tie a Taliban fighter to the trunk of this tree, and then you tell him ISIS is coming, he will run so hard that he will uproot the tree with him,'' said Malik Makee. (A1); Some of the men in charge of the war for the government in eastern Afghanistan, top. Thousands of families have been displaced by ISIS. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MAURICIO LIMA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A8) MAPS (A8) 

Document NYTF000020171226edcq0003h



Today’ Paper
Quotation of the Day: Long Fight Against  ISIS  in Eastern Afghanistan Bedevils the U.S.

61 words
26 December 2017
03:02
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

“t’ like a balloon. We squeeze them in this area, and they’l try to move out elsewhere.”

Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., the top American and NATO commander in Afghanistan, describing the challenges of fighting the Islamic State in that country.

Document NYTFEED020171226edcq000gp



National Desk; SECTA
American  ISIS  Suspect Held in Iraq Has Right To Lawyer, Judge Rules

By CHARLIE SAVAGE 
869 words
25 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
16
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Calling the Trump administration's position ''disingenuous'' and ''troubling,'' a federal judge on Saturday ordered the Pentagon to permit a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union to meet with a United States citizen who has been imprisoned in military custody for three months after being deemed an enemy combatant.

In a novel case pitting the individual rights of citizens against government wartime powers, Judge Tanya S. Chutkan of the Federal District Court of the District of Columbia also ordered the Pentagon not to monitor that conversation -- and told it not to transfer the man, who is being held in Iraq, until the A.C.L.U. conveys his wishes to her.

A Syrian militia captured the American citizen in mid-September and turned him over to American forces as someone suspected of fighting for the Islamic State. The government has refused to identify the man, but officials familiar with the matter have said he is a dual citizen of the United States and Saudi Arabia who was born on American soil to visiting Saudi parents and raised in Saudi Arabia.

The A.C.L.U. has filed a habeas corpus lawsuit on the man's behalf challenging his indefinite detention without charges or a lawyer. The Trump administration has asked Judge Chutkan to dismiss the case, arguing that the rights organization lacks standing to file suit on the detainee's behalf since it has not met with the man, has no relationship with him and does not know his wishes.

In a 12-page ruling, Judge Chutkan sharply criticized the government's position as ''disingenuous at best'' since the Defense Department is preventing lawyers for the group from conferring with the man. She also noted that the government has acknowledged that the man asked for a lawyer after being read the Miranda warning when interrogators shifted from questioning him for intelligence purposes to questioning him in hopes of gathering evidence that is admissible in a courtroom.

"Having informed the detainee of his right to counsel, and the detainee having asked for counsel, the department's position that his request should simply be ignored until it decides what to do with the detainee and when to allow him access to counsel is both remarkable and troubling,'' she wrote.

Wyn Hornbuckle, a Justice Department spokesman, declined to say whether the government would comply with the ruling or file an appeal.

''We're reviewing the ruling and will decline to comment,'' he said.

But Jonathan Hafetz, the lead A.C.L.U. attorney on the case, praised the judge's decision.

''This is a landmark ruling that rejects the Trump administration's unprecedented attempt to block an American citizen from challenging his executive imprisonment,'' Mr. Hafetz said. ''Ensuring citizens detained by the government have access to a lawyer and a court is essential to preserving the Constitution and the rule of law in America.''

National security officials initially wanted to prosecute the man in an American court for providing material support for terrorism, according to officials. But that proved difficult because of a lack of courtroom-admissible evidence -- in part because questioning of him ceased after he was read his rights and asked for a lawyer.

The New York Times reported last week that officials have now decided to try to transfer the man to Saudi Arabia, according to officials. That decision was reached on Dec. 15 at a meeting of the National Security Council's ''deputies committee,'' which is composed of the No. 2 officials of national security departments and agencies.

Such a transfer would be contingent on diplomatic assurances. Other repatriations and resettlements of former Guantáamo Bay detainees have typically included promises not to let former detainees travel abroad and other security measures. Saudi Arabia also runs a custodial rehabilitation program for low-level Islamist extremists.

It is not clear whether the United States government would seek to make the man renounce his American citizenship -- and with it his right to enter the United States -- as part of any such transfer. In 2004, when the Bush administration sent to Saudi Arabia a Guantáamo detainee who similarly was born on American soil to visiting Saudi parents, the detainee, Yaser E. Hamdi, agreed to renounce his citizenship as part of the deal. But by then, Mr. Hamdi had a lawyer.

Mr. Hafetz filed last week's Times article with the court in support of the A.C.L.U. request for immediate access to the man, and Judge Chutkan on Friday ordered the government to respond. The Justice Department told her later that day that no official has talked with the detainee about renouncing his citizenship.

But it also told the judge that ''there appears to be no case law suggesting that an individual must be provided counsel before he relinquishes citizenship.''

Follow Charlie Savage on Twitter: @charlie_savage.

Men suspected of fighting for the Islamic State held in Qaraqosh, Iraq, this year. A federal judge has ruled that an American citizen detained as an ''enemy combatant'' has the right to a lawyer. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SERGEY PONOMAREV FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171225edcp00040



world
The Hunt for  ISIS  Pivots to Remaining Pockets in Syria

By ERIC SCHMITT 
1,323 words
24 December 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

AL UDEID AIR BASE, Qatar —ecretive drones and surveillance jets are boring down on an estimated 3,000 remaining Islamic State fighters, who are hiding in Syria along a short stretch of the Euphrates River and surrounding deserts, as the American military campaign against the extremist group enters its final phase.

But the focus on a 15-square-mile enclave near the Iraqi border is complicated by skies congested with Russian, Syrian and Iranian aircraft as rival forces converge on that last main pocket of Islamic State militants in Syria.

“t drives up the complexity of the problem,”t. Gen. Jeffrey L. Harrigian, the air commander for Syria and Iraq, said of the increasingly risky airspace and near collisions, in an interview at his headquarters at this sprawling air base outside Doha, the capital of this tiny Persian Gulf nation.

With names like Joint Stars and Rivet Joint, the American spy planes are trying to track the last Islamic State fighters and top leaders, eavesdrop on their furtive conversations, and steer attack jets and ground forces to kill or capture them.

The three-year American campaign has largely achieved its goal of reclaiming territory in Syria and Iraq, and the Islamic State’ religious state, or caliphate, appears all but gone. Still, senior military commanders and counterterrorism specialists caution that the organization remains a dangerously resilient force in Iraq and Syria, and a potent global movement through its call to arms to followers on social media.

“s they lose the caliphate’ physical terrain, they’l adapt guerrilla tactics,”en. Joseph L. Votel, the head of United States Central Command, which oversees operations in the Middle East, said in an interview during a regional security conference in Bahrain. “ISIS has been beat up pretty bad. But this is a different kind of organization so we don’ know what they might try to add. They’e been very adaptive.”

Echoing earlier comments by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, General Votel said American forces will remain in eastern Syria, alongside their Syrian Kurdish and Arab allies, as long as needed to defeat the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or Daesh. “hat we don’ want to do is leave a mess,”eneral Votel said, something “orse than what we found.”

Here at Al Udeid, home to some 10,000 American and other allied troops, commanders are running the air wars not only in Iraq and Syria, but also the campaign in Afghanistan that is expected to increase sharply in the coming months under President Trump’ more aggressive strategy for combating the Taliban, ISIS and other extremist groups there.

For now, though, the bulk of the 300 combat aircraft under General Harrigian’ command are concentrating on the Islamic State. “ob One still is to get to the military defeat of ISIS,”eneral Harrigian said. “e need to make sure we stay focused on that.”

At the peak of its power three years ago, the Islamic State controlled a swath of territory in Syria and Iraq as big as Kentucky. Now that area has dwindled to half the size of Manhattan, and is shrinking fast.

The hunt for the final Islamic State fighters and operatives draws on an aerial armada of combat aircraft based in Jordan, Turkey and several Persian Gulf countries, as well as the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt, newly arrived in the Persian Gulf.

Warplanes are working with Syrian Kurdish and Arab militia on the ground to track down ISIS fighters, some of whom have disappeared in Sunni enclaves along the Euphrates River near the Iraq-Syria border. Others have made a dash across deserts west —hrough Syrian army lines —nd south into Iraq’ Anbar Province to avoid capture, or worse.

The United States has doubled the bounty, to $25 million, for information leading to the death or capture of the elusive leader of the Islamic State, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.

Russia and the United States back separate ground offensives against the Islamic State in eastern Syria, both of which are advancing in the oil-rich Deir al-Zour Province bordering Iraq.

The assaults are converging on Islamic State holdouts from opposite sides of the Euphrates, which bisects the province. Syrian Army troops backed by Russian air power and Iranian militia are advancing along the western side of the river; Syrian Arab and Kurdish fighters, supported by American warplanes and Special Operations advisers, are pushing along the eastern river banks.

American Reaper drones armed with intelligence collected from U-2 and other spy planes are hunting ISIS fighters, alongside Air Force and Navy fighter-bombers. A-10 attack planes, armed with laser-guided rockets and a 30-millimeter cannon, have provided effective air cover for advancing Syrian Kurdish and Arab militias.

Other American warplanes have dropped 500-pound and 250-pound bombs, often timed to detonate split seconds after impact to minimize civilian casualties, air planners said.

“e’e piling up a lot of airplanes in a very small piece of sky,”aid Col. Jeff Hogan, deputy commander of the air operations center at Al Udeid. He said the concentration of unarmed reconnaissance planes, armed fighters and attack planes —ll warily eyeing Russian and Syrian jets nearby —ere converging over Abu Kamal and Al Qaim, towns just across from each other on the Syrian and Iraqi borders.

At the height of the air campaign in Raqqa, Syria, over the summer, American and allied warplanes dropped nearly 200 bombs and missiles each day on Islamic State targets. Now, the warplanes are stalking their prey more selectively, dropping one-tenth of that over a weekend —nd sometimes less, said military officials at Al Udeid.

“e’e focused very hard on not letting ISIS escape,”aid Colonel Hogan, 44, from Olympia, Wash. “e’e got to annihilate them.”

Sometimes the bombs find high-ranking targets. Abu Faysal, a senior Islamic State leader, and his deputy, Abu Qudamah al-Iraqi, were killed in a Dec. 1 airstrike in the Middle Euphrates River region, the Central Command said in a statement.

Others have slipped away, across the border into Turkey or in a mad dash through Syrian army lines and desert to areas south of Damascus, the Syrian capital, Col. Ryan Dillon, a military spokesman in Baghdad, said last week.

“s the caliphate is squeezed, these remaining fighters would bleed off into surrounding countryside and Sunni strongholds,”aid Nicholas J. Rasmussen, who last week stepped down as head of the National Counterterrorism Center.

Mr. Rasmussen warned that even with its leaders on the run, the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or Daesh, remains a deadly worldwide force still capable of directing, enabling and inspiring terrorist attacks.

“e continue to see key individuals with a focus on external operations trying to advance plotting and planning both locally and abroad,”r. Rasmussen, who served as the country’ top counterterrorism official for three years, said in an interview. “ow, more often what we worry about are threats that emerge from individuals acting on their own, not waiting for guidance.”

That would include the suspects who carried out the recent terrorist attacks in Lower Manhattan and the New York City subway. Even as the Islamic State loses ground in Iraq and Syria, its affiliates in Libya, West Africa, the Philippines, and Sinai, remain persistent threats and have even attracted some new fighters, despite suffering setbacks in recent months.

“ISIS became a brand,”Brett McGurk, the special American envoy for the global coalition to defeat the extremist group, said last week in Washington. “his is going to go on for some time.”

Kitty Bennett contributed research.

* ‘ Did It for the Islamic State,’ombing Suspect Told Investigators

* Iraq Prime Minister Declares Victory Over \b ISIS\b0 

* With Loss of Its Caliphate, \b ISIS\b0  May Return to Guerrilla Roots

* Hunting Taliban and Islamic State Fighters, From 20,000 Feet

Document INHT000020171226edco0000c



Washington; SECT
The DeVos 'Nice List'

By ERICA L. GREEN 
1,555 words
24 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- It pays to be a cause that Education Secretary Betsy DeVos cares about.

In the year before Ms. DeVos was nominated for her post, the billionaire philanthropist and her husband poured money into more than 100 organizations across a broad spectrum of causes. The Dick and Betsy DeVos Family Foundation reported $14.3 million in charitable giving, according to 2016 tax filings provided by the organization to The New York Times.

The beneficiaries are a diverse group, many aligning with causes the DeVos family has championed: the city of Grand Rapids, publicly funded vouchers for private schools, conservative politics and Christian organizations, low-income children and families, innovation and the arts. A few organizations reflect the more complex picture of Ms. DeVos that has emerged since her rocky nomination process.

In accord with her ethics agreement, Ms. DeVos resigned from the foundation the day after she was nominated for secretary of education.

Here's are the highlights.

Xprize Foundation, Inc.

$3.75 million

The Xprize Foundation is a nonprofit that puts on million-dollar global competitions to foster innovation. The organization's mission statement is to ''transform how people think about the world's biggest problems and incentivize their solutions.'' For example, one Xprize competition was for a team to ''autonomously and inconspicuously trigger an emergency alert while transmitting information to a network of community responders, all within 90 seconds.''

Grand Rapids, Mich.

$3.1 million

Anyone's who has been to Grand Rapids, Mich., is likely to run into the DeVos name somewhere, whether it be on a street sign or a hospital or a convention center. The amount of donations attached to organizations with a Grand Rapids address last year was about $3.1 million. The foundation also donated to several organizations across the state, including Detroit where the foundation granted $150,000 to grow businesses last year.

University of Maryland, College Park, Foundation, Inc.

$750,000

The DeVos Institute of Arts Management at the University of Maryland, College Park, is training the next leaders of cultural institutions, such as museums and galleries, arts schools and libraries, symphonies and cinemas. The institute was named after the DeVos family in 2010 when Ms. DeVos and her husband donated $22.5 million to help the institute expand.

American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy

$750,000

The Washington-based research organization is often a conservative voice on a range of political and educational issues. However, fellows there have criticized the recent expansion of 529 plans to pay for private-school tuition, and several scholars there have been highly critical of President Trump.

Willow Creek Association

$650,000

This Illinois-based Christian leadership organization was a big beneficiary of foundation funding. The organization's mission is to develop Christian leaders, and its mission of ''helping Christians grow their leadership to maximize Kingdom impact.'' This echoes Ms. DeVos's own stated life's mission to ''expand God's Kingdom,'' a principle shaped by her Calvinist upbringing.

The collection plate at the DeVoses' home church runneth over. Last year, the Foundation donated $350,000 to the Mars Hill Bible Church, where Ms. DeVos has been a member and an elder for years.

Potter's House

$600,000

What They Do: Potter's House, an urban, Christian school that DeVos has supported for nearly 30 years, serves predominantly poor, minority students in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Ms. DeVos has referenced Potter's House in numerous interviews and speeches as having inspired her to advocate for low-income families to have more educational choices. Ms. DeVos sponsors tuition for entire classes at the school.

Grand Rapids Christian School Association

$350,000

The DeVoses are known to be very generous to Grand Rapids Christian High School, the alma mater of their four children. Often criticized for sending her children to private schools, Ms. DeVos told The Times that she chose Grand Rapids Christian because she wanted to continue her family's tradition of educating her children in Christian-based schools. But she also wanted her children to be educated in a more diverse setting than they would have had in the public schools of the wealthy suburb of Ada, Mich., where the family lives. The DeVoses also gave $55,000 to the Ada Christian School Society.

Success Academy Charter Schools, Inc.

$150,000

The New York-based charter school chain is among the most high-profile in the nation, and its leader Eva Moskowitz is arguably as controversial as Ms. DeVos herself. Ms. Moskowitz's recent book lends insight into the reform movement that self-described reformers like Ms. DeVos has championed. Ms. Moskowitz praised Ms. DeVos's nomination for secretary.

The 74 Media

$400,000

The DeVos Foundation invested in the company, co-founded by former television journalist Campbell Brown, that describes itself as a nonpartisan education news site. Its namesake is the 74 million children in America that will receive an education. Ms. Brown wrote an opinion piece about Ms. DeVos's nomination, calling out inaccurate claims on social media that led to Ms. DeVos being ''misleadingly caricatured.''

Alliance for School Choice

$290,000

Several organization that Ms. DeVos was connected to in her advocacy work received donations. Among them is the Alliance for School Choice, also known as the American Federation for Children, an organization that Ms. DeVos chaired before her nomination. Other school choice advocacy organizations on the list include the Great Lakes Education Foundation, which received $200,000. Jeb Bush's Foundation for Excellence in Education received $52,000. Ms. DeVos was a keynote speaker at the Foundation's national conference earlier this month.

Pregnancy Resource Center

Amount Donated: $20,000

What They Do: The organization provides a range of services for pregnant women, including ultrasounds and testing for sexually transmitted diseases. But also featured prominently on the organization's website is an option for ''My Choices'' and ''Abortion Information.''

Liberal leaning organizations have accused the resource center of advertising the abortion clinic as a way to talk pregnant women out of the procedure. But the organization provides a lot of information on them, including how to help families through them and referrals for where they can be performed.

The resource center is certainly no Parent Parenthood -- and it makes clear that it would like women to exhaust their choices before choosing abortion.

But it's also a stark contrast to the Right to Life of Michigan Educational Foundation, which received $25,000 from the Foundation. Its take on abortions: ''Some choices aren't worthy of a woman.''

Institute for Justice

Amount Donated: $35,000

The institute files and funds a variety of civil liberties lawsuits, including several defending school voucher and tax credit programs that help fund private school tuition.

Acton Institute for the Study of Religion and Liberty

Amount Donated: $155,000

The research organization describes its mission as the promotion of ''a free and virtuous society characterized by individual liberty and sustained by religious principles.'' It also publishes a journal.

Boy Scouts of America

Amount Donated: $305,000

The traditional Boy Scouts of America is undergoing its own evolution, admitting girls in the next two years.

Holland Rescue Mission

$201,000

What They Do: The Christian-based organization helps the homeless in the town where Ms. DeVos was born and raised. It offers a ''wide range of Christ-driven services that address the root issues of homelessness to help restore and transform lives,'' according to its website. The DeVos family funds dozens of organizations that help low-income families, and features prominently on its website the Inner City Christian Federation, which builds affordable housing in Grand Rapids.

Kids Hope USA

$235,000

Kids Hope USA organization pairs church members with at-risk kids, and it was Ms. DeVos's door into the Grand Rapids Public School, where she served as a mentor for several years. It was through the program that she met a young woman named Angie a decade ago, who she still mentors today. Angie told The New York Times in May that it was difficult to watch Ms. DeVos be criticized in the media for not caring about people.

Embracing the Journey

$25,000

The Georgia-based organization's mission is to support Christian families that have lesbian, gay, bisexual or transsexual children. The organization's mission is to ''help reconcile the LGBTQ community and their families, while helping them move closer to Jesus Christ where they can experience healing and personal growth.'' The organization is run by a couple who said they have ''immersed themselves in the LGBTQ community,'' since learning their son was gay 15 years ago. Their goal is to ''embrace their journey and encourage them to love their children well,'' according to their website.

Heraion Foundation

$30,000

The DeVos family helped to fund a little-known humanitarian effort to defeat the Islamic State, or ISIS -- run largely out of a Brooklyn apartment. The Heraion Foundation, known as HERA, is a veteran-run nonprofit organization that started in 2015 to bring ''a new full-spectrum approach to counter-extremist humanitarianism. A profile of the group said that when its founder was not on the ground in Iraq, he worked out of his apartment.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Document NYTF000020171224edco0004s



N.Y. / Region
Convicted Bomber Tried to Radicalize Fellow Inmates, Officials Say

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
580 words
23 December 2017
02:23
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Federal prosecutors said on Friday that the New Jersey man convicted of detonating explosives in the Chelsea section of New York in September 2016 that injured more than 30 people has been “ttempting to radicalize fellow inmates”t the Manhattan jail where he is being held pending his sentencing.

The inmate, Ahmad Khan Rahimi, gave the other inmates access to speeches and lectures by Osama bin Laden and Anwar al-Awlaki, books on jihad, bomb-making instructions and issues of Inspire, the online magazine published by Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the government said.

The writings were stored on Mr. Rahimi’ laptop, the prosecutors said, and were part of the discovery materials that were provided to him during his case.

The government said that the inmates Mr. Rahimi shared the materials with included Sajmir Alimehmeti, a Bronx man who has been charged with providing material support to the Islamic State, and is scheduled for trial next month.

The allegations against Mr. Rahimi came in a letter on Friday from the office of Joon H. Kim, the acting United States attorney in Manhattan, to Judge Richard M. Berman of Federal District Court, who is to sentence Mr. Rahimi on Jan. 18. Mr. Rahimi, who was convicted in October, faces a mandatory life sentence for his convictions.

Mr. Rahimi had met with some of the inmates to whom he gave the terrorist writings during Friday prayer sessions at the Metropolitan Correction Center, the government’ letter said.

The letter said evidence at Mr. Rahimi’ trial showed that his attack had been “otivated by a violent ideology espoused by terrorist leaders”ike Mr. bin Laden and that he had studied Mr. Awlaki’ speeches and Inspire magazine.

Mr. Kim’ office wrote that after jail employees learned of Mr. Rahimi’ “adicalization efforts,”hey searched his personal property and found an address book containing the names and inmate numbers of other terrorism defendants, including Muhanad Mahmoud Al Farekh, a Texan convicted of helping to plan a 2009 attack on a United States Army base in Afghanistan, and Maalik Alim Jones, a Maryland man who pleaded guilty to conspiring to support the Shabab in Somalia.

Mr. Kim’ office noted that Mr. Rahimi, Mr. Alimehmeti and another unidentified inmate with whom Mr. Rahimi was accused of sharing the materials are all represented by the federal public defender’ office, and asked that Judge Berman hold a hearing to ensure that Mr. Rahimi had knowingly waived any potential conflict of interest that might exist.

In a separate letter to the judge, which was also filed publicly on Friday, Mr. Rahimi said he began a hunger strike on Dec. 8, complaining that his family was not being permitted to visit him and he had not been allowed to call his lawyer.

“ am extremely frustrated and physically tired and mentally drained of the continuous run around they are giving me,”r. Rahimi wrote. Judge Berman ordered that the government and Mr. Rahimi’ lawyer each file responses.

One of Mr. Rahimi’ public defenders, Sabrina Shroff, declined to comment on both the government’ and Mr. Rahimi’ letter, as did Mr. Kim’ office; a jail spokesman did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

* Chelsea Bomb Suspect Guilty in Attack That Sowed Terror Across Region

* Bronx Man Accused of Trying to Join \b ISIS\b0  Is Arrested

Document NYTFEED020171223edcn000gp



World; Middle East
Woman, Around 80, Is Arrested at Beirut Airport for Cocaine Smuggling

By NADA HOMSI and LIAM STACK 
352 words
23 December 2017
00:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon — woman who is around 80 was arrested at Beirut’ international airport on Friday after trying to smuggle about 68 pounds of cocaine, according to government officials and state media in Lebanon, which called the illicit operation the largest in recent memory.

Lebanon’ National News Agency said on Friday that customs officials at Rafik Hariri International Airport in Beirut found the cocaine “idden within the luggage of an elderly Venezuelan passenger who is about 80 years old, coming from Venezuela to Beirut via Paris.”

The news agency, which cited a statement from the Finance Ministry, also reported that two internal security officers had been arrested, apparently for trying to escort the woman through customs. It did not identify any of the three suspects.

The finance minister, Ali Hassan Khalil, said on Twitter that it was the country’ “argest cocaine smuggling operation.”e also said the government’ approach to drug trafficking was “trict and in no way lenient,”nd he urged travelers “o take more care during this holiday season.”

This was not the airport’ first brush with drug trafficking. In June, Assala Nasri, a Syrian pop singer, was detained after security officials found a small amount of cocaine in her makeup bag, according to An-Nahar, a Lebanese newspaper. She was soon released.

And in 2015, five Saudi nationals, including a member of the royal family, Prince Abdul Mohsen bin Walid bin Abdulaziz, were arrested in Beirut for allegedly attempting to smuggle two tons of Captagon, an amphetamine popular in the Middle East.

He and nine others were charged with drug smuggling in November 2015, according to Reuters. His trial is currently proceeding in Lebanon.

Nada Homsi reported from Beirut, and Liam Stack from New York. Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut.

* Syrian War Drags On, but Assad’ Future Looks as Secure as Ever

* Scaling Up a Drug Trade, Straight Through \b ISIS\b0  Turf

* Marijuana for Christmas? Elderly Couple Arrested With 60 Pounds for Gifts

Document NYTFEED020171222edcm00899



Lens
Multimedia
Christmas Returns to a City Liberated From  ISIS 

By DAVID GONZALEZ 
596 words
21 December 2017
10:00
NYT Blogs
NYTB
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved 

For more than two years, 300 militia fighters waited to retake from the Islamic State the Iraqi city of Qaraqosh, the country’ largest Christian enclave. Then, in October of last year, the photographer Quentin Bruno accompanied these civilians turned soldiers as they approached the city that was once home to 50,000 people. He remembered their excitement, as well as the mortars that rained down upon them, a few days after the Iraqi Army had launched the Battle of Mosul.

Hope and excitement turned to surprise as they went into town and arrived at the ruins of a church. “hen we entered, nothing exploded,”r. Bruno explained. “verybody was expecting booby traps everywhere.”

Some of the men lit candles, Mr. Bruno recalled, until a sniper took aim and forced them to flee to another church. Once there, he said, a poet and writer named Jamil made a cross from two pieces of wood and hoisted it aloft.

Mr. Bruno, a freelance photographer based in Belgium, spent a year in the region, first with the members of the Christian militia during the offensive and later visiting regularly to document how the city was recovering from a conflict that drove out its inhabitants and destroyed about a third of the city. He began by moving to Erbil, where he got to know the militiamen. He found them easy to talk to, he said, unlike the regular Iraqi military.

“hey were civilians who had taken up guns to take back their city,”r. Bruno said. “he way they spoke was more human than the military. They were poets and bakers. You could feel they were not Rambos. They were full of hope. I thought it was a great story.”

Whatever exhilaration they felt upon their return, he said, was tempered by the reality of rebuilding what had become a ghost town. They were depressed, he said, and cold.

“hey were unsure if the people would come back to the city and if there would be life again,”e said. “t was hard because all these guys came back to find most of their houses had been burned. So I took them, one by one, to their houses to take pictures. Some of them cried when they got there. Others were desperate. No one knew if families would go back.”

Slowly, people returned. By last August, he said, some 25,000 people had come back, in time to have the children return to school. Shops were opening and construction was going on everywhere. And religious life also returned, though with some accommodations: During one religious feast in September (Slide 1), Mass was celebrated outside the church, rather than in the sanctuary, since the structure had to be reconsecrated for use.

As for the rest of the city, he said, many houses were rebuilt by families who returned.

“here are kids everywhere now,”e said. “here are internet cafes and restaurants. There is still a lot of construction, but you can feel there is life. You can feel the people found hope again.”

And so, perhaps it is time to celebrate and give thanks. Mr. Bruno said this Christmas will be the first time that the main church will once again be filled with civilians who have returned to their liberated city.

“hey have a crèhe ready,”e said. “here will be a choir. They are ready for Christmas.”

Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. Quentin Bruno is on Instagram. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.

Document NYTB000020171221edcl00001



Contributing Op-Ed Writer
Opinion
You Cannot Be Too Cynical About the Republican Tax Bill

By THOMAS B. EDSALL 
2,618 words
21 December 2017
12:02
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

The rush to enact the tax bill was designed to mask —s a break for the middle class —hat is in fact a $1.4 trillion package of benefits for key donors and lobbyists, the richest members of Congress, President Trump, his family and other families like his.

The speed from introduction to passage —even weeks, with no substantive hearings —ffectively precluded expert examination of the legislation’ regressive core, its special interest provisions and the long-term penalties it imposes on the working poor and middle class through the use of an alternative measure of inflation —he “chained CPI.”

Only last Friday, when the legislation came out of conference committee and was no longer subject to amendment —nd when decisive majorities of House and Senate Republicans had publicly committed to vote for the legislation —id experts and journalists begin to fully catch up with its defects.

Two days before Congress gave final approval, a group of 13 tax law experts released the most incisive critique of the tax bill to date, a 30-page document called “The Games They Will Play: An Update on the Conference Committee Tax Bill.”

The primary authors of the report —ri Glogower, David Kamin, Rebecca Kysar, and Darien Shanske —escribe the legislation as “ substantial blow to the basic integrity of the income tax”hat will “dvantage the well-advised in ways that are both deliberate and inadvertent.”

The authors cite a wide range of specific flaws, but their main argument is that the measure is gravely deficient at its core:

The most serious structural problems with the bill are unavoidable outcomes of Congress’ choice to preference certain taxpayers and activities while disfavoring others —nd for no discernible policy rationale. These haphazard lines are fundamentally unfair and inefficient, and invite tax planning by sophisticated taxpayers to get within the preferred categories.

Glogower, Kamin, Kysar, and Shanske argue that some of the most egregious loopholes and schemes permitted by the legislation are that individual taxpayers

will be able to shield their labor income from tax by simply setting up a corporation and having their income accrue in the form of corporate profits. As a result, income that would have been taxed at the high individual rates is instead taxed at the low corporate rate.

Second, the legislation creates a huge incentive for anyone in a position to do so to change his or her status from employee to “ndependent contractor or a partner in a firm. The game is clear: Don’ be an employee, instead be an independent contractor or partner in a firm.”he ability to make this shift is available primarily to the well-paid.

The legislation, according to Glogower and his colleagues, also fails to present a coherent rationale:

the fundamental problem is the lack of any underlying logic in deciding who benefits from the pass-through deductions, and who does not. Independent contractors and partners benefit, but not employees. Why? An owner of real estate through a REIT benefits, but not the doctor in the building. Why? An architect benefits in some ways that a lawyer does not. And so on.

The bill encourages tax evasion. Glogower and his colleagues cite

opportunities to use rate differentials and ill-considered transitions to engage in transactions that serve to basically pump money out of the Treasury and into the pockets of well-advised taxpayers.

To provide an example, they use a company that purchased equipment under existing law, which provides them with tax breaks on the cost spread out over the years in a depreciation schedule. The new law allows companies to immediately write off the full cost of buying equipment, known as expensing.

“o,”he authors ask, “hat does that mean?”

It means that old property can still get the benefit of expensing, but only if it is sold to another party. If the original owner holds it, they have to depreciate according to the old rules; if they sell it to another party, then suddenly the full cost is eligible for expensing, and the net effect is an immediate deduction of the existing tax basis of the asset. The parties can split the resulting surplus. It appears that the buyer of the asset could even lease it back to the existing owner, so that the property doesn’ even have to go anywhere.

I emailed some of the authors of this report for their individual thoughts.

Mitchell Kane, a law professor at N.Y.U., wrote in response that the bill will

create new incentives to shift tangible assets (and jobs) abroad. Given President Trump’ relentless message about U.S. jobs, it is incomprehensible to me that we are about to pass something that has this effect without any kind of meaningful discussion of the issue.

Daniel Hemel, a law professor at the University of Chicago, raised a crucial question about the long-term effects of the legislation’ adoption of chained CPI, a method of calculating the rate of inflation for the earned-income tax credit and other sections of the tax code that provide breaks to working- and middle-class families.

He noted that

lower and middle-income families, who are especially dependent upon inflation-indexed deductions, credits, and bracket thresholds, will feel the impact increasingly as time goes on.

In the first year, 2018, the changed inflation rate raises a relatively modest $31.5 billion but it grows every year, reaching $37 billion in 2027. “o be sure,”emel wrote, “his affects everyone to some degree, but most of the burden is paid for by families in the bottom four quintiles.”

In the long term, Hemel argued,

this is a very subtle way to increase taxes on the lower and middle classes and then use those revenues to pay for a massive tax cut for corporations.

What may prove even more significant is that the shift to chained CPI — less generous, slower-growing measure of inflation than the one currently in use —ould not only result in a tax increase over time, it would set a precedent for Republicans who would like to use the same method to pare back so-called entitlement programs like Social Security and Medicare. It is, in effect, a backdoor method of reducing benefits for the elderly and the disadvantaged without public scrutiny or debate.

This full-speed-ahead strategy simultaneously constrained the ability of the press to explore the special interest provisions buried in the legislation.

One exception is the work of three reporters from International Business Times —lex Kotch, David Sirota and Josh Keefe —ho have pursued this line of inquiry for the past week. A recent story disclosed that a provision inserted at the last minute into the bill stands to lower taxes on the income of 14 Republican Senators.

Along parallel lines, a liberal think tank, the Center for American Progress, now estimates that Senator Ron Johnson, Republican of Wisconsin, will get an annual tax break of somewhere between $21,500 and $205,000 based on his 2016 financial disclosure statement. The center’ calculations are based on Johnson’ reported income from three holdings he said produced a minimum of $215,002 up to a maximum of $2,050,000.

And the 2016 financial disclosure statement filed by Senator Steve Daines, Republican of Montana, shows income from real estate holdings of $487,500 to $4,305,000. If Daines’ax cut is computed using the same method that the center used for Johnson, it would be between $47,582 and $430,500.

Not only are many senators direct beneficiaries of the legislation, but 15 of the top 20 Senate recipients of contributions from the real estate industry are Republicans, according to Open Secrets, ranging from Marco Rubio at $3.27 million to Chuck Grassley at $276,636.

Perhaps most important, the measure rewards those who need it least —he very wealthy —hile leaving those most in need with modest and temporary tax breaks. The bill will diminish opportunities for social mobility by doubling the estate tax exemption, further entrenching generation after generation at the top of the income distribution.

As my colleague Jim Tankersley put it on Dec. 16, the final version of the legislation

offers little redress to workers who have grown to believe that the country’ tax law thicket advantages those with power, political connections and lawyers on retainer. Its evolution undermines a central selling point for a bill that is already seen by most Americans as unlikely to benefit them, according to polls.

The accompanying chart, which is based on an analysis done by the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center, describes the distribution of the benefits by income groups over the next decade.

Despite the fact that the measure is a tax cut, the majority of Americans, 53 percent, currently disapprove of the law and 35 percent approve, according to a CBS Poll. Most Americans believe the bill will help large corporations (76 percent) and the wealthy (69 percent), while 35 percent believe it will help the middle class and 24 percent said their own families will gain.

A tax expert who insisted on anonymity in order to protect client confidentiality, emailed me his critique of the bill:

(1) The corporate rate reduction is permanent, for individuals only temporary. Completely obnoxious. In effect the money “aved”ithin the 10 year budget window by making those individual cuts temporary helped to underwrite the cost of making the corporate/pass though side permanent

(2) Carried interest provision. When Trump was careening around in his populist candidate mode, he promised to end it. Here is one campaign promise that he “omehow”ailed to redeem when the clear and available chance presented itself.

(3) Restriction on state and C local tax deduction —onsciously vindictive imposition of double taxation on citizens of certain Democratic states; corporations and pass through businesses, the darlings of the Republicans, still get to deduct those very same taxes in full.

(4) Expanding the standard deduction but financing the cost of so doing by repealing the personal exemptions is a bit of a bait and switch maneuver. Some people might be worse off.

(5) In a bill in which 100s of billions of dollars were sloshing around to provide steep tax cuts for already wealthy and highly prosperous corporations and pass through businesses, the Republicans could only find the will to raise the refundable portion of the child care tax credit from $1000 to $1400. Rubio wanted it to be raised to $2000 and his Republican brethren refused to even meet him halfway. Pitiful.

(6) Deduction for extraordinary medical expenses —etention of this deduction did not even get the five-year sunset window applied to all the other individual tax provisions, two years only. Vicious.

(7) Pass through business taxation —he bill is a massive tax gift to some of the wealthiest people in the country, who are conducting business operations in non-corporate form or are investors in same.

The tax bill not only alters the competitive structure of American industry but includes such major provisions as opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska to oil drilling and the elimination of mandatory individual health insurance under Obamacare.

What amounted to three major pieces of legislation were approved by the full House and the Senate Finance Committee, “wo weeks after the bill was unveiled, without a single hearing on the 400-plus-page legislation,”s Thomas Kaplan and Alan Rappeport put it in The Times.

How well does this procedure stand up to the requirements Senator Ben Sasse specified in his maiden Senate speech on Nov. 3, 2015? In it, Sasse argued that the Senate was failing in its responsibility to fully air and debate the important issues before the county, calling for what he called “ cultural recovery inside the Senate”

One of our jobs is to flesh out competing views with such seriousness and respect that we should be mitigating, not exacerbating, the polarization that does exist ...

Good teachers don’ shut down debate; they try to model Socratic seriousness by putting the best possible construction on arguments, even —nd especially —f one doesn’ hold those positions.

Or, for that matter, how well does the bill fit with Senator John McCain’ determination to lay down the law on “egular order,”s outlined in an Aug. 31 op-ed in the Washington Post? “e are proving inadequate not only to our most difficult problems but also to routine duties,”cCain wrote. Or as McCain noted during the debate over legislation to repeal Obamacare, he was calling

for a return to regular order, letting committees of jurisdiction do the principal work of crafting legislation and letting the full Senate debate and amend their efforts. We won’ settle all our differences that way, but such an approach is more likely to make progress on the central problems confronting our constituents. We might not like the compromises regular order requires, but we can and must live with them if we are to find real and lasting solutions.

So far, however, only one Republican senator has suffered real costs for deciding to vote for the tax bill.

Just over two months ago, Bob Corker drew a line in the sand on the bill: if it raised the deficit, he would vote no:

No way that Bob Corker is going to vote for a tax reform bill that I think in any way is going to add to the deficit. It’ not going to happen, never. It’ never going to happen. Never, never, ever.

On Oct. 5, Susan Davis of National Public Radio put Corker on record with a series of quotes that he may have come to regret:

This is the most passionate thing for me, period, that I work on. Not foreign policy. Not banking. It’ this deficit issue.

For Corker, this issue went way beyond routine politics: “eficits matter,”e forcefully asserted. “hey are a greater threat to us than North Korea or ISIS.”

This past week Corker has decided that the deficit is no longer “he most passionate thing for me.”nstead, he voted for a tax bill that will increase the deficit by $1.46 trillion over ten years. In a statement, Corker declared:

In the end, after 11 years in the Senate, I know every bill we consider is imperfect and the question becomes is our country better off with or without this piece of legislation. I think we are better off with it.

All of this raises a basic question. How could nearly every Republican representative —nd all 52 Republican senators —upport the tax bill? The best answer may be the most cynical: because it benefits key leaders, their friends, their heirs and their donors.

After looking at the legislation in its entirety —ts substance and the procedures used to get there —t is difficult to conclude that the motivations of its sponsors are either benevolent or somehow in the best interests of the country. More likely it is hypocrisy and venality mixed up into one awful bill.

I invite you to follow me on Twitter, @Edsall.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Correction: December 21, 2017, Thursday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this column misstated the given name of a law professor at N.Y.U.; he is Mitchell Kaine, not Michael Kane.

* In Tax Overhaul, Trump Tries to Defy the Economic Odds

Jon Elswick/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020171221edcl0038p



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Officials Weigh Sending American Held as  ISIS  Fighter to Saudi Arabia

By CHARLIE SAVAGE, ERIC SCHMITT and ADAM GOLDMAN 
833 words
21 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Senior national security officials in the Trump administration are embracing a proposal to transfer to Saudi Arabia an American citizen being held in Iraq as a wartime detainee, according to officials familiar with internal deliberations.

A meeting last week of the National Security Council's ''deputies committee'' -- the No. 2 leaders of national security departments and agencies -- found its members united around a goal of pursuing such a transfer for the detainee, suspected of being a low-level Islamic State fighter, who has been held in military custody as an ''enemy combatant'' for the past three months, the officials said.

The man, whose name the government has refused to make public, was born in the United States to visiting Saudi parents, the officials said.

A spokesman for the National Security Council declined to comment. The officials spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe the internal deliberations.

The Trump administration has been wrestling with what to do with the man since a Syrian militia turned him over to American forces in mid-September. Legal pressure to resolve his fate has been building since the American Civil Liberties Union filed a habeas corpus lawsuit in October challenging his detention on his behalf.

The government initially wanted to prosecute the man in a civilian court for providing material assistance to terrorism, but the F.B.I. was unable to assemble sufficient courtroom-admissible evidence against him.

After interrogating the man for intelligence purposes, F.B.I. agents switched to questioning to gather courtroom evidence and read the man the Miranda warning. But after the man heard he had a right to have a lawyer present, the Justice Department disclosed as part of the A.C.L.U. case, he asked for one, so the agents ceased their questioning.

Robert M. Chesney, a national security law professor at the University of Texas, Austin, said that repatriating the detainee to Saudi Arabia, where he was raised and is apparently a dual citizen, was ''the most desirable outcome for all parties concerned.''

Mr. Chesney noted that there has been no claim that the man did or knows anything important, and he said that holding the man in longer-term military custody would give courts an opportunity to weigh in on unresolved legal questions, including whether Congress properly authorized the war against the Islamic State and the limits of the government's power to hold American citizens as enemy combatants.

''Why would you want to open that can of worms in the first place when you have a perfectly plausible, indeed attractive, disposition option?'' Mr. Chesney said.

The officials at the deputies committee meeting agreed that as part of reaching out to the Saudi government, the Trump administration would request diplomatic assurances about what would happen to the man after any transfer.

Previous repatriation deals for lower-level detainees have included assurances that their ability to travel would be restricted, as well as other security measures. Saudi Arabia also operates a custodial rehabilitation program for low-level Islamist radicals.

It was not clear whether such a deal would require the detainee to renounce his American citizenship, eliminating his right to enter the United States. In 2004, when the Bush administration repatriated a former Guantáamo detainee who had similarly been born in the United States to visiting Saudi parents, Yaser E. Hamdi, the man agreed to renounce his citizenship as part of the arrangement.

By then, Mr. Hamdi had a lawyer. The Trump administration has been fighting to keep a lawyer from reaching the current detainee.

Jonathan Hafetz, the lead A.C.L.U. lawyer in the habeas corpus lawsuit, said that whatever happens, the man should be given access to a lawyer first ''to advise him on fundamental questions, including renouncing his citizenship, if that's an issue.''

Although the International Committee for the Red Cross has visited the detainee twice, the government has kept secret the most basic facts about him. That he is a dual citizen of Saudi Arabia was earlier reported last week by The Hill, and was subsequently confirmed by officials.

The government has asked the judge overseeing the A.C.L.U.'s case, Judge Tanya S. Chutkan of the Federal District Court of the District of Columbia, to dismiss the lawsuit, saying the rights organization lacks standing because it has no connections to him or his relatives.

But the A.C.L.U., noting that the government is responsible for keeping the man's identity secret and not letting lawyers visit him, has asked Judge Chutkan to order the government to ask the detainee whether he wants to file a habeas corpus lawsuit himself and, if so, whether he wants the A.C.L.U. to represent him. She has not yet ruled.

On Twitter, follow Charlie Savage @charlie_savage, Eric Schmitt @EricSchmittNYT and Adam Goldman @adamgoldmanNYT.

Document NYTF000020171221edcl0003z



Times Insider
Our Journalists Share Their Most Memorable Interviews of 2017

Compiled by INSIDER STAFF 
2,313 words
18 December 2017
21:59
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

We asked 10 New York Times reporters to tell us about the most memorable interviews they conducted this year.

A Ukrainian heroine who had reason to fear the foreign press

ANDREW KRAMER, Moscow correspondent

AMINA OKUYEVA, volunteer soldier in the war against Russian-backed rebels in eastern Ukraine

It was Amina Okuyeva’ first interview with a foreign journalist since an assassin posing as a foreign journalist had tried to kill her and her husband during an interview.

We chose to talk in the lobby of the Intercontinental hotel, since it was a well-lit, well-guarded public space.

Ms. Okuyeva was a minor celebrity in Ukraine for, along with her husband, joining a volunteer paramilitary force fighting Russian-backed rebels in the eastern part of the country.

Her previous interviewer had said he was a reporter with the French newspaper Le Monde. In fact, he was a Chechen assassin. Midway through their interview, he opened fire. Ms. Okuyeva pulled out her own gun and shot back, saving herself and her husband.

There had been clues something was amiss. “e had a notebook, but he wasn’ writing anything in it,”he said.

In the Ukrainian news media, Ms. Okuyeva was portrayed as a fierce heroine for fighting back to survive. I saw a frightened woman. In my notebook I wrote, “urrowed brow.”

A few months later, I filed a brief story noting that Ms. Okuyeva had died in a subsequent assassination by a gunman hiding in bushes on a roadside. By coincidence, I wrote the story in the lobby of the Intercontinental hotel, where I had come earlier in the evening to have dinner.

A warm smile in the middle of tragedy

FRANCES ROBLES, domestic correspondent

AILEEN AYALA, mother whose son died of a heart condition the morning Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico

I met Aileen Ayala at the Salinas Memorial Funeral Home a week after her 29-year-old son, Josue Santos, died as Hurricane Maria trampled Puerto Rico. Communications were so bad she hadn’ been able to notify friends and family about Josue’ death.

In the middle of all that tragedy, Ms. Ayala, 53, portrayed a warmth that belied the heartbreak. I remember her smile most of all. She was convinced all this was happening to her so she could be stronger on the day someone needed her.

Here’ the quote we used in our story for The Times’ “24 Hours in Puerto Rico”roject: “ou go out and stand in line, because now life here is all about lines — line for gas, a line for the bank —nd everyone starts talking: ‘ lost this, I lost that, I lost my roof, I lost my car.’nd when it’ my turn, I have to say: ‘ lost my son.’”

An entire life devoted to a single pursuit

RAPHAEL MINDER, Madrid-based correspondent, covering Spain and Portugal

JUSTO GALLEGO, cathedral architect

On a chilly spring afternoon, I walked into the crypt of an unfinished cathedral in Mejorada, Spain, to find the grave of the frail old man I had come to interview.

Justo Gallego, 91, has been building his own cathedral almost single-handedly since the 1960s. With a 125-foot-tall cupola, the “athedral of Faith”s hard to miss, but talking to its architect proved far more complicated.

I had made an appointment through a friend of his, but Mr. Gallego was in no mood to talk. Hunched in front of a wooden stove, he made it clear he had no time for a journalist. Disappointed, I took another walk around the cathedral and settled on the steps of its esplanade to finish some other work.

Eventually, I went back in and found Mr. Gallego still transfixed by the glow of his stove, but in a different mood. For the next few hours, we discussed the Catholic Church, the Spanish Civil War, Gaudí’ architecture and why some people devote their entire lives to a single pursuit, whatever others might think about it.

A Syrian boy who was forced to look

SOMINI SENGUPTA, international reporter

MUHAMMAD, young Syrian refugee living in Beirut

In Beirut, I met a little boy who was forced to watch beheadings in his hometown in Syria. He would have been around 9 at the time, the same age as my own child.

He described holding his mother’ hand, not wanting to look, but also being unable to look away. Looking was mandatory, he said.

What seemed to trouble him most were the rules that pinched his freedom, like being told he couldn’ cut his hair or he couldn’ swim in the lake shirtless.

“uhammad cut his hair again as soon as he reached Beirut,” wrote in my story about childhood in ISIS-held areas. “e colored a swish of it platinum blond and swept it upward, with pomade, so that he looked a bit like a unicorn, with the face of a cherub.”

A “elf-proclaimed black weirdo”ith a “pectral, spaced-out”ound

JENNA WORTHAM, staff writer at The New York Times Magazine and co-host of the podcast “till Processing”

KELELA, R&B singer

Earlier this year, I flew to Strasbourg, France, to interview the singer Kelela for The Magazine’ annual Music Issue. She was on tour with the British band the xx.

The internet was ravenous for the return of her sound —pectral, spaced-out R&B that’ quirky and sexy without being hypersexualized —ut also for her visibility as a self-proclaimed black weirdo. There just aren’ that many of us in the spotlight.

A few days before we met, Beyoncé’ “emonade,”ne of the most visceral albums about black womanhood in years, had been passed over at the Grammys. Would Kelela’ new album, six years in the making, wind up in the void, too?

She was stunningly open with me as she worked through her feelings about her role as a black cultural figure —he responsibility it contains, and the delicate balance between succumbing to the appetite of the internet and resisting the commodification that goes with it.

For her, figuring out the answers to these questions was bigger than an article: It was essential for survival.

I left our last encounter after midnight, having gotten closer to resolving some questions of my own about the relentless uncertainty that accompanies the creative process.

A precious gift, after tea and pie

DAN BARRY, reporter and columnist

CATHERINE CORLESS, amateur historian, County Galway, Ireland

I carried a just-purchased apple pie up to the County Galway farmhouse of Catherine Corless.

I knew that this amateur historian had been interviewed many times before about how she had exposed the buried secrets of the old home for mothers and babies in nearby Tuam. But as the son of a Galway woman, I also knew that a deeper discussion would require tea, and tea would require pie.

Our interview, though, would need several more visits —nd several more pies. Ms. Corless is quite shy, but with each visit she revealed a little more about her personal stake in a case concerning the historic mistreatment of unwed mothers and their children.

During our talks, I tried to imagine myself as her, so as to ask better questions. And when we were done, I knew that what she had given me was her story — precious gift —nd now it was up to me to handle it with care.

A politician digging around in his own conscience

SHERYL GAY STOLBERG, Washington correspondent

JEFF FLAKE, Republican senator from Arizona

I had just started covering Congress when I went to Arizona in October to interview the Republican senator Jeff Flake, an ardent critic of President Trump, on his home turf. Mr. Flake was supposedly gearing up to run for re-election, and his race was going to be extremely difficult; Arizona is a pro-Trump state, so pundits were busy predicting Mr. Flake’ demise. (Ten days later, he dropped out of the race —ut not before he delivered a searing indictment of Mr. Trump on the Senate floor.)

What I remember most about Mr. Flake that day was his mood. He was not defiant, as he would later be in his Senate floor speech. Rather, he was deeply reflective; in retrospect, it seems clear he knew even then that his political career was over.

As we spoke, he ran through some of his earlier criticisms of the president —or peddling the false conspiracy theory that President Barack Obama was born in Kenya, for instance, and for characterizing Mexicans as rapists. Then he asked plaintively, “n which of those instances should I not have spoken out?”

I felt as though I were watching him dig around in his own conscience.

A door opened, after knocks that went unanswered

JOHN BRANCH, sports reporter

CLAUDETTE CRAIG, mother of murdered youth-league coach Charles “hucky”raig, mentor to N.B.A. star Kevin Durant

The N.B.A. star Kevin Durant wears No. 35 in honor of a mentor named Charles “hucky”raig, who at 35 was shot and killed outside a Maryland bar when Mr. Durant was a teen. Doing a story about a murder that happened in 2005 meant a lot of nonworking phone numbers, unreturned calls and knocks that went unanswered.

But one door opened, in a neighborhood of tired old houses in Washington, and a small, well-dressed older woman asked me in. It was Claudette Craig, Chucky’ mother, who had just arrived home from a funeral. She didn’ expect me, but quickly invited me to sit at the kitchen table, where a framed photograph of Chucky still stood.

The rest of the house was empty. After decades there, she was moving to Georgia to be close to family, taking the train the next day.

“f you had come tomorrow,”he said, “ wouldn’ have been here.”

I spent a couple of hours with her, talking about her son and her memories of the night he died. She had never met Mr. Durant, except maybe when he was a little boy and Chucky brought the kids from the recreation center by to get something to eat.

“ don’ know why I let you in,”s. Craig said as I got up to leave. “ don’ normally answer my door. But you looked nice.”

A bridge to a song

ANDY NEWMAN, metro reporter

J. J. COVIELLO, custodian, and SOLOMON WASSERMAN, inventor

[Video: Song for a New Bridge Watch on YouTube.]

Even mundane stories yield surprises. In August, I was at a rest stop on the New York State Thruway asking drivers about a new bridge on the Hudson River that had just replaced the deteriorating Tappan Zee Bridge.

A custodian emptying trash cans approached. His name was J. J. Coviello, and he had Down syndrome. In 25 years as a reporter, I had never interviewed someone with Down syndrome for a story that wasn’ about disability. But Mr. Coviello knew about the bridge. He planned to cross it soon to visit relatives. “’ thrilled,”e said. “t’ a good experience for me.”

I quoted him in the story, without mentioning his condition, because it wasn’ relevant. He was a guy excited by a new bridge. To people who know and love people with Down syndrome, this is no epiphany. But the experience opened up the world a little bit for me.

The next person I talked to was a big jolly man, an inventor named Solomon Wasserman. He made up a song on the spot about the bridge, to the tune of “f I Were a Rich Man” “ll day long I’l sing and I’l celebrate, what a wonderful bridge we have, hey!”

I left the rest stop grinning from ear to ear.

A string theorist with dreams of Middle East peace

DENNIS OVERBYE, cosmic affairs correspondent

ELIEZER RABINOVICI, theoretical physicist and co-creator of the Sesame institute

In my role as cosmic affairs correspondent, I’ rarely involved in anything that moves the markets or affects international relations.

But last spring I met Eliezer Rabinovici, a string theorist from Hebrew University in Jerusalem. After the famous handshake between Yasir Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin in 1993, Mr. Rabinovici and a colleague at the renowned physics lab CERN had an idea for what would eventually become Sesame, an institute in Jordan where Arabs and Israelis could collaborate on scientific research.

As someone who often speculates about multiple universes and extra dimensions, Dr. Rabinovici was as far removed from current affairs as I was. He would have no use for the Sesame synchrotron — particle accelerator that would produce a special kind of light for studying materials and drugs —nd even claimed he didn’ really know how it would work.

Why then, I asked him when he visited The Times in advance of Sesame’ opening, had he spent more than 20 years of his life getting it going?

“ always wanted to visit some of these other universes, just to see how things are there,”e said, but with the Sesame project “ actually got to live in a universe where Arabs, Israelis, Iranians, Pakistanis work together for the same cause for their own people, for humanity.”

* Rules for Reporting a Planned Death: No Photos, No Pad, No Pen

Brendan Hoffman for The New York Times | Gianfranco Tripodo for The New York Times | Erik Madigan Heck for The New York Times | Paulo Nunes dos Santos for The New York Times | Al Drago for The New York Times | Matt Roth for The New York Times | Stephen Speranza for The New York Times | Dmitry Kostyukov for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171218edci006pp



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Schumer Seeks M.T.A. Use of Machines That Can Detect Explosives in Crowds

By LUIS FERRÉSADURNÍ
692 words
18 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
18
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Less than a week after a man detonated a pipe bomb strapped to his chest in a crowded subway corridor in Manhattan, Senator Chuck Schumer urged the federal government on Sunday to speed up the rollout of a technology that can detect concealed explosives in crowded areas.

''ISIS said they are going to continue to look at subways as a target with suicide bombers,'' Mr. Schumer, a Democrat from New York, said at a news conference at a station at 53rd Street and Third Avenue. ''The good news is there is technology being developed that can actually detect explosives and suicide vests in subways.''

The attack last week in the heart of Manhattan materialized a possibility that the police had long dreaded: a suicide bombing attempt, a plot exceedingly difficult for the police to stop once it has been set into motion.

Since 2004, the Transportation Security Administration has been testing machines that can detect whether a person is concealing an improvised explosive device in crowded mass transit environments. Mr. Schumer called on the agency to speed up the tests and deploy the machines in New York City subways, bus stations and airports.

The machines, called stand-off explosive detection units, can detect metallic and nonmetallic explosive devices on people walking past by spotting an obstruction of the emissions naturally given off by bodies, according to the agency's website. An alarm is triggered if a threat is detected.

Mr. Schumer on Sunday lauded the technology and called on the agency to partner with transit agencies in the city and bring it to New York permanently.

The agency is currently testing the equipment in Los Angeles. The machines, which resemble film projectors on tripods and are meant to be operated by transit employees, have also been tested in partnership with Amtrak, New Jersey Transit and other mass transit agencies.

''The new tech will be rolled out if and when its effectiveness has been demonstrated by thorough testing,'' Michael England, a spokesman for the agency, said on Sunday.

But Mr. Schumer said the agency ''has shown too lax an attitude.''

''I am telling T.S.A., 'Wake up,' '' Mr. Schumer said. Referring to attacks, he continued, ''We need to be able to defend against them with increasing diligence and effectiveness, and the idea that we have this technology is good, but the idea that it's taken so long to develop is bad.''

''Imagine the relief if we knew that at the entrance of every subway there was a machine like this that could detect a suicide bomber and stop them before they could do their evil deed,'' he added.

The suspect in the attack last week, Akayed Ullah, a 27-year-old immigrant from Bangladesh, told investigators that he chose the crowded passageway between subway stations because of its Christmas-themed posters and that he detonated the bomb in retaliation for United States airstrikes on Islamic State targets in the Middle East.

Mr. Ullah built a pipe bomb and fastened it to his body, law enforcement officials said. The so-called lone wolf attack was the third in New York City since September 2016.

New York City law enforcement officials have foiled suicide attacks in the past.

In 2009, Najibullah Zazi and two friends were accused of planning to strap explosives to themselves and board crowded trains during rush hour at the Grand Central and Times Square stations. Mr. Zazi pleaded guilty to what officials at the time described as one of the most serious threats to the United States since the Sept. 11 attacks.

The police also arrested two men with Jordanian passports in 1997 when officers found them in a Brooklyn apartment making pipe bombs that officials said were part of a plot to detonate bombs in the Atlantic Avenue subway station and on a commuter bus.

Follow Luis FerréSadurnín Twitter: @luisferre

Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York, asked for the equipment to be approved soon. (PHOTOGRAPH BY YANA PASKOVA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171218edci0005h



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Russia Says C.I.A. Tip Helped Foil  ISIS  Attack

By ANDREW E. KRAMER 
707 words
18 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MOSCOW -- President Vladimir V. Putin called President Trump on Sunday to thank him for the work of the Central Intelligence Agency in helping prevent an Islamic State attack in the northern Russian city of St. Petersburg.

In rare words of praise for the C.I.A., Mr. Putin said the agency had provided information that ''helped detain terrorists planning explosions,'' the Kremlin said in a statement posted on its website. The attackers planned to strike crowded sites including Kazan Cathedral, a landmark Orthodox Christian church, the statement said.

''The information received from the C.I.A. was sufficient to search for and detain criminals,'' the statement said. ''The head of the Russian state asked the American president to convey words of thanks to the director of the C.I.A. and the American intelligence officers who received this information.''

The attack was described as imminent. It was said to be planned for Sunday -- just two days after the first arrests were made on Friday. It was not clear when the C.I.A. provided the tip.

The Kremlin announcement offered no details on what information the C.I.A. had forwarded to the Federal Security Service, the main successor agency to the K.G.B. American intelligence agencies typically view the Russian agency as an adversary, even while cooperating in counterterrorism operations.

During the call, Mr. Putin assured Mr. Trump that Russian intelligence agencies would similarly share information about terrorist threats to the United States, the Kremlin statement said.

Earlier, Russian media had reported the takedown of a terrorist cell in St. Petersburg without noting the tip from the C.I.A. The Federal Security Service, which is also known as the F.S.B., detained seven suspects who planned a wave of bombings, the Interfax news agency reported.

Russia has been plagued by terrorist attacks from some of the same Islamist groups that the United States tracks, such as the Islamic State. The Islamic State, for example, claimed responsibility for downing a Russian airliner over Egypt in 2015, killing all 224 people aboard.

It was not immediately clear where the plot originated -- or how the C.I.A. learned of it -- but Russian media reports identified a bomb maker with an ethnic Russian name, and other participants from two mostly Muslim regions in the Caucasus Mountains in southern Russia. That suggests that most of the suspects are Russian citizens. Another suspect was described as a native of Tajikistan, in Central Asia.

In 2011, the Federal Security Service warned the F.B.I. that an immigrant from Russia living in Boston, Tamerlan Tsarnaev, had associated with Islamist militants. The F.B.I. investigated the tip but closed the case after finding no proof. Two years later, Tamerlan and his brother Dzhokhar detonated homemade bombs at the Boston Marathon.

But the intelligence exchange that stopped the St. Petersburg attack was a rare recent example of publicly known cooperation between the two spy agencies.

Relations between Russia and the United States went into a deep freeze during the Ukraine crisis. Today, the United States military is training Ukrainian soldiers to fight Russian-backed separatists and, according to the American government, active-duty Russian soldiers in the eastern Ukraine war.

The United States and Russia also back opposite sides in the Syrian civil war.

And the cooperation that thwarted the St. Petersburg attack came after the C.I.A., in a joint report with other American intelligence organizations, identified the Federal Security Service as one of two Russian agencies that hacked the computers of the Democratic National Committee during the 2016 election.

The goals of the Russian operation, according to the report, were to diminish American confidence in elections and help the candidacy of Mr. Trump. The report, though, implicated not the F.S.B. but the main Russian military intelligence agency as the organization responsible for the so-called active measures phase of the operation -- the leaking of data stolen from the Democratic Party to help the Trump campaign.

According to a Kremlin statement, President Vladimir V. Putin credited the C.I.A. with providing vital information. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEXEI NIKOLSKY/SPUTNIK) 

Document NYTF000020171218edci0005f



Foreign Desk; SECTA
In Pakistan Church Blast, 9 Die and 35 Are Injured

By SALMAN MASOOD; Ihsanullah Tipu Mehsud contributed reporting. 
766 words
18 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Two suicide bombers attacked a church packed with worshipers on Sunday in southwestern Pakistan, killing at least nine people and injuring at least 35 others, several critically, officials said.

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS, claimed responsibility for the attack in Quetta, the capital of the restive Baluchistan Province, in the country's southwest. The group's Amaq News Agency posted a statement online Sunday that said attackers had stormed a church in Quetta, but gave no further details.

The assault raised concerns about the security of religious minorities, especially Christians, in a country with a dismal record when it comes to the treatment and protection of religious minorities, analysts say.

Pakistani officials denied that ISIS had an organized presence in the country, however, even though the terrorist group has claimed responsibility for several other attacks in Baluchistan in recent years.

''Law enforcement agencies have badly failed in protecting common citizens, and minorities in particular,'' said Shamaun Alfred Gill, a Christian political and social activist based in Islamabad.

''December is a month of Christian religious rituals,'' Mr. Gill said. ''We had demanded the government beef up security for churches all over the country. But they have failed to do so.''

Christians make up at least 2 percent of the country's population of about 198 million. Most of them are marginalized and perform menial jobs.

The attack, a week before the Christmas holiday, unfolded in the early morning hours at Bethel Memorial Methodist Church. About 400 people had gathered for Sunday service when an assailant detonated his explosives-laden vest near the door to the church's main hall.

Another attacker failed to detonate his suicide jacket and was shot by security forces after an intense firefight, officials said.

Sarfraz Bugti, the provincial home minister, said the death toll could have been higher had the attacker managed to reach the main hall of the church, which is on one of the busiest roads in the city and near several important public buildings.

Local television networks broadcast images of terrified worshipers running out of the church as the attack was underway. Several young girls, wearing white frocks and holding red bags, could be seen fleeing the compound. Witnesses told local news outlets that people, panicked and frightened, had rushed out after hearing a loud explosion, followed by the sound of gunfire outside.

As security forces moved inside the main hall after the attack, they were confronted by a scene of bloody destruction. Several benches and chairs were overturned. Musical instruments were turned upside down.

A Christmas tree with decorative lights stood at one corner, and blood was outside the door where the suicide bomber had detonated explosives.

Two women were among the dead, and 10 women and seven children were among the injured, hospital officials said. Most of the injured were taken to the Civil Hospital nearby.

Quetta has been the scene of violent terrorist attacks recently, and a large number of military and paramilitary troops, apart from the police, have been deployed to maintain security.

Officials have repeatedly claimed that they have reduced violence in Baluchistan, a rugged and resource-rich province bordering Afghanistan and Iran. But the ease with which the attackers managed to carry out their assault on Sunday seemed to belie those claims.

''The army repeatedly claims that it has broken the backbone of terrorism in the country,'' Mr. Gill said. ''But terrorism is still very much present and destroying the lives of common people.''

An insurgency by Baluch separatists has long simmered in the province, and the Taliban and other militants maintain a presence in the region.

Some officials were quick to shift blame toward Afghanistan, pointing to the presence of havens there for militants.

''The terrorists have safe sanctuaries across the border in Afghanistan,'' said Anwar-ul Haq Kakar, a spokesman for the Baluchistan government. ''They have become a major source of terrorism inside Baluchistan.''

Many minority leaders, however, stressed that there was a bigger need to look inward to ensure security for religious minorities, especially Christians.

''This attack is a serious breach of security,'' Mr. Gill said.

The main hall of the Bethel Memorial Methodist Church in Quetta, Pakistan, after an explosion on Sunday that was claimed by (PHOTOGRAPH BY ISIS. A. CALVIN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES); Survivors fleeing the building after the blast. Christians make up at least 2 percent of the country's population of about 198 million. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NASEER AHMED/REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020171218edci00055



Asia and Australia Edition
Briefing
North Korea, African National Congress, Israel: Your Monday Briefing

By CHARLES McDERMID 
1,413 words
17 December 2017
20:16
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•“n economic agent on behalf of North Korea.”

Australian federal police said Chan Han Choi, 59, a naturalized citizen living in Sydney’ suburbs, had been arrested on charges of trying to help North Korea sell its missile parts and other military technology to “nternational entities” that were not further identified.

North Korea, which has become adept at circumventing international sanctions, has been accelerating its nuclear and missile tests. Here’ what we know about the “uclear duo”nd the “issile quartet”—hat is, the scientists who serve the leader, Kim Jong-un.

The U.S. stance on talks with the North is back to a unified insistence on preconditions: Secretary of State Rex Tillerson made a U-turn after a brief effort at conciliation.

_____

•n South Africa, a turning point for the African National Congress.

In a meeting that isn’ exactly going smoothly, members are choosing a new party leader to succeed Jacob Zuma. The winner is expected to follow Mr. Zuma as the country’ president in 2019.

South Africa’ head of state since 2009, Mr. Zuma has been mired in a series of personal and political scandals that have tarred Nelson Mandela’ once heroic liberation movement.

_____

• Times investigation has brought to light a shadowy Pentagon program —arts of it remain classified —hat since 2007 has investigated reports of unidentified flying objects. One fighter pilot told us about a strange encounter in 2004 with a whitish, oval U.F.O. that “ccelerated like nothing I’e ever seen,”nd left him “retty weirded out.”

In less surprising political news, President Trump expects to sign the Republican tax bill this week. He has called it a Christmas present for the entire nation, but the fine print reveals some will get nicer gifts than others.

His administration sought to play down a report that officials at a top U.S. health agency, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, were told to avoid using seven words, including “etus”nd “ransgender.”

_____

• promising vaccine for dengue fever is in jeopardy after the Philippines suspended it, amid widespread fears about its safety and growing public anger over its use in 830,000 schoolchildren.

The French drugmaker, Sanofi, has come under fire for discounting early warnings that its vaccine could put some people at heightened risk of a severe form of the disease.

Researchers fear the stumble could stoke mistrust in vaccines around the globe.

_____

•he lights went out at the world’ busiest airport.

Passengers from around the world waited, held on the tarmac for four, five, six hours —ithout explanation. Expect snarls to ripple through the air traffic system.

_____

• $500 million yacht, a $450 million Leonardo da Vinci painting and the $300 million chateau above.

These are among the impulse buys of Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, the heir to the Saudi throne, who happens to be preaching fiscal austerity and leading a crackdown on corruption in the Saudi elite.

The purchase of Chateau Louis XIV, as pieced together through interviews and documents by The Times, “s a severe blow to that image,”ne analyst said.

_____

Business

•“he Last Jedi”ade the jump to box office hyperspace, selling $450 million in tickets worldwide on its opening weekend and affirming Disney’ strategy for rebooting the 40-year-old franchise.

The film’ stars —ncluding, above, Daisy Ridley, Adam Driver and Mark Hamill —ecently discussed new relationships, the joys of villainy and those porgs with our reporter.

•ber secretly spied on key executives, drivers and employees at rival ride-hailing firms as part of an intelligence-gathering operation in multiple countries, according to a letter made public in a U.S. federal court.

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•n Indonesia, as estimated 80,000 protesters marched against the U.S. decision to recognize Jerusalem as Israel’ capital, the latest show of support for Palestinians in the world’ most populous Muslim nation. [The Jakarta Post]

•ustralia’ midyear economic forecast comes out today. It’ expected to show a bottom line improvement amounting to billions of dollars, another boon to the Turnbull government after weekend election wins for his Liberal party. [The Guardian]

•Rahul Gandhi, the scion of India’ famous political dynasty, reached out to other opposition leaders with a formal dinner after taking  over as president of the  Congress party, which faces a stiff challenge from Prime Minister Narendra Modi’ governing Hindu nationalists. [Press Trust of India]

• lawyer for President Trump accused the special counsel, Robert Mueller, of illegally obtaining Trump transition emails, the latest in the mounting attacks on the investigation into Russian election meddling. [The New York Times]

•ussia’ p resident, Vladimir Putin, called President Trump to thank him for the C.I.A.’ help in disrupting an ISIS attack in St. Petersburg. [The New York Times]

•n Pakistan, the Islamic State claimed responsibility for an assault on a church in Quetta that left at least eight dead and 30 injured, raising concerns about the security of the country’ Christians. [The New York Times]

•ropical Storm Kai-Tak set off floods and landslides in the central Philippines, killing more than 30 people and leaving many others missing. Thousands of Christmas holiday travelers were stranded. [The New York Times]

•rotesters booed and shouted “hame”s European far-right leaders gathered at a weekend meeting in Prague to unify their stance on immigration and other issues. [The New York Times]

• Japanese mathematician, Shinichi Mochizuki, may have proven “he abc conjecture,”hich has baffled the best math minds for decades. His work could “undamentally revolutionize number theory.”The Asahi Shimbun]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•oliday travelers, here are 10 places around the world that really know how to celebrate Christmas (including Hong Kong).

•hat to cook this week: Our food editor, Sam Sifton, suggests chicken adobo, Russian honey cake and more.

Noteworthy

•lobal inequality, after widening for decades, has stabilized. The bad news: The respite probably won’ last despite rapid strides among developing economies like China and India.

•“t’ sort of like a religion.”In South Korea, break dancing offers escape from a strict conservative culture and intense educational system.

•nd our pop critics collected notable new music, including Lin-Manuel Miranda’ Hamildrops team-up with the Decemberists and a Thelonious Monk reissue.

Back Story

On Dec. 18, 1941, less than two weeks after the attack on Pearl Harbor, the Sunday editor for The Times sent a memo to the publisher, Arthur Hays Sulzberger.

It said: “e ought to proceed with the puzzle, especially in view of the fact it is possible there will now be bleak blackout hours —r if not that then certainly a need for relaxation of some kind or other.”

That’ how a time of national grief helped lead to one of The Times’ most joyful and beloved features. The crossword puzzle debuted some two months later as a weekly feature in the Sunday magazine.

The editor, Margaret Farrar, followed a simple rule: good manners. She refused to allow unpleasant or impolite language — rule that’ still followed by The Times’ current crossword editor, Will Shortz.

Nowadays, we like to think of our crossword puzzle as the form’ gold standard.

But The Times didn’ always hold crosswords in high regard. In 1924, a Times opinion column called the completion of crosswords a “inful waste.”

Crossword solvers, the column claimed, “et nothing out of it except a primitive sort of mental exercise.”

Many of us would disagree.

Stephen Hiltner contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. Browse past briefings here.

We have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian, European and American mornings. And our Australia bureau chief offers a weekly letter adding analysis and conversations with readers. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.

Korean Central News Agency, via European Pressphoto Agency. Photo Illustration The New York Times. | U.S. Department of Defense | Dustin Chambers for The New York Times | Patrice Diaz | Jesse Dittmar for The New York Times | Achmad Ibrahim/Associated Press | Keith Tsuji/Getty Images For Hong Kong Touri | Carolyn Kaster/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020171217edch002bd



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Bail Denied for Suspect In Subway Bomb Attack

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
498 words
14 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
27
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

In a brief court appearance held via videoconference from a hospital room, the Brooklyn man accused of detonating a homemade pipe bomb inside a crowded subway tunnel in Manhattan was ordered held without bail on Wednesday by a federal magistrate judge.

The defendant, Akayed Ullah, lying in a bed with his head elevated slightly so that he could look into the camera, was subdued but appeared to be listening attentively as the judge asked whether he could see her.

''Yes, ma'am, I can see you,'' he said.

Mr. Ullah, 27, an immigrant from Bangladesh, was charged on Tuesday with five charges, including use of weapons of mass destruction, providing material support to the Islamic State and bombing a place of public use.

As the judge, Katharine H. Parker of Federal District Court in Manhattan, advised Mr. Ullah of his rights and summarized the charges, he nodded occasionally, his face looking dour but otherwise expressionless. At times, he seemed to close his eyes briefly.

Mr. Ullah was being held at Bellevue Hospital Center while he recovers from injuries suffered when he set off the crude explosive device, which was made with screws, Christmas tree lights and a nine-volt battery, and was affixed to his torso with plastic zip ties.

Mr. Ullah had no visible injuries as he lay in the bed, although almost his entire body was hidden beneath a white covering.

According to a criminal complaint filed against Mr. Ullah, he admitted after his arrest that he had built the pipe bomb and carried out the attack ''for the Islamic State.''

He told investigators that he had hoped ''to terrorize as many people as possible,'' and timed the attack for a workday ''because he believed that there would be more people,'' the complaint said.

The complaint said Mr. Ullah had for several years viewed ISIS propaganda online, including a video that instructed followers, if they could not travel overseas to join ISIS, to carry out attacks ''in their homelands.''

About a year ago, Mr. Ullah began researching how to build explosives and in recent weeks, he began to collect the materials needed to construct the bomb, the complaint noted. It said he built the pipe bomb about a week ago in his apartment in Brooklyn.

During the videoconference hearing, two lawyers stood by Mr. Ullah's bedside, while two assistant United States attorneys and Judge Parker remained in the courtroom.

On the issue of bail, one prosecutor, Shawn G. Crowley, declared, ''The government seeks detention.''

Amy Gallicchio, a federal public defender, said that the defense would not contest detention at this time.

Judge Parker left open the possibility that Mr. Ullah's lawyers could apply for bail in the future. Mr. Ullah was not asked to enter a plea to the charges, several of which carry maximum sentences of life in prison.

The federal defenders' office had no comment after the hearing.

Document NYTF000020171214edce0003e



Weekly News Quiz
The Learning Network
Special News Quiz | 2017 in Review

By MICHAEL GONCHAR 
3,514 words
13 December 2017
15:26
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Updated, Jan. 2, 2018

See what you remember about the events of this dramatic year by taking our special news quiz.

You can fill in the blanks with your own guesses, or scroll down to find a scrambled list of words that were removed. Clicking on each blank will take you to the answer via the original Times article from which the information came, though you can also scroll to the bottom for an answer sheet.

We have also created this printable version of the quiz (PDF), as well as this one-page sheet (PDF) that lists just the answer choices, alphabetized.

Good luck!

_________

1. “es we did” A tearful _________ capped his farewell address on Jan. 10 with a play on the phrase that swept him into office in 2008. He also warned Americans not to take democracy for granted.

2. Donald J. Trump was sworn in as the _________th president of the United States on Jan. 20, ushering in a new era that he vowed would shatter the established order and reverse a national decline that he called “his American carnage.”is forceful address offered a strikingly grim view of the United States, repudiated the establishment and alarmed leaders around the world —ut also energized his supporters at home and abroad.

3. The following day, hundreds of thousands of _________ gathered to protest Mr. Trump in cities around the nation and the world. At the main demonstration, in Washington, D.C., protesters jammed the streets near the Capitol so tightly at times that they could barely move.

4. Reversing its stance of more than a century, the _________ said on Jan. 30 that the group would begin accepting members based on the gender listed on their application, paving the way for transgender boys to join the organization. Months later, in October, the group announced plans to broadly accept girls, marking a historic shift for the century-old organization and setting off a debate about where girls better learn how to be leaders.

5. President Trump on Jan. 31 nominated Judge _________ to the Supreme Court, elevating a conservative in the mold of Justice Antonin Scalia to succeed the late jurist and touching off a brutal, partisan showdown at the start of his presidency over the ideological bent of the nation’ highest court.

6. When the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences named “_________”est picture at the 89th Academy Awards on Feb. 26, the organization made cultural history. For the first time, Hollywood backed a gay-themed film —ne with an all-black cast —s its finest cinematic work. But in an epic flub that drew gasps of horror —nd joy —he presenter, Faye Dunaway, mistakenly named “a La Land”est picture.

7. A slim majority of _________ voters agreed on April 16 to grant sweeping powers to President Erdogan, in a watershed moment that the country’ opposition fears may cement a system of authoritarian rule within one of the critical power brokers of the Middle East.

8. _________ ’ reign as the top-rated host in cable news came to an abrupt and embarrassing end on April 18 as Fox News forced him out after the disclosure of a series of sexual harassment allegations against him and an internal investigation that turned up even more.

9. ________ , a centrist who has never held elected office, trounced the far-right candidate Marine Le Pen in the presidential runoff in France on May 7. The election was watched around the world for magnifying many of the broader tensions rippling through Western democracies, including the United States: populist anger at the political mainstream, economic insecurity among middle-class voters and rising resentment toward immigrants.

10. President Trump abruptly fired the director of the F.B.I., _________, on May 9, terminating the top official leading a criminal investigation into whether Mr. Trump’ advisers colluded with the Russian government to steer the outcome of the 2016 presidential election. A month later, the former director would testify in an extraordinary Senate hearing that he believed President Trump had tried to derail an investigation into his national security adviser, and accused the president of lying and defaming him and the F.B.I.

11. Soon after the firing of Mr. Comey, the Justice Department appointed _________, a former F.B.I. director, as special counsel to oversee the investigation into ties between President Trump’ campaign and Russian officials, dramatically raising the legal and political stakes in an affair that has threatened to engulf Mr. Trump’ presidency.

12. An explosion rocked Manchester Arena in England at the end of a performance by the pop star _________ on May 22. At least 22 people, including children, were killed and 59 others wounded as the authorities blamed a bomber, who died in the blast, for Britain’ deadliest case of terrorism since 2005.

13. President Trump announced on June 1 that the United States would withdraw from the _________, weakening efforts to combat global warming and embracing isolationist voices in his White House who argued that the agreement was a pernicious threat to the economy and American sovereignty. This, despite the fact that scientists say global temperatures have continued to rise, making 2016 the hottest year on the historical record and the third consecutive record-breaking year. Of the 17 hottest years ever recorded, 16 have now occurred since 2000.

14. In June, “_________”roke Hollywood’ superhero glass ceiling, making history with the biggest domestic opening for a female director, Patty Jenkins.

15. A lone gunman who was said to be distraught over President Trump’ election opened fire on members of the Republican _________ at a practice field in a Washington suburb on June 14, using a rifle to shower the field with bullets that struck four people, including Steve Scalise, the majority whip of the House of Representatives.

16. And, at least 80 people died when a fire tore through a 24-story _________ apartment building called Grenfell Tower on June 14 in Britain’ worst building fire in decades. Protesters have criticized the response and the lack of fire safety measures, including sprinklers and a central alarm system, in the building.

17. President Trump announced on June 16 that he will reinstate travel and commercial restrictions on the country of _________, which had been eased by the Obama administration. Then, 15 weeks later, the State Department announced that it was withdrawing all nonessential personnel from the embassy in Havana, after a mystery illness affected 21 diplomats.

18. The Iraqi government declared victory over the Islamic State in the battle for _________, which began in October 2016. Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi arrived in the city on July 9 to mark the formal end of a bloody campaign that killed thousands of people and displaced nearly a million more.

19. On July 31, _________, President Trump’ new chief of staff, firmly asserted his authority on his first day in the White House, telling aides he will impose military discipline on a free-for-all West Wing, and he underscored his intent by firing Anthony Scaramucci, the bombastic communications director, 10 days after he was hired.

20. Congress forced President Trump to sign legislation that imposed sanctions on _________ for meddling in the 2016 American election, heightening already tense relations with Moscow. Lawmakers passed it with bipartisan, veto-proof majorities. In response, President _________ announced on July 30 that the American diplomatic mission in Russia must reduce its staff by 755 employees.

21. The city of _________ was engulfed by violence on Aug. 12 as white nationalists and counterprotesters clashed in one of the bloodiest fights to date over the removal of Confederate monuments across the South. A 32-year-old woman was killed, and at least 19 other people were injured, when an Ohio man plowed his car into a crowd of counterprotesters, according to the police.

22. After two days of blaming “any sides”or the “atred, bigotry and violence”n display in Charlottesville, President Trump on Aug. 14 bowed to overwhelming pressure that he personally condemn white supremacists, including neo-Nazis and the Ku Klux Klan. However, by the next day, he abandoned his precisely chosen words, and he furiously stuck by his initial reaction to the unrest, blaming _________ and again drawing the very moral equivalency for which a bipartisan chorus, and his own advisers, had already criticized him.

23. Spain was hit by its worst terrorist attack in more than a decade on Aug. 17, when a van driver plowed into dozens of people enjoying a sunny afternoon on one of _________’ most famous thoroughfares. Hours later another vehicle attack took place in the seaside town of Cambrils, 70 miles to the south. The two attacks killed at least 14 people and injured more than 100.

24. _________, the embattled chief strategist who helped President Trump win the 2016 election by embracing their shared nationalist impulses, departed the White House on Aug. 18 after a turbulent tenure shaping the fiery populism of the president’ first seven months in office.

25. A _________ crossed the sky on Aug. 21 from Oregon to South Carolina and brought out throngs of spectators, who exulted in seeing the midday sky go briefly dark. This was totality, an event that had not happened in the continental United States since 1979 and had not traversed such a broad swath of the country in nearly a century.

26. _________, one of the most destructive storms in the nation’ history, pummeled southeast Texas after making landfall on Aug. 25. Catastrophic flooding that turned neighborhoods into lakes was just the start of a disaster that will take years to overcome.

27. President Trump on Sept. 5 ordered an end to the Obama-era program that shields _________ from deportation, calling it an “mnesty-first approach”nd urging Congress to pass a replacement before he begins phasing out its protections in six months.

28. Since late August, more than 620,000 _________, about two-thirds of the population that lived in Myanmar in 2016, have fled to Bangladesh, driven out by the military’ systematic campaign of massacre, rape and arson in Rakhine.

29. President Trump brought the same confrontational style of leadership he has used at home to the world’ most prominent stage on Sept. 19 as he vowed to “otally destroy”orth Korea if it threatened the United States and denounced the nuclear agreement with Iran as “n embarrassment”hat he may abandon. In his first address to the _________, Mr. Trump framed the conflicts as a test of the international system.

30. Following Mr. Trump’ U.N. speech when he referred to North Korea as a “and of criminals,”nd said of its leader, “ocket man is on a suicide mission for himself,”_________ called Mr. Trump a “entally deranged U.S. dotard”ho had “enied the existence of and insulted me and my country in front of the eyes of the world.”

31. Hurricane Maria, the most powerful storm to make a direct hit on _________ in almost a century, ravaged the island on Sept. 20, knocking out all electricity, deluging towns with flash floods and mudslides and compounding the already considerable pain of residents there. Four weeks later, 80 percent of the island still did not have electricity.

32. Senator John McCain of Arizona announced on Sept. 22 that he would oppose the latest of several proposals to repeal the _________, leaving Republican leaders with little hope of succeeding in their last-ditch attempt to dismantle the law and fulfill their longstanding promise to conservative voters.

33. President Trump on Sept. 24 issued a new order indefinitely banning almost all travel to the United States from Iran, Libya, Syria, Yemen, Somalia, Chad and North Korea, citing threats to national security posed by letting their citizens into the country. The new order was more far-reaching than the president’ original _________, which caused turmoil at airports in January and set off a furious legal challenge to the president’ authority.

34. Dozens of _________, from London to Los Angeles, knelt or locked arms on the sidelines, joined by several team owners; on some teams, nearly all the players skipped the national anthem altogether. What had been a modest round of anthem demonstrations this season led by a handful of African-American players mushroomed and morphed in late September into a nationwide, diverse rebuke of Mr. Trump’ divisive statements.

35. Jubilant Iraqi _________ celebrated their Sept. 25 vote on independence from Iraq, shooting off fireworks late into the night. But after weeks of threats and posturing, the Iraqi government began a military assault on Oct. 16 to blunt the independence drive, wresting oil fields and a contested city from separatists pushing to break away from the country.

36. A gunman on a high floor of a _________ hotel rained a rapid-fire barrage on an outdoor concert festival on the night of Oct. 1, killing 58 people, injuring hundreds of others and sending thousands of terrified survivors fleeing for cover, in one of the deadliest mass shootings in American history.

37. Also on Oct. 1, _________’ defiant attempt to stage an independence referendum descended into chaos, with hundreds injured in clashes with the police in one of the gravest tests of Spain’ democracy since the end of the Franco dictatorship in the 1970s. By the end of the month, Spain’ leader had fired the government of the rebellious region, dissolved the regional parliament and ordered new elections.

38. In early October, _________, the Hollywood producer, was fired from his namesake company after multiple women came forward to accuse him of rape and sexual assault. In what appears to be a seismic shift in what behavior is tolerated in the workplace, a cascade of high-profile men, many in the entertainment and news media industries, have since been fired or forced to resign after accusations of sexual misconduct that ranged from inappropriate comments to rape. The list includes _________, co-host of “oday” Charlie Rose, television host; Louis C.K., a comedian; and Russell Simmons, co-founder of Def Jam Records.

39. Fast-moving wildfires raged across _________ in October, killing at least 41 people, forcing thousands to evacuate and destroying about 5,700 structures in one of the most destructive fire emergencies in the state’ history.

40. American-backed forces said on Oct. 17 that they had seized the northern Syrian city of Raqqa from the _________, a major blow to the militant group, which had long used the city as the de facto capital of its self-declared caliphate.

41. President Trump’ campaign chairman, _________, was indicted on Oct. 30 on charges that he funneled millions of dollars through overseas shell companies and used the money to buy luxury cars, real estate, antiques and expensive suits.

42. After deadly street protests this summer and a continuing consolidation of power by President Nicolá Maduro, _________ is on the verge of, and by some measures already in, an extraordinary period of hyperinflation, with the inflation rate above 800 percent through October. People of all socioeconomic classes have been buffeted by sharply rising costs amid desperate scarcities of food and medicine, the collapse of public services and the medical system, and rampant crime.

43. A gunman clad in all black, with a ballistic vest strapped to his chest and a military-style rifle in his hands, opened fire on parishioners at a Nov. 5 service at a small Baptist church in rural _________, killing 26 people and turning this tiny town east of San Antonio into the scene of the country’ newest mass horror.

44. On Nov. 7, a muscular coalition of college-educated voters and racial and ethnic minorities dealt the _________ a thumping rejection and propelled a diverse class of Democrats into office, including new governors in New Jersey and Virginia.

45. Robert Mugabe, who ruled _________ since independence in 1980 and once proclaimed that “nly God will remove me,”esigned as president on Nov. 21 shortly after lawmakers began impeachment proceedings against him.

46. Militants detonated a bomb inside a crowded mosque in the Sinai Peninsula on Nov. 24 and then sprayed gunfire on panicked worshipers as they fled, killing at least 305 people and wounding at least 128 others. Officials called it the deadliest terrorist attack in _________’ modern history.

47. _________ fired an intercontinental ballistic missile on Nov. 28 that flew both higher and longer than previous such launches, a bold act of defiance against President Trump after he put the country back on a list of state sponsors of terrorism.

48. One of the longest stock-market booms in history continued its gravity-defying ascent, with investors cheering the prospect of deep corporate tax cuts and the rollback of government regulations under President Trump. The Dow Jones industrial average eclipsed yet another milestone, closing on Nov. 30 above _________ for the first time, while the unemployment rate held steady at 4.1 percent, the lowest since 2000.

49. Ten months after resigning, President Trump’ former national security adviser, _________, pleaded guilty on Dec. 1 to lying to the F.B.I. about conversations with the Russian ambassador in December 2016, becoming the first senior White House official to cut a cooperation deal in the special counsel’ wide-ranging inquiry into election interference.

50. In an emotional speech on the Senate floor, _________, Democrat of Minnesota, announced on Dec. 7 that he would resign from Congress, the most prominent figure in a growing list of lawmakers felled by charges of sexual harassment or indiscretions. In the House, Representative Trent Franks of Arizona, one of the House’ most ardent social conservatives, said that same day that he would resign after the House Ethics Committee began an investigation into complaints that he had asked two female staff members to be a surrogate to bear his child.

51. Michael T. Slager, the white _________ whose video-recorded killing of an unarmed black motorist in North Charleston, S.C., prompted protests, was sentenced on Dec. 7 to 20 years in prison, after the judge in the case said he viewed the shooting as a murder. But earlier in the year, jurors acquitted police officers in Minnesota and Milwaukee for shooting deaths that had touched off days of street demonstrations.

52. Doug Jones, a Democratic former prosecutor who mounted a seemingly quixotic Senate campaign in the face of Republican dominance in Alabama, defeated his scandal-scarred opponent, _________, after a brutal campaign marked by accusations of sexual abuse and child molestation against the Republican. The upset delivered an unimagined victory for Democrats and shaved Republicans’nstable Senate majority to a single seat.

53. The Federal Communications Commission voted on Dec. 14 to dismantle rules regulating the businesses that connect consumers to the internet, granting broadband companies the power to potentially reshape Americans’nline experiences. The agency scrapped the so-called _________ regulations that prohibited broadband providers from blocking websites or charging for higher-quality service or certain content.

54. A lopsided majority of United Nations members rebuked the United States on Dec. 21, denouncing its decision to recognize _________, the contested holy city, as Israel’ capital.

55. On Dec. 22 Mr. Trump affixed his signature to the $1.5 trillion _________ that will have broad and far-reaching implications for individual and corporate finances. He ended a chaotic first year by achieving his most convincing legislative triumph and finally demonstrating the political power of unified Republican control in Washington.

_________

Answer Choices

45th president

24,000

“oth sides”

Affordable Care Act

Al Franken

Ariana Grande

Barcelona

Bill O’eilly

Boy Scouts of America

Catalonia

Charlottesville, Va.

congressional baseball team

Cuba

Barack Obama

Egypt

Emmanuel Macron

Harvey Weinstein

Hurricane Harvey

Islamic State, also known as ISIS

James Comey

Jerusalem

John Kelly

Kim Jong-un

Kurds

Las Vegas

London

Matt Lauer

Michael Flynn

Moonlight

Mosul

N.F.L. players

Neil Gorsuch

net neutrality

North Korea

Northern California

Paris climate accord

Paul Manafort

Vladimir Putin

Puerto Rico

Republican Party

Robert Mueller

Rohingya Muslims

Roy Moore

Texas

Russia

Steve Bannon

tax overhaul

total solar eclipse

travel ban

Turkish

United Nations General Assembly

Venezuela

police officer

women

Wonder Woman

young undocumented immigrants

Zimbabwe

_________

You can find the quiz answers here (PDF).

* What Were the Best and Worst Things About 2017 for You?

* What Are Your Favorite Movies, Television Shows, Books, Albums, Songs and Performances of 2017?

Images from three key news stories of 2017. | Kim Ludbrook/European Pressphoto Agency; Jason Lappa for The New York Times; Saul Loeb/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Related Article | Mario Tama/Getty Images | Related Article | David Bornfriend/A24 | Related Article | Eric Feferberg/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Related Article | Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images | Related Article | Daniel Leal-Olivas/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Related Article | Olga Maltseva/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Related Article | Brian Snyder/Reuters | Related Article | Adam Dean for The New York Times | Related Article | Carlos Giusti/Associated Press | Related Article | Rey Del Rio/Getty Images | Related Article | Paul White/Associated Press | Related Article | Nick Wagner/Austin American-Statesman, via Associated Press | Related Article | Korean Central News Agency | Related Article | Bob Miller for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171213edcd004bl



World; Asia Pacific
Philippines Extends Martial Law in South for Another Year

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
718 words
13 December 2017
09:51
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA —he Philippine Congress on Wednesday approved a request from President Rodrigo Duterte to extend martial law on the southern island of Mindanao for another year, which the president said was needed to fight armed groups there.

Mindanao was placed under martial law in May, after local militants backed by the Islamic State seized the city of Marawi. After months of fighting, the government declared victory there in October. But Mr. Duterte said Friday that a yearlong extension of martial law was needed to ensure the “otal eradication”f militancy in Mindanao, an impoverished region where various armed groups have been active for decades.

Both houses of Congress approved Mr. Duterte’ request overwhelmingly, despite opposition lawmakers’arnings that martial law was no longer needed and that to extend it risked eroding constitutional values. The martial law edict gives the military widespread powers, including the ability to carry out warrantless arrests and set up roadblocks and checkpoints.

The president’ request for an extension came shortly after he halted efforts to reach a peace deal with the underground Communist Party of the Philippines, whose armed unit, the New People’ Army, has stepped up attacks in remote communities on Mindanao and elsewhere.

Harry Roque, a presidential spokesman, said Wednesday that the extension of martial law was needed to fight “he communist terrorists and their coddlers, supporters and financiers”nd to “nsure the unhampered rehabilitation of war-torn Marawi and the lives of its residents.”

In his request to Congress, Mr. Duterte said that while Islamist militants had been beaten back from Marawi, military intelligence had tracked Islamic State-linked gunmen spreading to other parts of Mindanao, the country’ main southern island and home to the only substantial Muslim population in the overwhelmingly Catholic Philippines. Mr. Duterte said these groups had stepped up their recruitment and “adicalization”ctivities.

“hese activities are geared towards the conduct of intensified atrocities and armed public uprisings in support of their objective of establishing the foundation of a global Islamic caliphate,”r. Duterte said.

He identified a militant, Abu Turaipe, as the likely successor to Isnilon Hapilon, who was killed in Marawi and was thought to have been the leader of the Islamic State in Southeast Asia. Mr. Turaipe’ ragtag fighters have been engaged in low-intensity fighting with soldiers in marshlands in central Mindanao since August.

Mr. Turaipe’ group, once dismissed as a small band of bandits, pledged allegiance to the Islamic State last year. Mr. Duterte asserted that the group had been gaining strength and was “lanning to conduct bombings”n urban centers in the Philippines.

He said security forces were still hunting for at least 185 fighters believed to have been involved in the Marawi siege. Over 1,200 people were killed in Marawi, the biggest security threat the Philippines has faced since Mr. Duterte took office last year.

Rights groups and opposition politicians have criticized Mr. Duterte’ request to extend martial law, warning that the authoritarian president was setting the stage for an eventual declaration of military rule across the entire country. Mr. Duterte has raised that possibility before.

Francis Pangilinan, the leader of the opposition in the Senate, argued that the victory in Marawi ended the need for continued military rule. He said that if Congress agreed to extend martial law, “e will be in danger of becoming the monsters that we seek to defeat, those who have no regard for law, order or respect for the Constitution.”

Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana, arguing the president’ position in Congress, said that such perceptions were “ar from what’ happening on the ground”n Mindanao, where the armed forces have reported that militancy is spreading.

“here might not be fighting in Marawi anymore, but there are still clashes almost every day in other parts of Mindanao,”r. Lorenzana said.

* Philippines Calls City ‘iberated,’onths After \b ISIS\b0  Allies Seized It

* Duterte Suggests Martial Law Across Philippines, Citing Islamist Threat

* Philippine Supreme Court Upholds Duterte’ Martial Law Edict

Members of the Philippine special forces patrolling near Marawi on the island of Mindanao in September. The government declared victory over Islamist militants in Marawi in October. | Jes Aznar for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171213edcd002mh



opinion
Was It Legal for the U.S. to Bomb Cambodia?; Vietnam '67

By BRIAN CUDDY 
1,620 words
12 December 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Is it acceptable to engage an enemy on the territory of a third country? It’ a question that has confronted Washington policymakers in recent years over ISIS forces in Syria and Qaeda operatives in Afghanistan and Pakistan. But in 1967, it was asked most urgently over the use of Cambodian territory by Vietnamese communists. What Washington policymakers decided then, and the way they continued to address the question over the following years, has had a significant impact on the shape of American foreign policy ever since.

The National Liberation Front, also known as the Viet Cong, and North Vietnam established camps and supply routes on the Cambodian side of the border with South Vietnam to resupply their forces and undertake military operations against the Saigon government and its allies. As an avowedly neutral party in the war, the Cambodian government did not formally approve of the Vietnamese communists using its territory as a base area, nor would it give permission to American or allied forces to enter its jurisdiction to confront their enemies.

This left decision makers in Washington in a bind. On the one hand, respecting Cambodian sovereignty allowed the enemy a sanctuary or safe haven and so hindered the American war effort. On the other, taking action against the enemy on Cambodian soil risked a public backlash, both within the United States and around the world.

In December 1967, this dilemma came into sharp focus for President Lyndon Johnson and his advisers when Gen. William Westmoreland, the commander of American forces in Vietnam, recommended an attack on enemy units resting and regrouping in Cambodia after the Battle of Dak To the previous month.

Westmoreland saw an easy target —ntelligence showed no evidence that the enemy units were digging in and constructing bunkers —nd on Dec. 5 he sought approval for three days of airstrikes by B-52 bombers. Westmoreland acknowledged that B-52 strikes would leave “ clear signature in Cambodian territory,”eaning news of the operation would be hard to keep under wraps, but he was adamant that possible bad publicity was worth the risk. “ feel strongly that the opportunity which exists is sufficiently important that it should be exploited now,”e wrote to Gen. Earle Wheeler, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “nd if necessary explain our actions as hot pursuit by fire in an uninhabited area.”

A recent spike in news media attention might have helped Westmoreland’ cause. Two weeks earlier, journalists from The Associated Press, tipped off by Westmoreland’ own staff, had reported the discovery of an enemy camp four miles inside Cambodia. And in a late November television interview, former President Dwight Eisenhower criticized “hat sort of sacrosanct idea of a line on the ground that no one can see, but it’ on your maps, and you must respect it.”

Publicly supporting the sort of action in “ot pursuit”hat Westmoreland and the Joint Chiefs would pitch in private a week later, Eisenhower was adamant that “f you’e chasing some people and they just step over into Cambodia or Laos, I wouldn’ —t wouldn’ bother me. I’ go at ’m as long as they’ come in there in the first place.”

Johnson discussed Westmoreland’ request in two meetings with his closest advisers on the war on Dec. 5. Wheeler pressed Westmoreland’ case: “e only wish Cambodia would be neutral —onest to God neutral, too. Anyone else would not permit enemy troops to use their territory for sanctuaries.”ut he was in a clear minority. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, who had announced his pending resignation the previous week, spoke up against granting Westmoreland’ request, telling the group that he was “cared to death of a policy based on an assumption that by going somewhere else we can win the war.”

His State Department counterpart, Dean Rusk, was similarly wary, speculating that Westmoreland’ proposed action could “hange the entire character of the war.”ohnson put Westmoreland’ request on hold.

Westmoreland’ proposal to explain his recommended action in Cambodia as “ot pursuit by fire”as an attempt to solve the crux of the Cambodian dilemma as it appeared to American policymakers throughout the Vietnam War: how to warp the red line that a sovereign border represented without ignoring it entirely. As the economist Thomas Schelling put it the previous year in “rms and Influence”—omething of a strategic playbook for key architects of the American war in Vietnam —he “urpose of invoking ‘ot pursuit’s not merely to find an excuse for it but to identify a limitation in intent, to let the enemy appreciate that his is not an abandonment altogether of some previous restriction but an allowable departure under the rules of the game.”

A number of Johnson’ advisers were skeptical of this logic. They thought that rather than signaling limited intent, an appeal to a right of hot pursuit would more likely be seen as feeble cover for a significant change in policy.. Averell Harriman, ambassador at large and one of Johnson’ foreign policy “wise men,”ried to convince the president that “he world at large (and a substantial section of the American public) has not yet been presented with convincing evidence that expanding the war into ‘ tiny, helpless country’s justified.”

In any case, despite the assumption of Westmoreland and Schelling, hot pursuit was not widely accepted as an allowable departure under the rules of the game. It had no standing in international law (except within the law of the sea, which allows for the hot pursuit of vessels into international waters), and since at least March 1965 the State Department Office of the Legal Adviser had rejected it as an appropriate justification for crossing the Cambodian border. The lawyers insisted instead that any legal argument for border crossing would need to rest on the right of self-defense guaranteed by Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.

The legal basis for the American bombing of North Vietnam rested on the collective self-defense of South Vietnam. But the logic of self-defense regarding Cambodia was different: Whereas the government of North Vietnam could conceivably be linked to military attacks against the government of South Vietnam, the government of Cambodia could not. Absent a sudden threat that left no time for deliberation, Washington would therefore need to show Cambodian “onnivance”n the use of its territory before launching any attack on Cambodia. The Cambodian head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, often appeared to be more friendly to the communists than to the Americans, but substantial evidence of connivance did not surface.

Particular military units engaged with the enemy had authority to fire over or cross the border if necessary to defend themselves. (On Dec. 5, Rusk suggested that this authority might still allow Westmoreland some freedom of action: “ would have thought that Westy would have drug his shirttail along the Cambodian border and drawn enemy fire. Then the rules would permit him to shoot back across the border when fired upon.” But beyond this, and the limited covert reconnaissance operations code-named Daniel Boone, no further authority was granted. On Dec. 18, Johnson effectively ended the debate over Westmoreland’ request. The United States would instead focus on trying to convince the Cambodian government to be more assertive in the defense of Cambodian neutrality, or to let others act to preserve that neutrality.

Johnson’ successor in the White House made a different decision. President Richard Nixon approved B-52 strikes on suspected enemy locations in Cambodia from March 1969, and at the end of April 1970 he sent American ground forces across the frontier to find and destroy enemy sanctuaries. The catalyst for the 1970 Cambodian incursion (or invasion) was the overthrow of Sihanouk and the establishment of a more pro-American government in Phnom Penh. But even this government sought to preserve Cambodia’ neutrality, meaning it could not formally invite American troops into the country.

Nearly a decade after the incursion, Nixon’ national security adviser, Henry Kissinger, wrote that the “oral significance”f the distinction between the Johnson and Nixon policies regarding Cambodia escaped him, even if the distinction seemed self-evident to the many people and foreign governments that objected to and protested the action.

The legal significance of Nixon’ action in Cambodia was more subtle, yet not inconsequential. A post-facto legal justification for the incursion was slow in coming, but on May 28, Nixon’ State Department legal adviser laid out a novel extension to the right of self-defense, arguing that the incursion was justified because the Cambodian government could not or would not defend its neutral status and prevent Vietnamese communists from using its territory.

Across a half-decade of earlier legal advice concerning Cambodia’ role in the Vietnam War, lawyers in the Johnson administration do not appear to have acknowledged the existence of such a standard, now known as the “nwilling or unable”octrine. But since its articulation in 1970, the “nwilling or unable”octrine has played an increasingly important role in justifying American interventions abroad. How American leaders grappled with the Cambodian problem during the Vietnam War has important implications for the use of military force by the United States today.

Subscribe to the Vietnam '67 newsletter.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Brian Cuddy is a historian of United States foreign relations and an associate lecturer in security studies at Macquarie University in Australia.

Document INHT000020171218edcc00001



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Man Detonates Bomb He Carried Under Times Sq.

By SARAH MASLIN NIR and WILLIAM K. RASHBAUM; Reporting was contributed by Al Baker, Christina Caron, Jonah Engel Bromwich, Luis FerréSadurní Winnie Hu, Joseph Goldstein, Sean Piccoli, Liz Robbins, Brian M. Rosenthal, Nate Schweber and John Surico. Research was contributed by Susan C. Beachy. 
1,674 words
12 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A would-be suicide attacker detonated a pipe bomb strapped to his body in the heart of Manhattan's busiest subway corridor on Monday, sending thousands of terrified commuters fleeing the smoke-choked passageways, and bringing the heart of Midtown to a standstill as hundreds of police officers converged on Times Square and the surrounding streets.

But the makeshift weapon failed to fully detonate, and the attacker himself was the only one seriously injured in the blast, which unfolded just before 7:20 a.m.

Law enforcement officials said the attacker, identified by the police as Akayed Ullah, 27, chose the location because of its Christmas-themed posters, a motive that recalled strikes in Europe, and he told investigators that he set off his bomb in retaliation for United States airstrikes on ISIS targets in Syria and elsewhere.

It was the third attack in New York City since September 2016, and the second in two months, coming only weeks after eight people were killed in a truck attack along a Hudson River bike path. Like the earlier two, the attack on Monday appears to have been carried out by a so-called ''lone-wolf'' terrorist.

The explosion on Monday morning echoed through the subway tunnels just off Times Square and filled parts of the Port Authority Bus Terminal with smoke as commuters fled. Even as smoke still filled the chamber, Mr. Ullah was subdued by Port Authority police officers.

After he was subdued, Mr. Ullah was taken to Bellevue Hospital Center, where he was in serious condition with burns to his hands and abdomen, according to Daniel A. Nigro, the commissioner of the New York Fire Department. Three other people had minor injuries, he said.

An immigrant from Bangladesh, Mr. Ullah came to live in Brooklyn through a visa program available to people who have relatives who are United States citizens.

On Monday afternoon, in his first remarks on the attack, President Trump assailed the current immigration system that allows for extended family members, and not just spouses or minor children, to receive green cards.

''The terrible harm that this flawed system inflicts on America's security and economy has long been clear,'' Mr. Trump said in a statement. ''I am determined to improve our immigration system to put our country and our people first.''

The attack occurred in a long pedestrian walkway connecting the Eighth Avenue, Seventh Avenue and Broadway subway lines. Among the commuters traveling beneath Times Square was a man in a hooded sweatshirt. Then came a deafening boom -- from him -- and then smoke.

Everyone ran.

Mr. Ullah had attached the pipe bomb to himself with a ''combination of Velcro and zip ties,'' said James P. O'Neill, the commissioner of the New York Police Department. It was crudely composed of a length of pipe stuffed with match heads, its ends stopped up. A broken Christmas tree light was the detonator: When lit, the filament ignited the match heads, the device powered by a nine-volt battery.

The explosion, captured on surveillance video, burned and cut Mr. Ullah, but because it did not detonate properly, it did not produce shrapnel, often the deadliest element of a pipe bomb.

''I think he was prepared to die, and we see him connect the wires on the video,'' said a law enforcement official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the assessment of the suspect's actions was still preliminary.

As people streamed through the station, Officer Anthony Manfredini of the Port Authority Police Department rushed toward the smoke, said Robert Egbert, a spokesman for the main police union that represents Port Authority officers. A former marine, Officer Manfredini, 28, found the suspect on the ground with ''visible wires coming from his jacket into his pants,'' Mr. Egbert said.

Three other Port Authority officers followed: Jack Collins, Sean Gallagher and Drew Preston. They arrived just as Mr. Ullah was ''reaching for a cellphone,'' which the responding officers thought might be used to trigger another device, Mr. Egbert said. They dived and wrestled it from him.

''These officers went into this situation blind, only becoming aware of the danger involved once they confronted the suspect,'' Mr. Egbert said.

Police released a photo of Mr. Ullah that appeared to have been taken inside the subway walkway after the blast. In it, he is curled in a fetal position; his exposed stomach is blackened.

Mayor Bill de Blasio found himself for the second time in two months calming the city after a terrorist attack, in this case, on the system that moves millions of people across the city every day.

''Our lives revolve around the subway,'' he said at a news conference on Eighth Avenue a few hours after the incident. ''The choice of New York is always for a reason, because we are a beacon to the world. And we actually show that a society of many faiths and many backgrounds can work.''

''The terrorists want to undermine that,'' the mayor added. ''They yearn to attack New York City.''

Investigators, led by the Joint Terrorism Task Force, believe Mr. Ullah acted alone, but they only have just begun to review materials from the searches and other leads.

Christina Bethea was in the underground walkway, headed to her job as a security guard, when the explosion nearly knocked her over, sending a haze of smoke into the corridor packed with commuters. She did not see where it came from, she said. ''As soon as we heard 'boom!' we began to run,'' she said. An hour after the attack, she stood outside the bus terminal, calling her mother and father in North Carolina to tell them she was O.K. ''I feel good,'' Ms. Bethea said. ''I am alive!''

All morning, thwarted travelers spilled into the streets of Times Square, towing suitcases in bewildered silence. They gathered at police cordons stretched across the city's most trafficked thoroughfares, boulevards vacant at the height of the holiday season, and filmed the red lights of scores of emergency vehicles.

On Monday morning, police searched a six-story apartment building where Mr. Ullah may have lived with his parents on Ocean Parkway, as well as two other residences. At around 11 a.m. officers led a woman in a dark coat from the Ocean Parkway home, a gray hijab covering her hair, into a patrol car, and sped off. The area is home to a few thousand Bangladeshi-born residents, and it represents the heart of their Brooklyn community, with stores and mosques built along Church Avenue.

Mr. Ullah is a permanent United States resident, according to Tyler Q. Houlton, a spokesman for the Department of Homeland Security, having arrived in 2011.

The method of attack -- self-detonation, or the attempt at least -- introduces something of a new element to a long history of the city as target, a place that has yet somehow avoided the bomb-wearing attackers that are the hallmark of terrorism in places like Israel and Nigeria.

Since the attacks on the World Trade Center in 2001, there have been about 26 terrorist plots against the city that officials have identified as being thwarted ''through intelligence, investigation and interdiction,'' John J. Miller, the Police Department's commissioner of intelligence and counterterrorism, said at a news conference on Monday.

But more recently, the string of foiled plots gave way to closer calls.

In 2009, law enforcement authorities prevented a cell of people with ties to operatives of Al Qaeda from carrying out plans to bomb subway trains. A year later, in May 2010, Faisal Shahzad, a Pakistani immigrant, tried to detonate a truck with explosives in Times Square -- but his devices did not go off.

In September 2016, a crude homemade explosive crafted from a pressure cooker packed with shrapnel was left on 27th Street in Chelsea, exploding but killing no one. Before Monday, the last attack was on Halloween, when a man spurred by Islamic State propaganda drove a rental truck down a bicycle path on Manhattan's West Side, killing eight people and injuring 12 others. The man, Sayfullo Saipov, was arrested and charged by federal prosecutors; he has pleaded not guilty.

While no formal announcement had been made, both federal and local law enforcement officials indicated that Mr. Ullah would be prosecuted in federal court in Manhattan by the office of the acting United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, Joon H. Kim.

But by Monday afternoon, the city was busy forgetting. On 42nd Street, tourists strolled unperturbed, or hurried into the reopened bus depot to catch their rides.

Just hours before, John Frank had stood on that street by the Port Authority exit when he felt tremors through the pavement. ''That's how strong it was,'' said Mr. Frank, 54. Shaken, he fled a flew blocks away, and stood for a few long minutes, leaning against a garbage can for support.

''In New York City, we are vulnerable to a lot of things,'' Mr. Frank said. ''These incidents are happening too frequently.''

The area around the Port Authority Bus Terminal was cordoned off Monday after an explosion in a subway station corridor. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEENAH MOON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Akayed Ullah (A1); The blast in one of Manhattan's busiest corridors shut down traffic above ground as emergency responders flooded the area. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTIAN HANSEN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A25) MAPS: Where the Port Authority: Subway Explosion Happened: A would-be suicide bomber set off a pipe bomb strapped to his body during the morning rush hour on Monday in the passageway linking the Times Square and Port Authority subway stations. (Source: Candy Chan, Project Subway NYC (3D model)) (A25) 

Document NYTF000020171212edcc0006m



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
A Tactic From Overseas, the Suicide Bombing Was Envisioned for Years in the City

By BENJAMIN MUELLER and MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ; Alexandra S. Levine contributed reporting. 
1,322 words
12 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
25
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Velcro. Zip ties. A pipe bomb.

And, after the smoke cleared and the commuters ran, a man slumped over in a tunnel beneath Midtown Manhattan, his midsection blackened and bloodied from the force of an explosive device strapped to his own body.

Of all the terrorist threats that loomed in New York in the aftermath of Sept. 11, 2001, few were as worrisome to counterterrorism officials as a suicide bomber walking into one of the world's busiest transit hubs.

Despite a couple of recent terrorist attacks, and the more than two dozen plots that law enforcement agencies have thwarted here in the last 16 years, no one in that period did what the police have long feared: tried to blow himself up in a crowd.

Until Monday.

Akayed Ullah, an immigrant from Bangladesh, is the person officials said crossed that threshold when a pipe bomb tied to his body exploded in a passageway between the Times Square and Port Authority subway stations, in the first attempted suicide attack in New York City since Sept. 11.

No one was gravely injured, and New Yorkers largely carried on with their commuting on Monday. But with the explosion, another chapter was added to a recent pattern of crude terrorist attacks in New York.

No longer were suicide bombings only a gruesome hallmark of conflicts abroad -- in post-invasion Iraq, for instance, or in Israel and the Palestinian territories.

And no longer were the psychological ripples from such an attack -- the eyeing of fellow subway riders, the suspicion that anyone could turn a train car into a death trap -- confined to regions like the Middle East, Southeast Asia and Europe, where citizens are returning home in large numbers from terrorism hotbeds like Iraq and Syria.

With the Islamic State shedding territory overseas and fighters frustrated at the prospect of reaching the battlefield abroad, once-unthinkable tactics have made an appearance in New York, too.

''It's scarier, because you don't even know,'' Fabian Fanfair, a United Parcel Service supervisor from Brooklyn, said on Monday. ''Somebody having that on him, you don't know who it could be. I could be just sitting on the train taking a nap like I usually do, and something like that could just happen.''

Suicide bombings are exceedingly difficult for the police to stop once they have been set into motion, and the attack left counterterrorism experts reckoning with how guerrilla tactics recently adopted by the Islamic State as it faces losses abroad could be countered.

''Old tactics, they never really come off the table,'' said David C. Kelly, a former assistant commissioner for counterterrorism in the New York Police Department. ''It's probably one of the toughest attack methods to detect and prevent.''

After the Sept. 11 attacks, Mr. Kelly said, police officials started working up a list of contingencies, and a scenario like Monday's attack was near the top of the list. Investigators held tabletop exercises to formulate, among other things, how investigators would sweep the subway system afterward for additional explosives.

But Lisa O. Monaco, a former Homeland Security and counterterrorism adviser with the Obama administration, said that the counterterrorism architecture created after the Sept. 11 attacks was intended to protect against well-organized groups like Al Qaeda, not a kind of lone-wolf attacker like Mr. Ullah.

''If they're determined to die in the process of the attack, you are much less likely to detect planning of follow on travel or attempts to escape,'' said Ms. Monaco, who is now a distinguished senior fellow at the New York University Law School.

In 2009, the government foiled a planned suicide attack. Najibullah Zazi and two friends were accused of planning to strap explosives to themselves, split up and board packed trains from the Grand Central and Times Square stations at rush hour. Mr. Zazi realized that he was under government surveillance and later pleaded guilty to what officials described as a Qaeda plot.

The police broke up another suspected suicide attack in 1997 when officers found the makings of pipe bombs in a Brooklyn apartment.

Other plots, though crude, leave telltale signs that something is amiss, like the car bomb in Times Square in 2010 that prompted an evacuation after a sidewalk vendor noticed smoke coming out of vents in the car.

The truck attack in Lower Manhattan on Halloween was also reminiscent of a tactic more prevalent overseas.

Officials have puzzled over why more attackers have not tried to commit suicide bombings in the United States. Mr. Kelly, now an associate managing director at K2 Intelligence, which offers investigative and consulting services, said officials wondered if domestic terrorists were trying to compensate for their smaller numbers by preserving themselves for future attacks.

Jean-Charles Brisard, chairman of the Center for the Analysis of Terrorism, a research organization in Paris, said the United States, unlike Europe, also had fewer citizens returning from terrorism hot spots abroad.

''The United States was not as impacted by the jihadi phenomenon,'' he said.

But he said Islamic State strategy has changed as it loses its geographic foothold in Iraq and Syria. As part of its effort to stay relevant, it has increasingly directed its supporters to carry out attacks in New York City.

He pointed to accounts on the encrypted chat service Telegram, known for disseminating jihadi propaganda, which in recent weeks has published apocalyptic images of the New York City skyline in flames. One, which depicts a camouflaged fighter holding a black ISIS flag, included the caption ''Very soon we'll be the one who will fight you, and you'll fight us no more.''

With the United States choking off people's efforts to get weapons training overseas, and also making it difficult for foreign fighters to enter the country, Islamic State supporters in the New York area and around the world are turning to tutorials on encrypted communications channels.

''Even someone who has never dealt with chemistry or bomb making could be able to make a sophisticated device,'' Mr. Brisard said.

In the past such attacks have prompted many countries, including the United States and more recently France, to expand government surveillance and impose certain restrictions in the name of security. After subway and bus blasts tore through London in 2005, for example, the police in New York started inspecting some bags coming into the subway system as a deterrent.

But countering suicide attacks can be a challenge even in countries with weak civil rights protections and expansive law enforcement powers.

Russia, where suicide bombings are not uncommon, particularly on public transportation, has responded -- mostly in vain -- with a grab bag of heavy-handed tactics. After a suicide bomber killed 16 people in an attack on the St. Petersburg Metro in April, two suspected accomplices who had their citizenship revoked said the police had beaten and waterboarded them, according to Human Rights Watch, a nonprofit.

Such attacks typically result in the increased use of racial profiling by law enforcement on public transportation, said Tanya Lokshina, the Russia program director for Human Rights Watch in Moscow. ''We can only hope the U.S. authorities do not react in a similar manner,'' she said.

After the attack on Monday, some New Yorkers remained sanguine. They said the goal of a suicide bombing was no different from that of the Chelsea bombing last year or the truck attack on Halloween: to scare people. They said they would keep going about their routines.

''We're not surprised because we've had everything else,'' said Stella Pulo, a Manhattan resident. ''A bit of complacency has set in that this is now the norm. Somebody said to me this morning, 'We don't say 'Have a good day' anymore. We say, 'Be safe.'''

Document NYTF000020171212edcc00067



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Hunting Militants in Afghanistan, With 10 Tons of Bombs at 20,000 Feet

By ERIC SCHMITT 
1,539 words
12 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
13
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ABOARD A B-52, over Eastern Afghanistan -- Flying at more than 20,000 feet, the hulking long-range bomber circled ominously above a militant-infested swath of Afghan territory near the rugged border with Pakistan, hunting for Taliban or Islamic State fighters who could threaten friendly troops nearby.

A ride in the cockpit on a recent 13-hour combat mission provided a rare bird's-eye view of the Trump administration's newly revamped Afghanistan policy of sending thousands of additional American troops closer to the front lines -- and more warplanes like this one to protect them. That includes striking Taliban drug depots to cripple the group's financial lifeline, as the Pentagon did in Iraq and Syria in hitting the Islamic State's oil tankers and cash-storage sites.

During the Obama administration, American commanders were barred from carrying out offensive airstrikes against the Taliban. Attacks had to be defensive, aimed at protecting Afghan forces on the ground, conditions that commanders complained tied their hands and led to a stalemate. Now the gloves are off, and American warplanes have already dropped more than 3,900 bombs and missiles against targets in Afghanistan this year, three times as many as last year.

''These new authorities give me the ability to go after the enemy in ways that I couldn't before,'' Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., the top American commander in Afghanistan, said last month after ordering the new operation, code-named Jagged Knife. ''We're hitting the Taliban where it hurts, which is their finances.''

American airstrikes and Afghan ground raids over the past month have so far destroyed 25 drug labs in southern Afghanistan, wiping out $16 million in Taliban proceeds and throwing the group's regional narcotics operations into financial disarray, according to military officials and Drug Enforcement Administration estimates.

General Nicholson said the campaign would last for months, as the Taliban operates 400 to 500 labs across the country to sustain the group's $200 million-a-year opium trade. The drug money accounts for at least 60 percent of the Taliban's income, and goes to buy weapons, recruit and pay fighters and conduct operations.

With the war in Afghanistan now in its 17th year, President Trump's strategy aims to drive the Taliban to a negotiated settlement. It seeks not only to squeeze the group's opium revenues, but also to increase Afghan army offensives backed by American air power and to hold elections to enhance the Afghan government's legitimacy.

''The Taliban have three choices: reconcile, face irrelevance or die,'' General Nicholson said.

Afghanistan specialists say they have heard such boasts before, and the war is still being fought. They also voiced doubts about the hit-them-in-the-pocketbook plan.

''It's useful to impact the Taliban financially, but it may just drive production into neighboring Pakistan or Iran,'' said David W. Barno, a retired Army lieutenant general who led the war effort in Afghanistan for almost two years.

Other critics said the sharp increase in airstrikes will backfire, inevitably causing more civilian casualties and the accompanying political blowback, despite the military's best efforts to mitigate that risk.

''If you increase the number of strikes without allocating the time, personnel and resources to preventing, investigating and acknowledging each one, you get more civilian casualties,'' said Daniel R. Mahanty, United States program director at the Center for Civilians in Conflict, an advocacy group. ''It's basic math.''

Targeting specialists at the military's air command center in Qatar say they assembled the list of drug facilities that directly finance Taliban insurgents battling the government by examining hundreds of hours of aerial surveillance and poring over intelligence reports. Airstrikes have been carried out at night when fewer people are near the targets.

''It was a very deliberate process,'' said Capt. Ryan Pretty, an Army artillery officer who is deputy chief of the team overseeing the bombing campaign's effects.

Watching and eavesdropping on the scurrying around by drug lab operators whose depots were not hit in the first wave offered important insights for planners drawing up the next set of strikes, helping them map out local Taliban networks.

''These strikes and the aftermath taught us a lot about the complexity of the Taliban's narcotics operations,'' said Navy Lt. William Conway, a former prosecutor in Chicago who is now a lead intelligence officer for Afghanistan at the command center in Qatar.

Central to both the antidrug and troop-protection operations are the B-52's. They are the latest chapter in the storied bomber's history over the past six decades, from its carpet-bombing missions in the Vietnam and 1991 Persian Gulf wars, to its strategic role as part of the country's nuclear deterrent. In January, B-52's will deploy from Louisiana to Guam for duty in the Pacific, including near North Korea.

Of the roughly 750 B-52's originally built, the Air Force is still flying about 75 of the sweptwing, eight-engine H-model planes. The aircraft I flew on, nicknamed Night Train, was built in 1961, making it nearly twice as old as any of its five crew members from the 69th Bomb Squadron out of Minot Air Base, N.D.

Our mission began before 5 a.m. at the squadron headquarters at Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar, where the crew received a series of intelligence, safety and mission briefings. Following bomber tradition, the crew then sprayed on cologne (a very pungent ''Extreme Liberty'' for this mission).

In the pre-dawn darkness, a bus ferried the crew to its jet, its engines running, bombs hanging off its massive wings. Crew members clambered up a metal ladder into the fuselage. The two weapons officers -- Soar, 30, from Pittsburgh, and Will, 28, from Arcadia, Calif. -- sat in front of glowing screens in the cramped, windowless offensive operations compartment.

Up another metal ladder was the cockpit and a separate cramped, windowless space for the electronic warfare officer -- Poppa, 28, from San Diego. The mission commander, Rage, 29, from Minden, Neb., and his co-pilot, Bravo, 26, from Hillsborough, N.J., ducked down an aisle and shoehorned themselves into their seats in the cockpit, while strapped into oxygen masks, flight suits, flight vests and ejection seats with parachutes. I sat in an instructor pilot seat behind Rage.

The crew members asked to be identified only by their call signs or first names for security reasons. It is a young crew, with only one member, Soar, having previously deployed overseas. One of a dozen crews in the squadron, this was their 23rd mission to Afghanistan or Iraq and Syria since arriving in September.

At 5:41 a.m., with the reddish dawn seeping across the horizon, the B-52 lumbered down the runway and roared off on the 3 and a half-hour flight to southern Nangahar Province in eastern Afghanistan, where Taliban and Islamic State fighters are battling with Afghan army troops for control.

Once there, with jaw-dropping views of 16,000-foot, snow-capped peaks out the tiny cockpit windows, the crew received instructions from Special Operations forces working with Afghan troops on the ground to use their high-powered camera sensors to spy on several buildings in a village compound, and look for any ''nefarious'' activity.

In this case, the B-52 was acting as an airborne cavalry, ready to rush to the aid of friendly forces with a formidable arsenal that included about two dozen 2,000-pound and 500-pound laser-guided bombs -- more than 10 tons of destruction in all.

Inside the B-52, affectionately known as a Buff (as in ''Big, Ugly, Fat,'' followed by an expletive), the noise was deafening. Crew members wore headphones and talked over microphones. Thirteen hours is a long time in a very confined space, and the crew has tricks to stay alert, including energy drinks and lots of caffeine. An eclectic mix of heavy metal, rock, country and rap music blared through their headphones.

For six hours, the B-52 flew tightly banked routes to give Soar the best view of his potential targets. Black-and-white images flickered across his screen: A man chopping wood. A woman doing laundry. Suddenly, he spotted something suspicious: a man pulling a long cylindrical object out from under a tarp. Was it just a long piece of wood or pipe, or was it a surface-to-air missile?

Taking no chances, Rage and Bravo veered the plane out of missile range, and called for an armed Reaper drone nearby to take a closer look. After nearly an hour and some delays, the B-52 needed to turn back to base without resolving the minor mystery.

No bombs were dropped that day, as has been the case on about a quarter of the crew's so-called overwatch missions to protect Afghan troops. ''But the good guys got home safely,'' said Rage.

Afghan youths near the site of an American bombing during an April operation against ISIS militants in eastern Afghanistan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NOORULLAH SHIRZADA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020171212edcc0003q



Briefing
Port Authority Bus Terminal, Donald Trump, N.F.L.: Your Monday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,612 words
11 December 2017
11:20
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

One in custody after New York explosion.

• lone suspect was in serious condition after an explosion this morning in a tunnel that connects the Times Square and Port Authority subway stations, the Police Department said.

The man, identified by the police as Akayed Ullah, 27, from Brooklyn, had been wearing an explosive device, said a senior city official who declined to be identified because the investigation was continuing.

The Fire Department reported four injuries. The two subway stations and the Port Authority Bus Terminal were evacuated.

•ayor Bill de Blasio called the blast an attempted terrorist attack and said no other devices had been found.

The president vs. the presidency.

As he ends his first year in office, Donald Trump is redefining the presidency.

In interviews with 60 advisers, associates, friends and members of Congress, our reporters found a man who “iews himself less as a titan dominating the world stage than a maligned outsider engaged in a struggle to be taken seriously.”

Mr. Trump reasons that his approach got him to the White House, so it must be the right one.

Among the highlights of our behind-the-scenes report:

•“or most of the year, people inside and outside Washington have been convinced that there is a strategy behind Mr. Trump’ actions. But there is seldom a plan apart from pre-emption, self-defense, obsession and impulse.”

•rmed with Twitter and fueled by Diet Coke, the president spends at least four hours a day —nd sometimes as much as twice that —n front of a TV. (Mr. Trump disputed the characterization today.)

• novice who is skeptical of anything that does not come from inside his bubble, Mr. Trump is, aides say, learning that a president cannot rule by fiat but must work with Republican leaders.

•enator Lindsey Graham, once a fierce critic of Mr. Trump’ but increasingly an ally, said the presidency was still “ work in progress.”t this point, Mr. Graham said, “verything’ possible, from complete disaster to a home run.”

Alabama Democrat gets quiet help.

•oug Jones remains a slight underdog to the Republican Roy Moore in Tuesday’ special Senate election.

But groups outside the state have been working hard to assist Mr. Jones, while also trying to avoid appearing to dictate whom Alabamians should support.

The effort received an unexpected lift on Sunday when Senator Richard Shelby, a Republican, said: “ couldn’ vote for Roy Moore. The state of Alabama deserves better.”

•he race has revolved almost entirely around Mr. Moore’ divisive views and allegations of improper behavior toward teenagers. Here are some of the policy issues the uproar has overshadowed.

An arsenal “nlike anything we’e ever seen.”

•xtremist forces, which have limited access to global arms markets, routinely manufacture their own weapons. But the Islamic State has taken the practice to new levels.

Reports provided to The Times detail the weapons the militant group has developed, including chemical rockets and space heaters rigged with explosives.

•fter more than three years of fighting, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq declared victory over the Islamic State on Saturday. Analysts warned that it did not mean the end of the ISIS threat.

Puerto Rico’ long road to recovery.

•arge parts of the island continue to be without electricity after September’ hurricanes, and the sick and elderly have suffered most acutely.

A look inside  Puerto Rico’ largest housing project for low-income seniors helps explain the storms’mpact.

•fficially, 64 people were killed as a result of Hurricane Maria. The actual death toll may be more than 1,000, a Times analysis found.

“he Daily” Alabama’ Senate race.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•nder the Republican tax plan, the same amount of income would be taxed at different rates depending on how the money was made.

•he Federal Reserve is expected to raise interest rates this week. Investors want to know what’ next.

•he F.C.C. is set to repeal net neutrality rules on Thursday, one of the headlines to watch this week.

What might a future without the rules look like? Parts of Europe offer a clue.

•.S. stocks were up on Friday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ven marathon runners need to watch their diet and lifestyle.

•anukkah begins Tuesday. Here’ how to make perfect latkes.

•ecipe of the day: Start the week with homemade fried chicken.

Over the Weekend

•ikki Haley, the American ambassador to the U.N., said that women who accused President Trump of sexual misconduct “hould be heard.”

•ope Francis said the common rendering of one line in the Lord’ Prayer —“ead us not into temptation”—was “ot a good translation” from ancient texts.

•li Manning reclaimed his job as the New York Giants’tarting quarterback, but the team still lost. So did the Jets. Here’ the rest of Sunday’ N.F.L. scores.

•aker Mayfield, the quarterback for Oklahoma, became the first Heisman Trophy winner to begin his career as a walk-on since the 1950s.

•“oco”arned $18.3 million to remain No. 1 at the North American box office.

Noteworthy

•celand’ hot springs.

In today’ 360 video, soak in one of the country’ geothermal pools.

•olden Globe nominees announced.

“he Shape of Water,”“unkirk,”“he Post”nd “all Me by Your Name”ll received multiple nominations this morning. Check our live briefing for more.

Here’ a list of all the nominees.

•t’ not all bad out there.

In our Weekend Briefing, we featured a roundup of some inspiring stories in The Times.

We’ like to incorporate more of those, so today we introduce you to the Mekong Review. The magazine covers Southeast Asia’ literary scene and offers a voice in countries where free speech is perennially threatened.

•uotation of the day.

“hen you grow up in France, none of the heroes you learn about are entrepreneurs. When someone gets rich in France, people immediately ask, ‘hat did he do to make this money? He must be a nasty person.’”

—Brigitte Granville, a professor at Queen Mary University of London who was raised in France, on shifting views toward business as the country tries to make the most of Britain’ exit from the European Union.

Back Story

“reed is good.”oday is the 30th anniversary of the release of “all Street.”

Michael Douglas won an Oscar for his role as Gordon Gekko, the ruthless corporate raider who takes a young stockbroker named Bud Fox, played by Charlie Sheen, under his wing.

The movie was meant as a harsh critique of the excesses of 1980s capitalism —ut it became wildly popular with actual Wall Street types. (When it came out, our critic suggested that its moralizing was its weak point: “he movie crashes in a heap of platitudes,”incent Canby wrote.)

The director, Oliver Stone, said that in a twist, many young people told him it had inspired them to work on Wall Street. Even years later, brokers would tell him, “ou’e the man!”

Mr. Stone discussed the film’ legacy in this 2009 Times video. He said it was “isunderstood by some, because it was about a horrible thing that was going on, about how people would worship money at all costs.”

That interview took place as he was preparing to film the sequel, “all Street: Money Never Sleeps,”eleased in 2010. Our critic called it “ corrective, a parody and a sly act of auto-homage.”

Karen Zraick contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated all morning. Browse past briefings here.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can get the briefing delivered to your inbox Sunday through Friday. We have four global editions, timed for the Americas, Europe, Asia and Australia, and an Evening Briefing on weeknights. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Follow Chris Stanford on Twitter: @stanfordc.

Firefighters and police officers on 8th Avenue in Manhattan after the reported explosion. | David Scull/The New York Times | President Trump boarding Air Force One on Saturday. He is more unpopular than any of his modern predecessors at this point in his tenure, yet he dominates the landscape like no other. | Tom Brenner/The New York Times | Iraqis in Baghdad on Sunday after the prime minister announced the end of the battle against the Islamic State. The militant group once controlled nearly one-third of Iraq. | Ahmad Al-Rubaye/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Firefighters outside a burning home in Carpinteria, Calif., on Sunday. More than 8,500 firefighters were battling six blazes across Southern California. | Mark Ralston/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | The kind your Bubbe used to make. | Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times | After being benched, Eli Manning returned as the Giants’tarting quarterback on Sunday, throwing one touchdown and two interceptions. | Ben Solomon for The New York Times | Michael Douglas as Gordon Gekko. | 20th Century Fox | Iceland has more than 100 public pools, most of which are heated by the country’ abundant geothermal energy. | By TIM CHAFFEE and KAITLYN MULLIN 

Document NYTFEED020171211edcb00209



Briefing
New York City, Alabama, Putin: Your Monday Evening Briefing

By KAREN ZRAICK and DAVID SCULL 
1,056 words
12 December 2017
00:02
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good evening. Here’ the latest.

1. “he choice of New York is always for a reason, because we are a beacon to the world. And we actually show that a society of many faiths and many backgrounds can work.”

That was Mayor Bill de Blasio on the attempted terrorist attack in New York City. The crudely made pipe bomb that exploded in a crowded subway corridor during the morning rush injured a handful of people, sent commuters fleeing into the streets and disrupted the day for tens of thousands more. The explosion was caught on surveillance video.

Officials rapidly identified the suspect as Akayed Ullah, a 27-year-old immigrant from Bangladesh living in Brooklyn. He told officials he was inspired by ISIS. He is in custody and has been hospitalized for burns.

_____

2. President Trump pushed back against an article that we published over the weekend, headlined “Inside Trump’ Hour-by-Hour Battle for Self-Preservation.”t was based on interviews with 60 advisers, associates, friends and members of Congress.

In particular, Mr. Trump insisted via Twitterthat he does not watch four to eight hours of television each day. “e stand by our reporting,” Times spokeswoman responded.

And the Treasury Department released an analysis of the Senate tax bill that suggested the $1.5 trillion plan would more than pay for itself —ut only if the economy grows much faster than any independent analysis has projected.

_____

3. Alabama voters go to the polls tomorrow in what has become a national nail-biter: the special election for the Senate seat vacated by Attorney General Jeff Sessions.

Roy Moore, the arch-conservative Republican dogged by accusations that he made sexual advances on underage girls, is holding a rally with Stephen Bannon tonight. Doug Jones, his Democratic challenger, is getting a big assist from Democratic and liberal groups across the country.

We discussed the race with our political correspondent Jonathan Martin on “he Daily.”

_____

4. President Vladimir Putin of Russia took a whirlwind diplomatic tour of Egypt, Syria and Turkey, amid anger over President Trump’ decision to recognize Jerusalem as Israel’ capital.

Above, Mr. Putin, in car, waved goodbye to President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey. The trip showcased Mr. Putin’ role as a global statesman just as he embarks on a campaign for another presidential term, his fifth and possibly last.

_____

5. When the Islamic State seized territory in Iraq and Syria in 2014, it had the time and space to manufacture weapons on an industrial scale. We obtained extensive documents that show how the group built up its output levels “nlike anything we’e ever seen”rom a nonstate force.

At times the weapons were exceptionally cruel —ooby-traps that blew up homes, heaters packed with explosives. Above, an area of Mosul recently recaptured from the group.

“hey’e spreading this knowledge all over the world,”aid an explosives expert. “t’ going to the Philippines, it’ in Africa.”e added, “his stuff’ going to continue to grow.”

_____

6. After reports that North Korea is developing the ability to launch submarine-based missiles, the U.S., Japan and South Korea are conducting drills to track such weapons.

Fears of a crisis on the Korean Peninsula are mounting. In China, a leaked document circulating online shows that a county along the border with North Korea is constructing refugee camps that could hold thousands of people.

_____

7. Mario Batali, the celebrity chef, apologized and stepped away from his food empire and ABC’ “he Chew” after four unnamed women accused him of sexual harassment.

He’ one of the country’ most high-profile chefs and restaurant owners, and also a best-selling cookbook author. The accusations were first reported by Eater, the food website.

Separately, The New Yorker fired its Washington correspondent, Ryan Lizza, after it said he had engaged in “mproper sexual conduct.”e denied the charge.

_____

8. Firefighters in Southern California have been getting some of the fires in Los Angeles and San Diego under control. But the Thomas Fire is still threatening communities around Santa Barbara. Above, a scene in Carpinteria.

Sign up for our California Today newsletter to get the latest on the fires and other local news delivered to your inbox each morning.

_____

9. Talk about unintended consequences. Among the transformations Nafta brought to Mexico: a diet more like the U.S.’, complete with lots of junk food, soda, meat —nd an epidemic of diet-related illnesses. Above, a Sam’ Club in Chiapas.

The latest installment of our series “lanet Fat”racks how the 1994 deal opened the floodgates to imports of cheap corn, meat and processed foods.

“he only way that Mexico became a ‘irst world’ountry was in terms of diet,”aid a trade expert.

_____

10. Finally, the Golden Globes nominations are out, led by Guillermo del Toro’ fantasy “he Shape of Water,”ith seven. Octavia Spencer, second left, and Sally Hawkins, center, both earned nominations for their roles in the film.

Here are the top nominees and a look at the surprises and snubs (no best screenplay for “et Out” “onder Woman”hut out; three nods for “ll the Money in the World”—rom which Kevin Spacey was eradicated).

Have a great night.

_____

Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.

Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

Jeenah Moon for The New York Times | Eric Thayer for The New York Times | Brynn Anderson/Associated Press | Kayhan Ozer/Presidency Press Service, via Associated Press | Felipe Dana/Associated Press | Kcna/European Pressphoto Agency | Scott Eells/Bloomberg, via Getty Images | Hilary Swift for The New York Times | Adriana Zehbrauskas for The New York Times | Kerry Hayes/Fox Searchlight Pictures, via Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020171211edcb007hh



MOSUL JOURNAL
Foreign Desk; SECTA
After  ISIS , Reclaiming The Soul Of Mosul

By MARGARET COKER 
1,639 words
11 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq -- In the heat of the late summer sun, weeks after the end of one of the largest urban battles since World War II, a high school principal trekked from his home in east Mosul to the west bank of the Tigris River to confront the ruins of his life's work.

Bordering Mosul's Old City, his stately Ottoman-era school, where generations of Iraqi political and military leaders studied, lay in ruin. Two campus buildings had been leveled by American coalition airstrikes during the battle against the Islamic State. Century-old stone walls were scarred from shrapnel. The once-gleaming computer lab, library and theater, which in 2014 presented a student production of ''Macbeth,'' were burned by retreating Islamic State fighters.

The scale of devastation at the place he hoped to mold Iraq's next generation of leaders drew a flutter of despair from the principal, Muthana Saleh. But then he harnessed the traits that residents of Mosul are famous for: ingenuity and industriousness. This month, thanks in part of volunteers and an Iraqi donor, he is planning to restart classes for 450 students.

''We solve problems,'' he said. ''We find resources. We find a way. It's the spirit of Mosul.''

For three years, this metropolis of three million people, Iraq's second-largest city, lived under the harsh rule of the Islamic State. When the militant group was finally ousted in July, it signaled the beginning of the end of its self-declared caliphate, which once occupied a third of the country and much of Syria. American-backed Iraqi forces swept across the country, officially declaring the job finished this weekend.

But the battle for Mosul lasted nearly nine months, killing thousands of people, displacing nearly a million and leaving entire districts in smoldering heaps of rubble.

Around 600,000 people remain displaced, and approximately 60,000 homes are uninhabitable. The city's business and government sectors are crippled, with at least 20,000 commercial and government buildings destroyed, according to aerial images commissioned by the United Nations.

The west side in particular sustained apocalyptic damage. It took six months of grinding street-by-street battles and aerial bombardment to free the area, including the labyrinthine Old City, where the militants made their last stand.

''Mosul is a tale of two cities,'' said Lise Grande, the humanitarian coordinator in Iraq and head of the United Nations Development Program. ''In east Mosul, more than 95 percent of people are home. On the west side, it's a completely different picture. Yet people are rolling up their sleeves and determined to get their lives back.''

Since the summer, the international community has spent about $400 million to help restore electricity, water and medical services, and donor countries, along with the Iraqi government, are struggling to create and finance a comprehensive multibillion-dollar redevelopment plan.

In the interim, Muslawis -- as Mosul residents are called -- have mustered their own resources and philanthropic spirit to breathe new life into the city.

The highways leading to Mosul are clogged with flatbed trucks bringing in commercial goods and construction materials. On both sides of the river, gleaming rows of washing machines, space heaters and children's bikes are for sale. Restaurants, especially those with family sections, are doing a roaring business.

On Nov. 30, a Mosul nonprofit organized a marathon and shorter foot races for children, an event that drew around 4,000 people.

[Video: Marathon draws thousands in Iraq's devastated Mosul Watch on YouTube.]

''We are excited to change the atmosphere of Mosul,'' said Feras Khalil, an engineer supervising the reconstruction of Fountain Square, a park along a main commercial street on Mosul's east side. ''We want to give the opportunity for our neighbors to breathe fresh air after defeating Daesh,'' he said, using the Arabic acronym for the Islamic State.

On the east side, the sprawling Mosul University campus hums with activity from the 30,000 students -- men and women -- who are attending classes this fall. Hundreds of students from other parts of Iraq have also re-enrolled, a testament, they say, to their parents' confidence about security.

For centuries, Mosul has been a center of learning. In the Middle Ages, scholars here pioneered surgical techniques and medical instruments still used by contemporary doctors. The university remains highly regarded for its medical and science graduates.

During Islamic State rule, however, most classes ground to a halt, both because the group forbade the teaching of what it considered sinful or irrelevant subjects, like art and philosophy, and because professors and students were afraid to venture out of their homes.

The campus, like most areas of Mosul, shows scars of conflict. United States coalition airstrikes destroyed four science buildings that the Islamic State had been using as weapons research labs. University administrators say they have no idea how to replace the millions of books from their library, a repository for old manuscripts and research materials, that were burned by the Islamic State, or hundreds of thousands of dollars in science equipment.

Yet staff and students have tackled smaller tasks on their own.

Professor Intisar Abdel Rada, who has taught accounting for 18 years, helped supervise a group of professors and students who raised money to repair ceilings and electrical wiring in her department's classrooms, and cleaned and painted lecture halls, work that enabled classes to resume last month. ''It's like we were dead but have been resuscitated,'' she said while rushing between her lectures.

A few miles away, at Al Khansaa Pediatric and Maternity Hospital, the director, Dr. Jamal Younis, worked throughout the summer with international aid organizations such as Doctors Without Borders to solve critical needs, like installing generators and incubators to keep the city's only maternity ward and pediatric surgery theaters operational.

He still faces frequent gaps in the daily operating budget -- in October an average of four babies were born at Al Khansaa each day -- but the staff struggled to maintain stocks like surgical gloves and food for patients.

For now, his problem solver is Dr. Saad Salih, a surgeon who counts members of Mosul's wealthiest families as friends.

When medicine earmarked for the hospital was stuck in Erbil about 60 miles away, a phone call to a local businessman raised the $500 needed to rent two flatbed trucks to transport the drugs to Mosul. Calls to pharmacy owners have brought in donations of bandages and surgical supplies.

Prominent Iraqis outside Mosul have also pitched in. Dr. Salih said a group of British Iraqis had sent funds for hospital supplies. Last week, a man delivered an envelope with $1,200 from a Baghdad-based surgeon who was born in Mosul and wanted to help her hometown.

''We lived through decades where people did not trust each other in Iraq,'' Dr. Salih said. ''That's the truth and a big challenge facing us now. But somehow, now it's different. People really are motivated to help one another.''

Across the river, in the Old City, the few residents lucky enough to have their homes still standing say they also are invigorated by community spirit.

Talal Muhammad, a father of four, has run a small shop in the Old City's Bab al Bedh district selling dairy goods for 30 years. A Muslawi philanthropist gave him the equivalent of $850 last month to help repair his refrigerators. Those funds helped kick-start a flickering commercial renaissance. Now, amid the rubble, nine shops have reopened.

Intisar Mehdi, the matriarch of her 20-member family, said she was the last person to leave the during the fighting this summer and the first to return. She immediately put her four children and 10 grandchildren to work cleaning the ashes and rubble from their house and fix piping to their well.

A month ago, she says, her winding lane was quiet and isolated. Now, it's filled with noise from an army of toddlers and the chatter of housewives exchanging information about developments in the city.

About a mile away, at the Sharqiya Secondary School, Mr. Saleh, the principal, is using the challenge of rebuilding as a teachable moment, reflecting the motto that hangs on one of the school's old stone walls: ''The misfortunes of some can be turned into an advantage for others.''

Since August, Mr. Saleh has been fielding calls from dozens of teachers and hundreds of parents pleading to resume classes.

He persuaded the police commander responsible for his area to secure the school grounds from bombs and other dangerous material.

In October, he organized teachers and administrators in shifts to clear rubble and burned equipment from several buildings. The police commander then put him in touch with a Baghdad-based charity that wanted to donate building equipment.

Now, Mr. Saleh says, he will transform his 450 waiting students into a volunteer work force. This week, they plan to install doors and windows in 10 classrooms, enough space to start classes by the end of the year, he says.

''None of us want to lose any more time,'' said Ahmed Jassim, 20, who had to delay his senior year of high school during the Islamic State's occupation. ''Our city has major problems that are too huge for us to solve. But this part, we can manage.''

Students outside the burned-out library of Mosul University, left, which was targeted during the fight against the Islamic State. Below, a family at Khansaa Pediatric and Maternity Hospital, which has struggled to remain open.; Muthana Saleh, the principal of the Sharqiya Secondary School in west Mosul. He plans to transform his 450 waiting students into a volunteer work force to help repair the building. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171211edcb0004m



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS ' Arsenal: 'Unlike Anything We've Ever Seen'

By JOHN ISMAY, THOMAS GIBBONS-NEFF and C. J. CHIVERS; Margaret Coker contributed reporting from Baghdad, and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul. 
2,217 words
11 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Late this spring, Iraqi forces fighting the Islamic State in Mosul discovered three unfired rocket-propelled grenades with an unusual feature -- a heavy liquid sloshing inside their warheads. Tests later found that the warheads contained a crude blister agent resembling sulfur mustard, a banned chemical weapon intended to burn a victim's skin and respiratory tract.

The improvised chemical rockets were the latest in a procession of weapons developed by the Islamic State during a jihadist arms-manufacturing spree without recent analogue.

Irregular fighting forces, with limited access to global arms markets, routinely manufacture their own weapons. But the Islamic State took the practice to new levels, with outputs ''unlike anything we've ever seen'' from a nonstate force, said Solomon H. Black, a State Department official who tracks and analyzes weapons.

Humanitarian de-miners, former military explosive ordnance disposal technicians and arms analysts working in areas captured from the Islamic State provided The New York Times with dozens of reports and scores of photographs and drawings detailing weapons that the militant organization has developed since 2014, when it established a self-declared caliphate in Syria and Iraq.

The records show the work of a jihadist hive mind -- a system of armaments production that combined research and development, mass production and organized distribution to amplify the militant organization's endurance and power.

The resulting weapons, used against the Islamic State's armed foes on many fronts and against civilians who did not support its rule, were variously novel and familiar. At times they were exceptionally cruel.

One report noted that before being expelled from Ramadi, Islamic State fighters buried a massive explosive charge under a group of homes and wired it to the electrical system in one of the buildings.

The houses were thought to be safe. But when a family returned and connected a generator, their home was blown apart in an enormous blast, according to Snoor Tofiq, national operations manager for Norwegian People's Aid, which is clearing improvised weapons from areas that the Islamic State left. The entire family, he said, was killed.

Craig McInally, also an operations manager for the Norwegian demining organization, described indiscriminate inventions elsewhere -- including four seemingly abandoned space heaters and a generator recovered near Mosul.

The heaters and generator, useful to displaced civilians and combatants alike, were packed with hidden explosives. The bombs had been configured, Mr. McInally said, so that if a person approached them or tried to move them, they would explode.

Taken together, the scope and scale of Islamic State production demonstrated the perils of a determined militant organization allowed to pursue its ambitions in a large, ungoverned space.

Some weapon components, for example, were essentially standardized, including locally manufactured injection-molded munition fuzes, shoulder-fired rockets, mortar ammunition, modular bomb parts and plastic-bodied land mines that underwent generations of upgrades. Many were produced in industrial quantities.

The findings also included apparent prototypes of weapons that either were not selected for mass production or were abandoned in development, including projectiles loaded with caustic soda and shoulder-fired rockets containing blister agent.

While the Islamic State has been routed from almost all its territory in Iraq and Syria, security officials say that its advances pose risks elsewhere, as its members move on to other countries, its foreign members return home and veterans of its arms-production network pool and share knowledge and techniques online.

''They're spreading this knowledge all over the world,'' said Ernest Barajas Jr., a former Marine explosive ordnance disposal technician who has worked with ordnance-clearing organizations in areas occupied by the Islamic State. ''It's going to the Philippines, it's in Africa.'' He added, ''This stuff's going to continue to grow.''

Born of Insurgency

One reason for the Islamic State's level of sophistication was clear: Its armaments programs grew out of the insurgencies fighting the American occupation of Iraq from 2003 through 2011.

Sunni and Shiite militant groups became adept at making improvised bombs, both from conventional munitions abandoned in 2003 by Iraq's defeated military, and with ingredients that bomb-makers prepared themselves. American officials say certain Shiite groups received technical assistance and components from Iran.

Sunni bomb makers also fielded chemical weapons, sometimes by combining explosive devices with chlorine, a toxic substance with legal applications, and other times in bombs made from degraded chemical rockets or shells left from Iraq's defunct chemical warfare program.

The Islamic State, which evolved from Al Qaeda in Iraq, built upon its predecessors' lethal industry.

The group's larger success since also played a role. When the Islamic State seized swaths of territory and major cities in 2014, it took control of shops and factories with hydraulic presses, forges, computer-driven machine tools and plastic injection-molding machines. It also moved into at least one technical college and university lab. This infrastructure positioned the Islamic State for an arms-production breakout.

Behind the capacity was an armaments bureaucracy that supervised product development and manufacture, said Damien Spleeters, head of operations in Iraq and Syria for Conflict Armament Research, a private arms-monitoring and investigative firm that has done field work in both countries during the war.

The system was resilient, Mr. Spleeters said. One of the Islamic State's projects, a series of recoilless launchers that gained prominence late in the battle for Mosul, in northern Iraq, was built from the ground up even while militants were pressured in combat from multiple foes on multiple fronts.

''It just kept going,'' Mr. Spleeters said of the technical advancements. ''They could develop stuff even as they lost territories.''

The Islamic State's arms bureaucracy was also disciplined. Detonating cord used in improvised explosive devices was measured and allotted down to the centimeter, Mr. Spleeters said. When a stock ran out, management would fill out a request form for more. The material would be resupplied.

Mr. McInally said the group's armament production appeared centralized and carefully considered.

As de-miners have found weapons, he said, they have routinely encountered improvised devices with a modular design that allowed for the Islamic State's fighters to choose from uniform parts and assemble devices quickly. The separate parts were issued distinctly, to be combined before use.

''It's a collection of pressure plates, a collection of charges, a collection of switches,'' Mr. McInally said. ''Components that can be connected as necessary. It's clever. It's impressive.''

The New York Times is withholding technical details of weapons and explosive mixtures described in this article to prevent the spread of information useful to copycats.

Mr. Barajas said the explosive charges themselves were further standardized -- via a so-called homemade explosive with a recipe the group tweaked and produced at an industrial scale.

The mixture, he said, is a widely known combination of ammonium nitrate fertilizer and aluminum with a long history of use in many conflicts, including in Iraq. But the Islamic State improved the explosive with the addition of another material that makes it easier to detonate. The Times previously documented the Islamic State's importation of large amounts of ammonium nitrate from Turkey, along with sections of heavy pipe.

Mr. McInally said the group also standardized other items: supplemental charges for mortar rounds to extend their range; a common fuze with a spring-loaded striker assembly machined from an over-the-counter bolt; and an improvised bomb -- he said de-miners refer to it as a land mine -- that was fielded in a standard-sized plastic tub.

The mines resemble an Italian-made antipersonnel mine called the VS-50, though the Islamic State's version is much larger, prompting de-miners to dryly refer to it as the ''VS-500.''

As time passed, newly produced VS-500 mines became increasingly water-resistant, extending their life in the ground. Similarly, the striker fuzes that the Islamic State has fielded show signs of being made resistant to moisture and rust.

The first-generation land mines, Mr. McInally said, were not well made. ''They didn't weather well,'' he said. But by the time the Islamic State was defeated in Mosul, he said, it had improved the design and salted the battlefield and villages with weapons ''that last a long, long time.''

The Islamic State has also engaged in organized scavenging, including collecting dud American-made bombs dropped by coalition warplanes and repurposing their explosive power. One set of photos provided by a de-miner show how the group set up an open-air chop shop to cut open unexploded American aircraft bombs and remove the explosive inside.

These explosives tend to be more powerful and more reliable than homemade explosives. Mr. Barajas said the Islamic State put what it had scavenged to priority use -- in suicide attacks.

''Every time I'd run an explosive test on the ordnance buried in the ground, if I found it connected to the pressure switches, it would come back as 'homemade explosives,''' he said. But the explosives in suicide vests and belts, he added, were compounds, including RDX and TNT, extracted from conventional ordnance.

Not all of the Islamic State's developments have been effective. When experimental designs failed, Islamic State engineers made changes or moved on.

According to an American government official who examined an analysis of the rocket-propelled grenade filled with blister agent, the weapons would probably not fly a predictable and accurate path. X-rays, he said, showed that they had been only partly filled, and were unbalanced.

Similarly, the Islamic State seemed to struggle with a series of mortars filled with caustic soda, or lye, a strongly alkaline compound that is sold in a heavy flake form and sometimes used as a drain cleaner.

Dozens of locally produced mortar projectiles filled with caustic soda were found by de-miners in Manbij, Syria, in late 2016. Mr. Barajas analyzed the discovery.

''Caustic soda is extremely hazardous. It'll burn your skin,'' he said. ''If you inhale it, it'll cause death.'' But the material is also corrosive, so much so that it damaged the interior of the shells the Islamic State had used to hold it.

He said that the Islamic State tried loading 120-millimeter mortar rounds with caustic soda, but that the munitions rusted to the point of exuding salts. They could not be safely fired. ''I think once they got this bad reaction, they moved away from this,'' Mr. Barajas said.

Put to Brutal Use

Many of the Islamic State's bombs have been used against the military and police forces fighting it. Aso Mohammed, a Kurdish de-miner with the Swiss Foundation for Mine Action, said that by his estimates, improvised explosive devices have been responsible for 60 percent of casualties of Kurdish pesh merga soldiers in Iraq's north.

But other uses were consistent with the Islamic State's well-documented disregard for international law and humanitarian concerns evident in their abductions, public executions, production of snuff films and bombings of public spaces.

In a prepared statement, the American military in Baghdad noted that coalition forces have recovered and destroyed booby-trapped teddy bears. De-miners and their supervisors in Iraq frequently trade reports and details of other Islamic State-made booby traps, among them dolls, stuffed animals and plastic trucks, as well as teapots, fire extinguishers, flashlights and copies of the Quran.

Two de-miners, Steve Kosier and Mr. Mohammed, of the Swiss demining organization, said that the Islamic State's locally made weapons had evolved in a predictably sinister fashion. Improvised devices that once were connected to a single plate that would cause the bomb to explode were later in the campaign connected to several plates -- an adaptation intended to slow de-miners as they cleared buildings, roads and terrain.

Mr. Kosier said he had disabled one makeshift bomb that ''had four pressure plates surrounding the container with a 9-volt battery for each plate.'' Each plate was connected by a separate electrical circuit to a container of homemade high explosives, which in turn had an ''anti-lift device'' beneath it -- essentially a booby trap added to an already complex booby trap.

The ambition behind such a trap, de-miners said, is to kill people trying to make the Islamic State's former turf safe.

The Islamic State rigged explosive devices inside everyday items, like this space heater. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CRAIG MCINALLY/NORWEGIAN PEOPLE'S AID) (A1); JR. MISFIRES: Above left, a projectile filled with caustic soda flakes, or lye, right, was created by ISIS but did not work because the corrosive fill caused the munition to rust.; JR. RECYCLING: Suicide belts made by ISIS, above left, often used more powerful explosives such as TNT, right, scavenged from dud American bombs and other captured weapons. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ERNEST BARAJAS); Top, decimated cars and houses in Mosul, Iraq, where the Islamic State was recently defeated. Above, Kurdish de-miners from the Swiss Foundation for Mine Action next to improvised land mines made by ISIS. The insurgents built an advanced system of weapons production. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STEVE KOSIER/SWISS FOUNDATION FOR MINE ACTION; FELIPE DANA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A10) 

Document NYTF000020171211edcb0003r



Europe Edition
Briefing
Donald Trump, Laurent Wauquiez, Syria: Your Monday Briefing

By PATRICK BOEHLER 
1,355 words
11 December 2017
06:06
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•ays of angry protests in the Palestinian territories ebbed, but there were rallies in cities across the world to denounce President Trump’ decision to recognize Jerusalem as Israel’ capital. Militant extremist leaders vowed bloodshed. (In Sweden, a masked gang hurled Molotov cocktails at a synagogue.)

Our Jerusalem bureau chief described a city braced for more turmoil. “ou feel like you’e living in jail here,”ne resident told him.

President Emmanuel Macron of France, carving out a more assertive global role, called the American announcement a “angerous threat to peace”s he met with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel. Mr. Netanyahu is expected in Brussels today.

_____

•n the skies over war-torn Syria, Russian fighter jets have flown dangerously close to American warplanes over the past month, risking collisions and confrontation, as rival forces converge on the last stronghold of Islamic State militants in the country.

De-miners face an arduous task in removing improvised explosive devices left behind by the militant group, which took the manufacturing of  such weapons to a new level. (The results included booby-trapped teddy bears and copies of the Quran; and chemical rockets.)

In neighboring Iraq, the residents of Mosul are pulling together to rebuild the city as the government declared it had ousted \b ISIS\b0  from the country.

_____

•ixty insiders told our reporters about President Trump’ daily routines: at least four hours of cable news, a dozen Diet Cokes and an iPhone at the ready for Twitter.

They describe a man who “iews himself less as a titan dominating the world stage than a maligned outsider engaged in a struggle to be taken seriously.”or one, he has expressed fear about how many aides, even his own relatives, could be hurt by the investigation into Russian election meddling.

Separately, his U.N. ambassador, Nikki Haley, said that women who have accused Mr. Trump of sexual misconduct “hould be heard,” a break from the administration’ assertions that the allegations have no merit and should be dismissed.

_____

•aris is vying against Dublin, Frankfurt and Luxembourg in seeking to attract the thousands of workers and jobs that financial firms may have to move out of London before Britain leaves the European Union.

France’ main conservative opposition party, the Republicans, elected  Laurent Wauquiez, 42, a new leader who is skeptical of Mr. Macron’ plans to strengthen the E.U.

And nationalists in Corsica, seeking more autonomy, swept elections for a new regional assembly. (On a recent visit to the Mediterranean island, our correspondent noted the nationalists’ppeal to younger voters.)

_____

• reminder: Amid the world’ turmoil, there is also plenty of joy, inspiration and reason for hope.

Here are seven fantastic things that happened recently (including research that shows men should hug more) that prove it isn’ all bad out there.

Business

•his week, expect the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates and a key U.S. regulator to repeal net neutrality. (Here’ more on the week ahead in business.)

•ome European telecom providers have already pushed the boundaries of internet protections, offering a glimpse at the future American consumers may face.

•olkswagen’ chief executive has become the first German auto boss to suggest publicly that the government in Berlin should consider phasing out subsidies for diesel cars.

•n the latest tech newsletter, our columnists debate how sustainable the Bitcoin boom is. (On Sunday, Bitcoin futures started trading.)

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•he Nobel Peace Prize ceremony in Norway honored the International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons. The group’ leader warned that “ur mutual destruction is only one impulsive tantrum away.”The Guardian]

•n the U.S., video footage showing a police officer shooting an unarmed man has renewed calls for reforms in law enforcement. [The New York Times]

• Senate election in Alabama on Tuesday will test whether voters remain just as willing to shrug off truth-stretching as in last year’ presidential election. [The New York Times]

•n Poland, critics fear that Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the leader of the governing party, is taking the country in an authoritarian direction. [The New York Times]

•ritain’ foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, ended a visit to Tehran without a public resolution on the fate of an imprisoned British-Iranian dual citizen. [The New York Times]

•t the Bolshoi in Moscow, “ureyev”ad its premiere in front of a starry crowd that didn’ include its director, who is under house arrest. [The New York Times]

•hinese spies have tried to infiltrate political and business circles in Europe by using fake LinkedIn profiles, Germany’ intelligence agency has warned. [Associated Press]

•ierce winter weather left thousands of travelers stranded at Heathrow and other European airports. Expect more rain and snow in much of Europe today. [The New York Times]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•hat run you went on this morning? Great! But you still need to watch your diet and lifestyle.

•appy Hanukkah! Here’ how to make the perfect potato latkes.

•tart the week deliciously with a batch of homemade fried chicken.

Noteworthy

•here are no audio tracks with the looping image above, but some people really do “ear”t, suggesting that our senses don’ operate the way we assume.

•ope Francis has suggested an update in the translation of the Lord’ Prayer. It all has to do with “emptation.”

•ome older smokers are turning to vaping. (That may not be a bad idea.)

• motorized plastic monkey that grasps your finger has turned into a must-have gift of the holiday season, in part because of savvy marketing.

•he Golden Globe nominations will be announced today (2:15 p.m. in Berlin and Rome, 8:15 a.m. in New York). Check nytimes.com for live coverage.

Back Story

“reed is good.”oday is the 30th anniversary of the release of the movie “all Street.”

Michael Douglas won an Oscar for his role as Gordon Gekko, the ruthless corporate raider who takes a young stockbroker named Bud Fox, played by Charlie Sheen, under his wing.

The movie was meant as a harsh critique of the excesses of 1980s capitalism —ut became wildly popular with actual Wall Street types. (When it came out, our critic suggested that its moralizing was its weak point: “he movie crashes in a heap of platitudes,”incent Canby wrote.)

The director, Oliver Stone, said that in a twist, many young people told him it inspired them to go work on Wall Street. Even years later, brokers would tell him, “ou’e the man!”

Mr. Stone discussed the film’ legacy in this 2009 Times video. He said it was “isunderstood by some, because it was about a horrible thing that was going on, about how people would worship money at all costs.”

That interview took place as he was preparing to film the sequel, “all Street: Money Never Sleeps,”eleased in 2010. Our critic called it “ corrective, a parody and a sly act of auto-homage.”

Karen Zraick contributed reporting.

_____

This briefing was prepared for the European morning and is updated online. Browse past briefings here.

You can get the briefing delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. We have four global editions, timed for the Americas, Europe, Asia and Australia, and an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.

Nabil Mounzer/European Pressphoto Agency | Russian Defense Ministry Press Service, via Associated Press | Doug Mills/The New York Times | Dmitry Kostyukov for The New York Times | James Yang | Sam Hodgson for The New York Times | NTB Scanpix/Reuters | J. David Ake/Associated Press | Happy Toast | 20th Century Fox 

Document NYTFEED020171211edcb001jl



World; Middle East
In a Blow to Hamas, Israel Destroys Tunnel From Gaza

By ISABEL KERSHNER 
1,167 words
10 December 2017
17:09
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

JERUSALEM —srael said on Sunday that it had destroyed a tunnel dug by Hamas from Gaza into Israeli territory, dealing a substantial blow to one of the main strategic assets in the Islamic militant group’ arsenal.

It was the second cross-border tunnel in six weeks that the Israeli military said it had detected and put out of use with new technologies, leading officials to predict the end of the cross-border threat from such tunnels.

“e have reached new technological capabilities in the struggle against terror tunnels,”srael’ defense minister, Avigdor Lieberman, said in a statement.

Referring to Israeli border communities, he added, “ hope that in the coming months the tunnel threat to the residents of the ‘aza envelope’ill become a thing of the past.”

More immediately, the action against the tunnel injected another element of uncertainty into the simmering tensions over President Trump’ decision to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.

Clashes on Friday and Saturday between Palestinian protesters and Israeli forces in many parts of the West Bank and along the border with Gaza were not as huge as many had feared, and most had died down by Sunday.

The United States ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley, noted the relatively low intensity of the backlash so far as she defended Mr. Trump’ declaration on Sunday.

“verybody said the sky was going to fall,”he said in an interview with Jake Tapper on CNN. “he sky is still up there, it hasn’ fallen.”

Arguing that Mr. Trump’ decision could “ove the ball forward”n the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, she said the administration “id not talk about boundaries or borders”f Israeli sovereignty within the contested city “or a reason. And that’ because whatever is East Jerusalem or any other part, that’ between the Palestinians and the Israelis. That’ not for the Americans to decide.”

There were some further disturbances, however.

The military wing of Hamas vowed to avenge the deaths of two militants killed by Israeli airstrikes, which were themselves a retaliation after a rocket was fired from Gaza into the Israeli border town of Sderot over the weekend. It smashed the window of an empty kindergarten.

“ur battle for Jerusalem continues hour by hour, over the ground and underground,”Hamas’ military wing said in a statement on Sunday.

In the Israeli-occupied West Bank, where the Western-backed Palestinian Authority exercises limited control, a Hamas leader joined his organization’ calls for a “erusalem intifada,”r uprising.

The mainstream Fatah party led by President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority also called for protests after Mr. Trump’ declaration and has disseminated some graphic images  via social media to whip up emotions.

A White House official said on Sunday it was “nfortunate”hat Palestinians were declining to meet with Vice President Mike Pence during a coming trip to the region.

“t’ unfortunate that the Palestinian Authority is walking away again from an opportunity to discuss the future of the region, but the administration remains undeterred in its efforts to help achieve peace between Israelis and Palestinians, and our peace team remains hard at work putting together a plan,”aid Jarrod Agen, a deputy chief of staff and spokesman for Pence.

In Jerusalem, meanwhile, a Palestinian man in his 20s stabbed an Israeli security guard at the central bus station, severely wounding him, the police and medics said. The assailant was arrested at the scene.

A surge of Palestinian stabbings, shootings and car ramming attacks that began in October 2015 has claimed the lives of about 40 Israelis and others, including two American visitors. More than 250 Palestinians were killed during the same period, according to the Palestinian Ministry of Health, mostly while carrying out or trying to carry out attacks, by Israel’ count.

Most of the attacks on Israelis were carried out by so-called lone wolves, acting without the assistance of known Palestinian organizations and, in many cases, without any particular political affiliation. The violence had largely petered out over the past year.

Lt. Col. Jonathan Conricus, a spokesman for the Israeli military, said the tunnel destroyed on Sunday had been monitored by the Israelis for months. The decision to incapacitate it now, he said, despite the current tensions over Jerusalem, stemmed from what he called “he unknown part of the equation.”

“hose who are responsible for protecting Israeli civilians have to decide every day that goes by if it is worth waiting,”e said. The military, he added, “oes not seek to escalate the situation.”

During the 2014 Gaza war, several Israeli soldiers were ambushed and killed by militants who emerged from underground tunnels. The Israeli authorities say the tunnels violate Israeli sovereignty and threaten civilians living in the border area.

The latest to be destroyed extended hundreds of yards into Israeli territory, according to the military, and ended in open farmland about a mile from the nearest Israeli village.

Israel has invested heavily in trying to thwart tunneling. It recently went public with its plans for a subterranean barrier, has been using virtual-reality systems to simulate fighting in tunnels and is training troops in mock-ups of mazelike underground networks.

Military and defense officials did not elaborate on the new tunnel detection and demolition system, but said it was a combined effort involving intelligence agencies, combat and engineering forces. Mr. Lieberman attributed the recent successes to the military, the Ministry of Defense and the defense industries.

The previous tunnel operation was in late October. The military identified what it said was a tunnel belonging to Islamic Jihad, which sometimes rivals Hamas, the dominant force in Gaza, but joins it in battle against Israel.

That time, Israel destroyed the tunnel by bombing it. Up to a dozen Islamic Jihad militants were killed in the tunnel’ collapse, as were two Hamas militants carrying out what the group called a rescue mission. It was the deadliest cross-border event since the 50 days of fighting in 2014.

This time, the Israeli military used a new, quiet and unspecified method of neutralizing a tunnel, and said it knew of no casualties.

* Responding to Rocket Fire, Israel Launches Airstrikes Into Gaza

* Unity Deal Offers Hope for Palestinians and a Respite for Gaza

* Israel and Militants Trade Deadly Attacks in Gaza

* Protests in Lebanon Near U.S. Embassy After Trump’ Jerusalem Decision

* Terrorist Groups Vow Bloodshed over Jerusalem Decision. \b ISIS\b0 ? Less So.

Israeli police officers holding a suspect at the scene of a stabbing attack in Jerusalem on Sunday. | Sebastian Scheiner/Associated Press | Palestinian protesters opposite Israeli heavy machinery on Sunday after a tunnel across the Israel-Gaza border was discovered. | Mahmud Hams/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Protesters running away from tear gas fired by Israeli troops in the West Bank city of Ramallah on Sunday. | Nasser Shiyoukhi/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020171210edca001rx



Retro Report
U.S.
From 200 Years Ago, a Lesson About Mass Killings

By CLYDE HABERMAN 
717 words
11 December 2017
00:30
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The scene as described is painfully familiar. Someone snaps, for whatever reason, and sets off on an “ggressive, homicidal, frenzied attack.”n short order, “ lot of people lie dead, and there’ blood everywhere.”

Those words could have readily applied to the American cascade of shooting rampages. But the speaker, Geoffrey Robinson, a professor of Southeast Asian history and politics at the University of California, Los Angeles, was instead offering a glimpse of what life was sometimes like two centuries ago in lands that are the modern Malaysia and Indonesia.

A man —t was almost always a man —ould feel he had endured an unbearable indignity. After a period of brooding, he lashed out by attacking everyone in sight with knives or other sharp weapons, hacking away until fellow villagers or the authorities finally killed him.

This was the true meaning of running amok, a word derived from the Malay “engamok,”hich roughly means making a furious, desperate charge. For Professor Robinson, there are unmistakable parallels between those long-ago “mokers”nd today’ mass killers in the United States, and also possible lessons to be learned. Behavior patterns are not immutable, he told Retro Report, a series of video documentaries examining how past developments inform modern events. By the end of the 19th century, Malay men mostly stopped running amok.

In this installment, Retro Report explores how the change came about and whether there is hope for the same in violence-plagued America.

For now, the picture is unquestionably grim. Hundreds of mass shootings occur every year, most of them receiving little or no national attention. Gun Violence Archive, an online tracker of the mayhem, defines that type of shooting as an assault in which four or more people are killed or wounded. The archive recorded 324 such incidents nationwide this year through November, with at least 415 people killed and 1,725 wounded.

Our society is, obviously, heavily armed. So were the Malays of the past, with daggers, swords and spears. There was even an honorable quality to a man’ running amok, knowing that it would almost surely end in his own death. “e would become part of the story of that village and the story of his family,”rofessor Robinson said. There was, he said, a certain “ura”o it, not unlike the notoriety that many of today’ mass killers seem to seek.

That aura faded during colonial rule in Malaya and the Dutch East Indies. The authorities changed tactics, discouraging villagers and the local police from killing a man who ran wild. Instead, Professor Robinson said, they arrested him or packed him off to an institution. That drained the rampage of heroic quality. “ventually,”e said, “t loses its appeal.”

Whether comparable tactics can work in the United States is in question. For starters, some mass killers turn their guns on themselves right after their carnage, so prison or a mental hospital is out of the picture. And the British and Dutch colonialists had no Bill of Rights to obey. The Second Amendment complicates any attempt to confiscate the arsenal of even a man known to be deranged, and the First Amendment makes it virtually impossible to stop news organizations from writing extensively about a mass killer —nd possibly creating copycats in the process.

Nonetheless, a reason to study the Malay experience for Professor Robinson is to learn how perhaps the past might be prevented from dictating the future. Mass killing, he said, “s not an irreparable kind of problem of the American psyche or American society. These things change.”

The video with this article is part of a documentary series presented by The New York Times. The video project was started with a grant from Christopher Buck. Retro Report, led by Kyra Darnton, is a nonprofit video news organization that aims to provide a thoughtful counterweight to today’ 24/7 news cycle. Previous episodes are at nytimes.com/retroreport. To suggest ideas for future reports, email retroreport@nytimes.com.

* In a Deadly Obsession, Food Is the Enemy

* Questioning Evolution: The Push to Change Science Class

* What Doomsday Cults Can Teach Us About \b ISIS\b0  Today

Man running amok is chased, 19th century | Alamy Photo 

Document NYTFEED020171210edca0040h



World; Middle East
Protests in Lebanon Near U.S. Embassy After Trump’ Jerusalem Decision

By NADA HOMSI and ANNE BARNARD 
855 words
10 December 2017
12:28
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon —ebanese security forces on Sunday fired tear gas and water cannons into crowds that had gathered near the United States Embassy, in a sign that protests against President Trump’ decision to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel may be escalating.

Thousands of protesters chanted slogans against Mr. Trump’ orders, which involves moving the embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, with some throwing rocks and setting tires and a large trash container on fire outside the embassy’ highly secured gated compound in a suburb north of the capital, Beirut.

Some protesters tried to rip the barbed wire off a fence, but they were repelled by the security forces, who fired a barrage of tear gas and sent them running, with many choking from the smoke, vomiting or fainting.

Mr. Trump’ decision, which dealt a blow to the idea of a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital, has been widely condemned across the Arab world and beyond. The Arab League, which held an emergency meeting in Cairo, on Sunday denounced Mr. Trump’ announcement as a “angerous violation of international law.”

Germany and France criticized the move, and North Korea denounced Mr. Trump for what it called his “eckless, wicked act”nd called him a “otard”new, according to the state-run KCNA news agency.

In Indonesia, the world’ most populous Muslim country, 10,000 people rallied outside the American Embassy in the capital, Jakarta. It was the third and largest demonstration in that country against the Jerusalem decision by Mr. Trump.

Indonesia’ president, Joko Widodo, has said that Mr. Trump’ move was a violation of United Nations resolutions. The country has been a longtime supporter of Palestinians and has no diplomatic ties with Israel. In a statement, Indonesia’ Prosperous Justice Party described the decision as “ form of humiliation and provocation against Muslims all over the world.”

The Taliban, Hamas and Shia extremist leaders also vowed bloodshed after the move, though the Islamic State has played down its significance and criticized fellow extremist groups.

In Lebanon, Prime Minister Saad Hariri and President Michel Aoun both condemned Mr. Trump’ decision. Mr. Hariri said the United States move foreshadowed dangers for the region.

In a post on Twitter on Wednesday, Mr. Hariri wrote that Lebanon “eclares on this day the highest degree of solidarity with the Palestinian people and its right to establish an independent state with Jerusalem as its capital.”

Foreign ministers from Arab states called on Sunday for the United States to reverse its decision, which they said put Washington on the side of the occupation. In a two-page resolution, the ministers meeting in Egypt said they would seek a United Nations Security Council meeting to address the issue. But the United States has veto power on any resolution.

The Arab League’ chief, Ahmed Aboul Gheit, said at a news conference: “erusalem has been occupied for 50 years. This is an extended battle, a battle that will be escalated.”

In Lebanon, the security forces clashed with protesters who were trying to break through a roadblock to the American Embassy on the main road from Dbayeh, a coastal town, to Awkar.

The protesters, bused in from around Beirut, included Lebanese and Palestinians. Some chanted, “erusalem is Arab! Palestine is Arab!”nd other slogans. Many waved Palestinian flags and the flags of Lebanese parties, Arab nationalists and Hezbollah, the Lebanese militia and political party formed to fight Israel.

As the security forces confronted other protesters with batons, some retaliated by throwing rocks and glass bottles. One man drop-kicked an officer to the ground. Several people were injured after being hit directly by tear gas canisters, witnesses said. One man who said he had been hit by birdshot was seen bleeding from two places in his back.

Lebanon is home to more than 500,000 Palestinian refugees, many of whom fled what is now Israel and the West Bank during the wars of 1948 and 1967 or are descendants of those who did.

They live under tight restrictions imposed by the Lebanese government, which has barred them from more than 30 professions as part of efforts to avoid normalizing their status in Lebanon.

There have been daily protests in the camps since Mr. Trump’ announcement, and Hezbollah has called for a larger demonstration in southern Beirut on Monday.

* The Jerusalem Issue, Explained

* Rallying Cry of Jerusalem May Have Lost Force in Arab World

* Terrorist Groups Vow Bloodshed over Jerusalem Decision. \b ISIS\b0 ? Less So.

* Jerusalem: It’ Tense, Crowded and Can Feel Like a Jail

Protesters trying to remove barbed wire blocking a road leading to the United States Embassy, east of Beirut, Lebanon, on Sunday. | Bilal Hussein/Associated Press | Lebanese soldiers clashed with protesters. | Wael Hamzeh/European Pressphoto Agency | The crowd in Beirut pushing to enter a gate near the United States Embassy. | Bilal Hussein/Associated Press | Security forces used water to disperse protesters. | Anwar Amro/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171210edca0012x



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
Sunday Review Desk; SECTSR
The Man Who Danced on the Heads of Snakes

By ROBERT F. WORTH 
1,069 words
10 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

For those who knew him, it is hard to believe that Ali Abdullah Saleh, Yemen's longtime ruler and one of the most cunning autocrats of our time, is finally gone.

Time and time again, Mr. Saleh seemed to outmaneuver death. He dodged a blizzard of bullets over the years, along with a bombing that left his skin mottled, his right hand stiffened like a claw. He'd held power for so long -- even after his nominal ouster from the presidency in 2011, he remained a dominant force in Yemen -- that he seemed almost welded to the landscape.

Mr. Saleh was in many ways the quintessential Arab dictator. He was not as brutal as Saddam Hussein of Iraq or the Assads of Syria, not as flashy as Libya's Muammar el-Qaddafi. But he may have been the greatest master at the cynical politics they all deployed: the art of making oneself indispensable by destroying or corrupting everyone and everything else. This wily survivor's game staved off revolt for decades in the Arab world. It also helped to doom the 2011 uprisings, leaving us with the sad landscape of civil war, jihadism and economic collapse today in the Middle East.

The last time I saw him, in January 2014, Mr. Saleh had the look of an embittered patriarch. He was sitting at a round table in the vast courtyard of his palatial house in Sana, Yemen's capital. He wore a suit and tie, as always, and issued commands to underlings in a guttural, contemptuous voice. He looked unusually thin, and the skin on his neck and wrist was blotched from skin grafts. It was amazing he was alive at all: The bombing of the mosque at the presidential palace in June 2011 had burnt him badly and killed several of his guards.

After I walked out of his compound that day, I wrote an article lamenting the poisonous influence he still wielded on his divided, beautiful, desperately poor country. I expected him to hate it. I was wrong. He loved the article, so much that he had it reprinted on the cover of his own political party's newspaper, with a photograph of the two of us talking. It didn't take long to see why: Mr. Saleh didn't mind being called evil as long as you called him powerful. He wasn't in it for the money, though he did pocket billions of his country's (relatively meager) oil profits. He didn't binge on women or drugs. He didn't even seem to care that much about posterity. He wanted power, at any cost.

Mr. Saleh was not without patriotism: He unified North and south Yemen in 1990, an achievement that won him gratitude from many of his countrymen. His long reign, coming after the coups and counter-coups of the 1970s, brought his country a measure of stability, that familiar lipstick of tyrants.

But he lasted only because he learned how to trade on Yemen's misfortunes and amplify them. Even Al Qaeda became a cash cow for Mr. Saleh, drawing American military help and training. He thrived on Yemen's tribal conflicts, setting enemies against each other and expertly stirring the pot. He called this technique ''tawazun,'' the Arabic word for ''balancing,'' and he was proud of it.

''Ruling Yemen is hard,'' Mr. Saleh told me when we first met, in 2008. ''I always say it's like dancing on the heads of snakes.'' Perhaps he thought those words would convey a kingly gravitas. They didn't. He sounded brittle and impatient, like an addict.

His grip was finally broken in 2011, when the vast demonstrations of that year -- spreading across the Arab world from Tunis and Cairo -- forced him to step down. He could have gone anywhere, bought anything. Instead, he stayed in Yemen, nursing dreams of revenge.

Mr. Saleh's last act was ingeniously cynical, and as dark as the final scenes of ''Macbeth.'' In 2013, he reached out to the Houthis, a rebel group he had brutally suppressed during his years in power. The Houthis had every reason to hate Mr. Saleh. But they needed his political skill, and they shared a common enemy: the government installed in Mr. Saleh's place. Together, they reconquered the country in 2014, forcing its nominal leader -- the man who had succeeded Mr. Saleh as president -- to flee to Saudi Arabia early the following year.

This ploy had predictable and tragic consequences. The triumph of the Houthis, who are backed by Iran, was bound to provoke an intervention by Saudi Arabia, Yemen's neighbor to the north. The result is that Yemen, a country where sectarian conflict was almost unknown until recent years, is now a battleground in the same toxic Sunni-Shiite struggle that has overtaken so much of the Middle East. The Saudi-led bombing campaign has killed thousands of civilians. Famine has ravaged the country, and so has the largest and fastest-spreading cholera outbreak in modern history.

In the end, it seems, Mr. Saleh was done in by his own opportunism. After losing a gun battle for control of the huge mosque in Sana that bears his name over the weekend, he signaled his willingness to change sides, yet again, if the Saudis would stop blockading and bombing Yemen. It was too late. The Houthis smelled betrayal and attacked Mr. Saleh's compound. The finale was an ignominious photograph of an old man, skull split open, in the back of a pickup truck.

Yemen's people will gain nothing from his death. His followers will seek revenge, sowing more chaos. The main factions in Yemen's war -- echoing the sectarian grudge match across the Middle East -- show no interest in compromise. The human cost, in hunger and disease, is likely to worsen; a settlement will grow more elusive. The dance is over, and the snakes have won.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Robert F. Worth, a former New York Times correspondent, is the author of ''A Rage for Order: The Middle East in Turmoil, from Tahrir Square to ISIS.''

Ali Abdullah Saleh in 2011, when he was president of Yemen. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MUHAMMED MUHEISEN/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020171210edca00095



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Over Syria, Close Calls With Russian Warplanes

By ERIC SCHMITT 
1,297 words
10 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

AL UDEID AIR BASE, Qatar -- Russian fighter jets have flown dangerously close to American warplanes in eastern Syria over the past month -- including one near-collision -- in what American officials say is a pattern of daily Russian violations of an agreement to separate rival forces converging on the last main pocket of Islamic State militants in the country.

In one instance, two Air Force A-10 attack planes flying east of the Euphrates River nearly collided head-on with a Russian Su-24 Fencer just 300 feet away -- a knife's edge when all the planes were streaking at more than 350 miles per hour. The A-10s swerved to avoid the Russian aircraft, which was supposed to fly only west of the Euphrates. Other Russian planes have flown within striking distance or directly over allied ground forces for up to 30 minutes, escalating tensions and the risk of a shootdown, American officials said.

Since American and Russian commanders agreed last month to fly on opposite sides of a 45-mile stretch of the Euphrates to prevent accidents in eastern Syria's increasingly congested skies, Russian warplanes have violated that deal half a dozen times a day, according to American commanders. They say it is an effort by Moscow to test American resolve, bait Air Force pilots into reacting rashly, and help the Syrian Army solidify territorial gains ahead of diplomatic talks aimed at resolving the country's nearly seven-year-old war.

''There's risk there,'' Lt. Gen. Jeffrey L. Harrigian, the air commander for Syria and Iraq, said of the violations, in an interview at his headquarters at the Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar. ''Their desire is to set this up for the end state for Syria. We've got to be cleareyed. The Russians are here to support the Syrian government.''

The perilous air maneuvers come as Moscow is seeking to expand its reach in the Middle East. Russia has cemented its military presence in Syria since rushing to help the government of President Bashar al-Assad in the summer of 2015. Russia recently struck a deal with Egypt to allow Russian military jets to use its airspace and bases. Russian submarines have stepped up patrols in the Mediterranean.

In recent weeks, Russian bombers have intensified airstrikes against Islamic State militants in eastern Syria. There have been reports that the Russians have met with Syrian Kurdish fighters -- the backbone of the American-supported militia battling the Islamic State -- with offers of military assistance.

President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia declared on Wednesday that the Islamic State in eastern Syria had suffered a ''complete defeat'' -- a boast that American officials said exaggerated Moscow's role and seemed to ignore the contentious efforts to rout the remaining 3,000 Islamic State disciples still on the run.

Russian officials did not respond to an email seeking comment.

Russia and the United States back separate offensives against the Islamic State, also called ISIS, in eastern Syria, both of which are advancing in oil-rich Deir al-Zour Province bordering Iraq. The assaults are converging on Islamic State holdouts from opposite sides of the Euphrates, which bisects the province. Syrian Army troops backed by Russian air power and Iranian militia are advancing along the western side of the river; Syrian Arab and Kurdish fighters, supported by American warplanes and Special Operations advisers, are pushing along the eastern river banks.

The shrinking physical distance between the two forces has raised the risk of inadvertent clashes, a problem that Russia and the United States have tried -- at least in principle, if not always practice -- to avoid.

Two years ago, the Russian and American militaries established a special hotline to help prevent disasters in the air. Every day, an American Air Force officer calls his Russian counterpart at an air base in Latakia, Syria, to head off, or ''deconflict,'' as the military says, any potential problems over Syria.

Several months ago, a regular call was started between a Russian officer and an American officer at a command center in Kuwait to deconflict ground movements in eastern Syria.

Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has spoken to Gen. Valery V. Gerasimov, the chief of the Russian general staff, about a dozen times in the past year, most recently on Wednesday, ''to avoid miscalculation and to promote transparency in areas where our militaries are operating in close proximity,'' said General Dunford's spokesman, Col. Patrick Ryder.

The daily phone calls between the air bosses have remained professional, but the dialogue does not always reflect what American commanders in the region see in the skies, prompting as many as a dozen additional calls a day from the Americans demanding explanations for Russian violations.

''We've had contentious calls,'' said Col. Jeff Hogan, deputy commander of the air operations center at the Qatar base, who speaks to his Russian counterpart daily through a translator. ''The Russians have a vote in Syria, and sometimes people forget that.''

In early November, as the airspace constricted over the shrinking battlefield, the two sides agreed to the Euphrates as the dividing line for operations. If either military needed to cross the river for any reason, the agreement was to call ahead first.

That did not happen on Nov. 15, when the two A-10s dodged the Russian Fencer. Nor did it happen the next two days, Nov. 16 and Nov. 17, when a Russian Su-30 Flanker flew 1,000 feet directly below A-10s, both times crossing into airspace east of the Euphrates River.

On Nov. 17, two American F-22 Raptors encountered an armed Russian Su-24 Fencer that had crossed into the airspace east of the Euphrates, and made three passes directly over allied ground forces for 20 minutes.

During that time, the F-22 pilots attempted to contact the Fencer five times by radio with no response or reaction. The Air Force pilots showed restraint, but given that the actions of the Su-24 could have reasonably been interpreted as threatening to the American aircraft, the F-22 pilots would have been with their rights to fire in self-defense, officials at the Qatar air base said.

A flurry of phone calls between the two sides temporarily eased tensions, with the Russians claiming some violations were brief overflights to allow them safer flight paths to strike ISIS targets on the side of the river. Still, the violations have continued.

''It's become increasingly tough for our pilots to discern whether Russian pilots are deliberately testing or baiting us into reacting, or if these are just honest mistakes,'' said Lt. Col. Damien Pickart, the command's spokesman. ''The greatest concern is that we could shoot down a Russian aircraft because its actions are seen as a threat to our air or ground forces.''

The setting was similar last June in southern Syria, when American warplanes shot down a Syrian Air Force Su-22 and two Iranian-made drones after they had threatened American-backed militia forces.

The risky flying behavior of the Russians has complicated the American hunt for the remaining Islamic State fighters in a pocket near the border with Iraq, forcing General Harrigian to pull some fighter jets off attack missions to protect unarmed surveillance planes hovering over the 15-square mile piece of ISIS-controlled territory.

General Harrigian said only one main enemy lurks in the deserts of eastern Syria. ''We're all here killing ISIS,'' he said. ''We're not here to fight the Russians.''

An image taken from a video of a Russian bomber striking Islamic State targets in Syria on Dec. 3. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RUSSIAN DEFENSE MINISTRY, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020171210edca0007g



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Iraqi Premier Declares End Of  ISIS  War

By MARGARET COKER and FALIH HASSAN 
760 words
10 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
14
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq declared victory over the Islamic State on Saturday, announcing the end of more than three years of battles to regain control over nearly one-third of the country that had been under the terrorist group's dominion.

Mr. Abadi's carefully calibrated statement came months after armed forces wrested back control over Iraq's major urban areas, notably its second-largest city, Mosul, and shifted focus to mopping up remnants of the militants who had escaped or gone underground in the vast desert border areas between Iraq and Syria.

''Our forces fully control the Iraqi-Syrian border, and thus we can announce the end of the war against Daesh,'' Mr. Abadi said, using the Arabic acronym for the Islamic State, known as ISIS or ISIL.

''Our battle was with the enemy that wanted to kill our civilization, but we have won with our unity and determination,'' he said.

The Iraqi senior military commander in charge of operations against the Islamic State confirmed that his forces, supported by the American-led coalition, had regained control of the border areas. Military leaders have said they were the last part of the country where ISIS' supporters could muster any organized resistance.

The prime minister's announcement heralded a significant turnaround for the nation's armed forces and political leadership from the summer of 2014, when the military, hollowed out by years of corruption and inept political decisions, crumbled under the juggernaut of the Islamic State's once-formidable fighting force.

By June that year, the terrorist group had seized control of Iraq's Sunni-dominated north and west, putting more than four million Iraqis under its control. At first, some of those Iraqis were willing supporters of the insurgent force, in large part because of the years of sectarian violence and abuse they had experienced from Iraq's Shiite-majority politicians.

But the puritanical punishments and cruelties ISIS inflicted soon made the group a feared and unwelcome overlord.

Now, Iraqis around the capital and many parts of the liberated regions say they have a newfound pride in their security forces, as well as in their government. Mr. Abadi is routinely cited by supporters and rivals alike as Iraq's most popular and trusted politician.

Still, security analysts and military commanders warned that the end of large-scale military maneuvers did not mean the end of the Islamic State threat.

Hours before Mr. Abadi's speech, a bomb suspected of being planted by insurgents exploded in the center of Tikrit, the hometown of former President Saddam Hussein and an area of antigovernment activity for many years, before the creation of the Islamic State's so-called caliphate.

Among the urgent challenges officials now face to ensure security and stability are reconstruction plans for cities like Mosul, which was destroyed by the fighting, as well as reconciliation programs for the country's Sunni and Shiite communities, said Hussein Allawi, a professor of national security at Al Nahrain University in Baghdad.

Some three million Iraqis remain displaced by the war, and municipal services have yet to be restored in many liberated areas.

''The battles against Daesh are over, but the war is not,'' Mr. Allawi said.

Hakim al-Zamili, who leads Parliament's security and defense committee, estimates that 20,000 hard-core supporters of the Islamic State remain in the country, hidden among the large groups of displaced people or in remote areas of the western deserts.

Iraqi intelligence and other officials over recent weeks have documented the rise of a possibly new violent Islamist movement in the country, which has suffered attacks from various factions of jihadist movements over the past 15 years.

Mr. Zamili and other military officials cautioned that Iraq must devote significant intelligence resources to find and track down these extremists, and that continued military assistance from the American-led coalition was vital to this continuing mission. More than 5,000 American troops are currently based in Iraq, in addition to military trainers from Britain, Italy, Australia and other countries.

''Iraq still needs the intelligence cooperation with the international coalition and neighboring countries because there are many places for ISIS to hide,'' said Wathiq al-Hashimi, the chairman of the Iraqi Group for Strategic Studies, an independent think tank in Baghdad. ''ISIS commanders are now in different countries in the world.''

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020171210edca0006e



World; Middle East
Responding to Rocket Fire, Israel Launches Airstrikes Into Gaza

By REUTERS 
304 words
9 December 2017
17:36
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Israel launched airstrikes into the Gaza Strip on Saturday in response to rocket fire from the enclave. Hamas said two of its gunmen were killed.

Militants fired at least three rockets toward Israeli towns from the Hamas-controlled strip on Friday, which was declared a “ay of rage”y Palestinian factions protesting President Trump’ recognition of Jerusalem as Israel’ capital.

In a statement, the Israeli military said its aircraft targeted four Hamas facilities, including two weapons manufacturing sites, a weapons warehouse and a military compound.

Two Palestinians were killed in clashes with Israeli troops on the Gaza border on Friday, and scores more were wounded there and in the West Bank during protests.

Across the Arab and Muslim worlds, thousands of protesters took to the streets Friday to express solidarity with Palestinians and outrage at Mr. Trump’ reversal of United States policy.

Israel considers all of Jerusalem to be its capital. Palestinians want the eastern part of the city as the capital of a future independent state of their own.

For decades, Washington, like most nations, held back from recognizing Jerusalem as Israel’ capital, saying its status should be determined as part of the Palestinian-Israeli peace process.

The Trump administration argues that the peace process has become moribund, and outdated policies need to be jettisoned to make progress. Mr. Trump also said he would begin the process of moving the United States Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.

* Jerusalem Largely Calm as Region Protests Trump Move

* Terrorist Groups Vow Bloodshed over Jerusalem Decision. \b ISIS\b0 ? Less So.

* U.S. Faces Blunt Criticism at U.N. Over Jerusalem Decree

A Hamas target hit by an Israeli airstrike on Saturday in the northern Gaza Strip. | Mohammed Salem/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020171209edc9002xl



Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
Biggest Cement Maker a Focus in an Inquiry on  ISIS  Finances

By LIZ ALDERMAN 
856 words
9 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

PARIS -- The former chief executive of LafargeHolcim, the world's largest cement maker, and five other top officials are being formally investigated as part of a government inquiry into whether the company helped finance the Islamic State militant group and other armed factions while operating a factory in Syria.

The expanding investigation underscores the difficulty of doing business in war-torn regions, a challenge faced by companies around the world, especially those in the energy and industrial sectors.

Lafarge, a sprawling French multinational with operations in 80 countries, has said that its employees were motivated to keep the Syrian plant running by a ''can-do'' approach. But critics have accused the company of trying to maintain profitability and a presence there, despite the growing danger to its employees.

Investigators questioned Eric Olsen, the former chief executive, on Thursday, a day after he was taken into police custody. They are trying to determine whether he and other company managers placed the lives of workers at the cement factory, in northern Syria, in danger during a civil war.

Mr. Olsen resigned as chief executive in April after an internal inquiry found that managers of Lafarge's Syrian plant had paid armed groups to allow employees to move to and from the factory so that it could continue operating. Lafarge concluded at the time that Mr. Olsen was not responsible for, or aware of, the activity.

Since then, French judges have been examining the extent to which top Lafarge executives knew about the payments, and whether the company may have bought oil linked to the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, in violation of United Nation sanctions and a 2011 European Union embargo. The group seized the plant in September 2014, forcing the Lafarge employees who were there at the time to abandon it.

Police raided the Lafarge headquarters in Paris and an office in Brussels last month, seizing computers and seeking other information related to the case.

Lafarge began producing cement for the Syrian market in 2010 after investing more than 600 million euros, or $708 million at current exchange rates, to refurbish a factory in Jalabiyeh, a town near the Turkish border. The plant had created hundreds of jobs for local residents, generated thousands of tons of cement every day and supported other businesses nearby.

But the security situation in Syria began to deteriorate in 2011 as a civil war broke out after protests against Bashar al-Assad's government. Multinational companies began to pull out of Syria one by one, except for Lafarge.

In the two years that followed, the area near the factory was occupied by a succession of armed groups, including the Al Qaeda affiliate in Syria, the Al Nusra Front. In April 2013, ISIS infiltrated Syria and began advancing across the territory.

At various times, all of these groups interfered with Lafarge employees as they traveled to and from the plant. They also hindered access to supplies needed to keep the plant running, according to a statement by the company in April.

In 2012, Lafarge's local managers started using intermediaries to pay the armed groups to ease the passage of employees and suppliers, the company's internal inquiry found. Lafarge has said it saw little choice if it wanted to keep its operations running, and sought to avoid direct contact with the groups to minimize potential risks that could arise with the Syrian government or other militants.

''Very simply, chaos reigned and it was the task of local management to ensure that the intermediaries did whatever was necessary to secure its supply chain and the free movement of its employees,'' the company said in its statement.

As part of their investigation, French judges are also examining charges brought by a French organization, Sherpa, on behalf of 11 employees. They claim the company endangered their lives by placing them in a high-risk situation as the Islamic State advanced.

Two other former executives from Lafarge's Paris headquarters were placed under investigation this week: Bruno Lafont, the company's chief executive from 2007 to 2015, and Christian Herrault, the former director general, who was responsible for Lafarge's operations in Syria and other countries.

Last week, three former managers of Lafarge's Syrian operations were placed under formal investigation over questions about funds paid to factions that controlled the area where the cement plant was located. Those being investigated include Frééic Jolibois, the plant's director from 2014 to 2016; Bruno Pescheux, who oversaw the plant from 2009 to 2014; and Jean-Claude Veillard, Lafarge's former security director based in Paris.

The case is expected to take months, if not years, to conclude.

Follow Liz Alderman on Twitter: @LizAldermanNYT.

Bruno Lafont, a former chief executive of Lafarge, is one of several company officials under investigation over operations of a plant in Syria. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIC PIERMONT/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (B1); Investigators are looking into Lafarge payments to armed groups to enable its Syrian operations. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTOPHE ENA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (B2) 

Document NYTF000020171209edc90004w



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Terrorist Groups Vow Bloodshed Over Trump's Stance.  ISIS ? Less So.

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
740 words
9 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Osama bin Laden was just 14 when his mother noticed that he had stopped watching his favorite Westerns. She found him fixated instead on news reports about Palestinians, tears streaming down his face as he watched TV in their home in Saudi Arabia.

''In his teenage years, he was the same nice kid,'' his mother related. ''But he was more concerned, sad and frustrated by the situation in Palestine,'' she said, according to Lawrence Wright's account of bin Laden's trajectory and Al Qaeda's rise in his book, ''The Looming Tower.''

The Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza has long been one of the themes invoked by jihadists to push a narrative of Muslim victimhood and to fan an us-versus-them framework. So it's of little surprise that Qaeda affiliates across the world reacted with venom after President Trump this week recognized Jerusalem as Israel's capital, a decision that was also denounced by Arab leaders.

The Taliban, Hamas and Shia extremist leaders also railed against the move.

But the outlier was the Islamic State, which waited until Friday to publish an editorial in its weekly newsletter -- one that appeared to be mainly concerned with critiquing what it saw as hypocritical and self-serving statements by other jihadist groups and Arab leaders.

''How did ISIS respond to US announcement on #JerusalemEmbassy move? Outrage? Nope. Call to jihad? Not really,'' the independent researcher Raphael Gluck wrote on Twitter. He added, ''ISIS takes a stab at rival terror and Islamist groups accusing them of politicizing Palestinian cause to suit their own agendas.''

The article published by the Islamic State began: ''Sixty years and Jerusalem has been in the hands of the Jews, and it is only now that people cry when the Crusaders announced today as their capital,'' according to a translation provided by the Washington-based SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors the group's propaganda.

''Are these cries over an issue to which they are accustomed to crying every time it is mentioned?'' it added. ''Or is it a new opportunity for the traders of faith and the fraudulent ones to raise their voices again?''

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS, argued that the focus should instead be on working to defeat the Arab countries ringing Israel, which they say ''surround it the same way a bracelet surrounds the wrist, protecting the Jews from the strikes of the mujahideen.''

Even as the Islamic State's official line played down the White House move, the group's followers in chat rooms on the messaging app Telegram have busied themselves making revenge posters.

One shows Israeli and American flags burning in a pyre, with the signature dome of the Old City's Al Aqsa Mosque pictured in the background. Images of Al Aqsa -- one of the holiest sites in Islam, which is also revered by Jews as the Temple Mount -- have been used in generations of jihadist propaganda.

''Wait for violent attacks on American and Jewish embassies by the wolves of the Islamic State,'' the text alongside the images said.

That message was more in line with that of other terrorist groups, especially Al Qaeda. The world's perceived indifference to the plight of the Palestinians is proof, jihadists say, of the second-class status of Muslims, and evidence that only through violence will Muslims regain their dignity.

The spokesman for the Shabab, Al Qaeda's branch in East Africa, called Mr. Trump's decision on Jerusalem ''an aggression against Islam.'' He urged its followers to pick up arms in revenge, according to SITE Intelligence.

''The Jews do not have the right to a grain of sand of Palestine and Jerusalem,'' Qaeda's affiliate in Yemen railed. Qaeda's largest branch, in Syria, said, ''We emphasize that whatever was taken by force can only be retrieved by force.''

And from Mali to Yemen to Afghanistan, jihadist groups ridiculed Mr. Trump. On his Telegram channel, Abu Muhammad al-Maqdisi, an influential Qaeda ideologue, posted a YouTube clip from a campaign rally last year, when Mr. Trump appeared startled after hearing a commotion behind him. He called Mr. Trump a ''coward'' and an easy mark, urging future terrorists to do their best to ''surprise'' him.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020171209edc900034



World; Middle East
Terrorist Groups Vow Bloodshed over Jerusalem Decision.  ISIS ? Less So.

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
781 words
9 December 2017
03:39
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Osama bin Laden was just 14 when his mother noticed that he had stopped watching his favorite Westerns. She found him fixated instead on news reports about Palestinians, tears streaming down his face as he watched TV in their home in Saudi Arabia.

“n his teenage years, he was the same nice kid,”is mother related. “ut he was more concerned, sad and frustrated by the situation in Palestine,”he said, according to Lawrence Wright’ account of bin Laden’ trajectory and Al Qaeda’ rise in his book, “he Looming Tower.”

The Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza has long been one of the themes invoked by jihadists to push a narrative of Muslim victimhood and to fan an us-versus-them framework. So it’ of little surprise that Qaeda affiliates across the world reacted with venom after President Trump this week recognized Jerusalem as Israel’ capital, a decision that was also denounced by Arab leaders.

The Taliban, Hamas and Shia extremist leaders also railed against the move.

But the outlier was the Islamic State, which waited until Friday to publish an editorial in its weekly newsletter —ne that appeared to be mainly concerned with critiquing what it saw as hypocritical and self-serving statements by other jihadist groups and Arab leaders.

“ow did ISIS respond to US announcement on #JerusalemEmbassy move? Outrage? Nope. Call to jihad? Not really,”he independent researcher Raphael Gluck wrote on Twitter. He added, “ISIS takes a stab at rival terror and Islamist groups accusing them of politicizing Palestinian cause to suit their own agendas.”

The article published by the Islamic State began: “ixty years and Jerusalem has been in the hands of the Jews, and it is only now that people cry when the Crusaders announced today as their capital,”ccording to a translation provided by the Washington-based SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors the group’ propaganda.

“re these cries over an issue to which they are accustomed to crying every time it is mentioned?”t added. “r is it a new opportunity for the traders of faith and the fraudulent ones to raise their voices again?”

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS, argued that the focus should instead be on working to defeat the Arab countries ringing Israel, which they say “urround it the same way a bracelet surrounds the wrist, protecting the Jews from the strikes of the mujahideen.”

Even as the Islamic State’ official line played down the White House move, the group’ followers in chat rooms on the messaging app Telegram have busied themselves making revenge posters.

One shows Israeli and American flags burning in a pyre, with the signature dome of the Old City’ Al Aqsa Mosque pictured in the background. Images of Al Aqsa —ne of the holiest sites in Islam, which is also revered by Jews as the Temple Mount —ave been used in generations of jihadist propaganda.

“ait for violent attacks on American and Jewish embassies by the wolves of the Islamic State,”he text alongside the images said.

That message was more in line with that of other terrorist groups, especially Al Qaeda. The world’ perceived indifference to the plight of the Palestinians is proof, jihadists say, of the second-class status of Muslims, and evidence that only through violence will Muslims regain their dignity.

The spokesman for the Shabab, Al Qaeda’ branch in East Africa, called Mr. Trump’ decision on Jerusalem “n aggression against Islam.”e urged its followers to pick up arms in revenge, according to SITE Intelligence.

“he Jews do not have the right to a grain of sand of Palestine and Jerusalem,”aeda’ affiliate in Yemen railed. Qaeda’ largest branch, in Syria, said, “e emphasize that whatever was taken by force can only be retrieved by force.”

And from Mali to Yemen to Afghanistan, jihadist groups ridiculed Mr. Trump. On his Telegram channel, Abu Muhammad al-Maqdisi, an influential Qaeda ideologue, posted a YouTube clip from a campaign rally last year, when Mr. Trump appeared startled after hearing a commotion behind him. He called Mr. Trump a “oward”nd an easy mark, urging future terrorists to do their best to “urprise”im.

* U.S. Faces Blunt Criticism at U.N. Over Jerusalem Decree

* Did Trump Kill Off a Two-State Solution? He Says No, Palestinians Say Yes

* Jerusalem Largely Calm as Region Protests Trump Move

The Old City of Jerusalem. Jihadists used such images in protesting President Trump’ decision to consider Jerusalem the capital of Israel. | Ronen Zvulun/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020171209edc9001e1



Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; SECTC
Times Critics' Top Books of 2017

By DWIGHT GARNER, JENNIFER SENIOR, PARUL SEHGAL and JANET MASLIN 
4,717 words
8 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
19
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

This was a year when books -- like the rest of us -- tried to keep up with the news, and did a pretty good job of it. Novels about global interconnectedness, political violence and migration; deeply reported nonfiction accounts of racial and economic strife in the United States; stories both imagined and real about gender, desire and the role of beauty in the natural world. There were several worthy works of escapism, of course, but the literary world mostly reflected the gravity and tumult of the larger world. Below, The New York Times's three daily book critics -- Dwight Garner, Jennifer Senior and Parul Sehgal -- share their thoughts about their favorites among the books they reviewed this year, each list alphabetical by author. Janet Maslin, a former staff critic who remains a frequent contributor to The Times, also lists her favorites.

The year in books included a historic change at The Times. Michiko Kakutani stepped down as our chief book critic in July. Kakutani began her role as a critic in 1983, and won the Pulitzer Prize in 1998. This year, among other noteworthy books, Kakutani reviewed George Saunders's ''Lincoln in the Bardo,'' Mohsin Hamid's ''Exit West,'' Omar El Akkad's ''American War'' and Ayobami Adebayo's ''Stay With Me.'' -- John Williams, Daily Books Editor and Staff Writer

Dwight Garner

Each of these books, in a hard year, was one I didn't know I needed until it appeared.

'SELECTION DAY' By Aravind Adiga (Scribner). This is Adiga's third novel, and it offers proof that his Man Booker Prize, for ''The White Tiger'' in 2008, was no fluke. He is not merely a confident storyteller but also a thinker, a skeptic, a wily entertainer and a thorn in the side of orthodoxy and cant. This is a cricket novel that maintains a running critique of the sport, and a moving novel about fathers and sons. It's a book about religion and its tribal cruelties, and it bears bad tidings. Adiga's take on the world makes you consider what the apocalypse might sound like as reported by the BBC's Hindi service. (Read the review.)

'THE VIRGINIA STATE COLONY FOR EPILEPTICS AND FEEBLEMINDED: POEMS' By Molly McCully Brown (Persea). This is Brown's first book of poems, and it is part history lesson, part sénce and part ode to dread. The title refers to an actual place, a government-run hospital that, in the early part of the 20th century, sterilized many of its patients without their consent. The author grew up near the institution, and it has long haunted her. Brown's blank verse is supple yet restrained; it contains all its essential oils. In its formal design, and in its interest in art and history, the book resembles a slender ghost version of James Agee's text for ''Let Us Now Praise Famous Men.'' (Read the review.)

'TRANSIT' By Rachel Cusk (Farrar, Straus and Giroux). Faye, the divorced writer who is the narrator of Cusk's transfixing latest novel, is the same woman we met in the author's previous novel, ''Outline.'' These two short books are part of a projected trilogy, and together they're already an achievement: dense, aphoristic, philosophically acute novels that read like Iris Murdoch thrice-distilled. We watch Faye move through her days, speaking to friends, old lovers, real estate agents, salon employees, fellow writers, construction workers. Cusk's writing offers the iron-rich pleasure of voice instead of style. (Read the review.)

'MANHATTAN BEACH' By Jennifer Egan (Scribner). Egan's immensely satisfying new novel, the follow-up to ''A Visit From the Goon Squad,'' which won a Pulitzer Prize, is a dreadnought of a World War II-era historical novel, bristling with armaments yet intimate in tone. It primarily tells the story of Anna Kerrigan, a young woman who works at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, where women have been allowed to hold jobs that belonged only to men. This is an old-fashioned page-turner, tweaked by this witty and sophisticated writer so that you sometimes feel she has retrofitted sleek new engines inside a craft owned for too long by James Jones and Herman Wouk. (Read the review.)

'SUNSHINE STATE: ESSAYS' By Sarah Gerard (Harper Perennial). Thanks to books by John Jeremiah Sullivan (''Pulphead'') and Leslie Jamison (''The Empathy Exams'') and a handful of other young writers, the essay collection has new impetus and drama in American letters. Gerard's book deserves to be talked about in this company. One of its themes is the way Florida can unmoor you and make you reach for shoddy, off-the-shelf solutions to your psychic unease. This book's first essay, in particular, is a knockout, a lurid red heart wrapped in barbed wire. It's about the author's intense friendship with a girl who grew up to be a stripper and spend time in women's shelters, and it has the sinister propulsion of a Mary Gaitskill short story. (Read the review.)

'STICKY FINGERS: THE LIFE AND TIMES OF JANN WENNER AND ROLLING STONE MAGAZINE' By Joe Hagan (Knopf). Wenner is said to regret his decision to choose Hagan to be his biographer, but from this reader's perspective his bet paid off: Hagan has delivered a graceful, confident, dispassionately reported and deeply well-written biography. It's a big book, one that no one will wish longer, but its chapters move past like a crunching collection of singles and not a thumb-sucking double album. It's a joy to read and feels built to last. (Read the review.)

'THE ANSWERS' By Catherine Lacey (Farrar, Straus and Giroux). Lacey writes sentences that are long and clean and unstanchable. They glow like the artist Dan Flavin's fluorescent light tubes. In this, her second novel, she sweeps you up in the formidable current of her thought and then drops you down the rabbit hole. On a certain level, this is a dystopian project; it borders on science fiction. It's about a young, underemployed and ill young woman, and how she is slowly drawn into an experiment that involves facial recognition software and electromagnetic pulses that can make a person weep or flush. It's a warm-blooded yet brooding novel about the neurobiology of love. It casts a spell. (Read the review.)

'CLASS' By Francesco Pacifico (Melville House). Pacifico's second novel is as bitter and strange as a glass of Fernet Branca. It's about young, wealthy, amoral Italian hipsters in Manhattan and Brooklyn circa 2010, and it is the work of a forceful and ambitious writer. The novel is a manifesto of contempt and its deformed twin, self-loathing. It's about young people who flicker across the globe, tucked under blankets and Beats headphones in first-class airplane seats, coasting on the dwindling remains of their trust funds. This book both attracted and appalled me when I first read it, and those feelings still hold true. But I find this novel has stuck with me in ways that ostensibly ''better'' ones have not. (Read the review.)

'HOME FIRE' By Kamila Shamsie (Riverhead). Shamsie's new novel, which was longlisted for this year's Man Booker Prize, is a bold retelling of Sophocles' ''Antigone.'' It begins with the airport interrogation of a young Muslim woman who has come to the United States to study, and Shamsie dilates throughout on Sophocles' themes: civil disobedience, fidelity and the law, especially as regards burial rights. The author is shrewd and funny, but this novel pushes past tragicomedy into darker areas, including the appeal of ISIS for some young men. Hold tight for its final scene, which is the most memorable of any novel I read this year. (Read the review.)

'AUTUMN' By Ali Smith (Pantheon). Smith has a beautiful mind. Her new book, the first of an anticipated four novels in a seasonal cycle, is ostensibly about the friendship between a young woman and a very old man. But it's really about everything: poverty and bureaucracy and sex and mortality and music. Perhaps the most moving thing about it is that it plays out against a certain sense that the world is heading into darker times. Post-Brexit, and with an election looming in the United States, people watch the evening news with their hearts tucked up under their ears. I found this book to be almost unbearably moving in its awareness of what the author praises as the ''array of colors of even the pulverized world.'' (Read the review.)

Jennifer Senior

How else to put it? This was a corkscrew of a year. Its exceptionalness -- the sheer blinding drama of it all -- seems to have determined my reading preferences, repeatedly guiding me toward topical subjects. Not on this list, but worth mentioning: Joe Biden's ''Promise Me, Dad'' and Hillary Clinton's ''What Happened,'' two strong political memoirs, a true rarity (the genre's generally a dud, an excuse to peddle bromides dipped in chloroform). Not everything on this list is political, of course, and neither are some of my honorable mentions. I particularly enjoyed the thriller ''Fierce Kingdom,'' by Gin Phillips, and the lively true-crime procedural ''American Fire,'' by Monica Hesse.

Because this is my final month on the job, I ask one minor indulgence: While my fellow staff critics have done the customary list of 10, I've added one more for the road. It's ''Cork Dork.'' We can always use a good glass of wine, perhaps especially this year.

'CORK DORK: A WINE-FUELED ADVENTURE AMONG THE OBSESSIVE SOMMELIERS, BIG BOTTLE HUNTERS, AND ROGUE SCIENTISTS WHO TAUGHT ME TO LIVE FOR TASTE' By Bianca Bosker (Penguin). Ordinarily, I loathe thousand-yard subtitles, but I'll concede that here, where I have so little room to write, this one at least does some of the work for me. Bosker, once an editor at The Huffington Post, quit her day job to become a certified sommelier, and her adventures in this sodden universe of fanatics are a combination of rigorous -- 20,000 different wines to memorize? -- and raucous. (Read the review.)

'RICHARD NIXON: THE LIFE' By John A. Farrell (Doubleday). The tests for a good Nixon biography, given how many exist, are fairly simple. One: Is it elegantly written? Two: Can it tolerate paradoxes and complexity, the spikier stuff that distinguishes real-life sinners from comic-book villains? The answer, in the case of this book, is yes on both counts. Farrell's work also happens to feel eerily relevant. The parallels between Nixon and our current president leap off the page like crickets. (Read the review.)

'LOCKING UP OUR OWN: CRIME AND PUNISHMENT IN BLACK AMERICA' By James Forman Jr. (Farrar, Straus, and Giroux). This superb, shattering book probably made a deeper impression on me than any other this year. It tells the story, beginning in the 1970s, of how prominent African-Americans played a role in lobbying for more punitive measures to fight gun violence and drug dealing, in the quest to keep their neighborhoods safe. Never once did they imagine that their efforts would result in the inhuman outcome of mass incarceration. A tragedy to the bone. (Read the review.)

'JANESVILLE: AN AMERICAN STORY' By Amy Goldstein (Simon & Schuster). A magnificently well-researched ethnography of an ailing Wisconsin town after a General Motors plant shuts down. That it happens to be the home of House Speaker Paul D. Ryan adds to the political drama, but the real tensions are on the ground, where families contend with declining incomes and itinerant dads. The author deserves a medal for her data-driven work on the limits of job retraining. (Read the review.)

'THE WATER WILL COME: RISING SEAS, SINKING CITIES, AND THE REMAKING OF THE CIVILIZED WORLD' By Jeff Goodell (Little, Brown). An immersive, mildly gonzo and depressingly well-timed book about the drenching effects of global warming, and a powerful reminder that we can bury our heads in the sand about climate change for only so long before the sand itself disappears. (Read the review.)

'TURTLES ALL THE WAY DOWN' By John Green (Dutton). He may have a gift for screwball comedy, but Green has always had a serious streak too, and this book, his first since ''The Fault in Our Stars,'' is his most personal and serious yet -- more Paul Thomas Anderson than Wes Anderson. The protagonist, Aza, suffers from an extreme case of obsessive-compulsive disorder (as does Green), and her rogue thoughts threaten to overwhelm her life. One needn't be a fellow sufferer to be moved to tears. (Read the review.)

'BLACK EDGE: INSIDE INFORMATION, DIRTY MONEY, AND THE QUEST TO BRING DOWN THE MOST WANTED MAN ON WALL STREET' By Sheelah Kolhatkar (Random House). A modern version of ''Moby-Dick,'' with wiretaps rather than harpoons. Kolhatkar, a staff writer for The New Yorker and a former hedge fund analyst, gives a captivating account of skulduggery at SAC Capital Advisors, and of the failure of the Feds to indict its founder, Steven A. Cohen. It would be an uncomplicated pleasure to read if the story weren't true. (Read the review.)

'THE FAR AWAY BROTHERS: TWO YOUNG MIGRANTS AND THE MAKING OF AN AMERICAN LIFE' By Lauren Markham (Crown). An intimately reported and beautifully rendered work of nonfiction about a pair of 17-year-old boys -- ''unaccompanied alien children,'' in the chilly parlance of the law -- who come to the United States to escape the gang brutality of El Salvador. An education in the realities of immigration, which, not surprisingly, are more complicated than sound bites from the left or the right would allow. (Read the review.)

'THE ESSEX SERPENT' By Sarah Perry (Custom House/William Morrow). This Victorian-era novel is one of almost insolent ambition -- lush and fantastical, brimming with ideas. The premise is that a giant sea monster is haunting a small English town, but Perry uses it only as an excuse to riff on faith and science, friendship and solitude. Have I mentioned there are enough love triangles here to confound Euclid? It's the kind of book that's so involving you read it as you're walking down the street. (Read the review.)

'ANYTHING IS POSSIBLE' By Elizabeth Strout (Random House). You pick up a book by Strout for the same reason you listen to a requiem: to experience the beauty in sadness. That was the joy of reading her Pulitzer Prize-winning ''Olive Kitteridge,'' and it's the joy of reading this novel too, which once again focuses on an interconnected cast of broken souls in a small town. (Read the review.)

'DYING: A MEMOIR' By Cory Taylor (Tin House). An electrifying book about dying that's part dreamy reminiscence, part philosophical monograph. The author, reckoning with Stage 4 melanoma, demystifies the final experience of our lives, exploring questions of control, fear and regret. My copy is underlined like a composition notebook. ''For what are we,'' Taylor asks, ''if not a body taking a mind for a walk, just to see what's there?'' (Read the review.)

Parul Sehgal

As it turns out, nearly every book on my list is a history of violence. More than half are stalked by monsters -- real or imaginary. Several are tinged with elements of horror, science fiction and the gothic.

None of this was by design but it feels appropriate. It's been that kind of year. But these books haven't stuck with me just because they mirror the mood of a moment. Every book puts a new spin on a classic form: the biography, the short story, the campus novel. Old stories, new strategies. There's a lesson in there somewhere. (A note on my selections: Since I only began as a staff book critic in July, a few of my picks are books I reviewed or assigned earlier in the year as an editor at The New York Times Book Review.)

'THE IDIOT' By Elif Batuman (Penguin Press). Batuman describes the heroine of her first novel, Selin, as ''the world's least interesting and dignified kind of person'': an American teenager. She's also irresistible -- a clever, almost appallingly innocent 6-foot-tall daughter of Turkish immigrants who arrives at Harvard in the mid-'90s and begins wooing a reluctant love interest over email. Every page is thicketed with jokes, riffs, theories of language. It's a portrait of an intellectual and sentimental education that offers almost unseemly pleasure. (Read the review.)

'THE COMPLETE STORIES' By Leonora Carrington (Dorothy). This year is the centennial of the birth of the British Surrealist, who died in 2011. Her short stories are marked by a strange, spectral charm -- women undress down to their skeletons; a sociable hyena ventures out to a debutante ball, wearing the face of a murdered maid -- but they're also a form of oblique autobiography. Carrington finds ways to tell her own story -- of exile, harrowing institutionalization, reinvention -- in code, and with dark mirth. (Read the review.)

'MY FAVORITE THING IS MONSTERS' By Emil Ferris (Fantagraphics). Drawn with Bic pen on lined notebook paper, this moody and ravishing graphic novel takes the form of a sketchbook diary. Growing up in Chicago in the 1960s, 10-year-old Karen Reyes investigates the suspicious death of her glamorous neighbor and finds troubling clues lurking close to her own home. The densely crosshatched pages pay homage to Otto Dix's psychologically shaded portraits and the classic monster magazines of the 1950s. An eerie masterpiece of the monsters around and within us. (Read the review.)

'THESE POSSIBLE LIVES' By Fleur Jaeggy, translated by Minna Zallman Proctor (New Directions). The Swiss Italian writer's unconventional biographies of three writers -- Thomas De Quincey, John Keats and Marcel Schwob -- contain some of my favorite sentences of the year. ''His sister Jane lived three years,'' she writes of De Quincey. ''When she died, Thomas thought that she would come back, like a crocus. Children who grow up in the country know about death; they can, in a manner of speaking, see their own bones out the window.'' Jaeggy finds a new way to tell the story of a life -- to pluck out ''human characteristics amidst the chaos,'' as Schwob described the biographer's art, and to distill her subjects' essences onto the page. (Read the review.)

'HER BODY AND OTHER PARTIES: STORIES' By Carmen Maria Machado (Graywolf). Machado's debut collection is a wild thing, blazing with the influence of fabulists from Angela Carter to Kelly Link, borrowing from science fiction, queer theory and horror. These eight tales depict women on the verge -- survivors of assault, brutal marriages and mysterious afflictions. Machado finds fresh language for ancient horrors. (Read the review.)

'DIFFICULT WOMEN: A MEMOIR OF THREE' By David Plante (New York Review Books). Plante's recently reissued memoir of his friendships with three literary icons -- Jean Rhys, Germaine Greer and Sonia Orwell -- is a tart and complicated pleasure. First published in 1983, the book horrified some with its frank portrayals of the women at their most unguarded, vulnerable or drunk, but there's no denying its power. Each scene burns with dark excitement, and Plante's honesty is exhilarating. It's an indelible book about friendship, isolation, ambition -- and what it means to make a religion out of literature. (Read the review.)

'THE EVOLUTION OF BEAUTY: HOW DARWIN'S FORGOTTEN THEORY OF MATE CHOICE SHAPES THE ANIMAL WORLD -- AND US' By Richard O. Prum (Doubleday). Prum, an ornithologist and museum curator, resurrects Darwin's provocative theory of sexual selection, which argues that animals select mates on the basis of beauty, not just genetic fitness. His elaborations are elegant, persuasive and come to a surprisingly feminist conclusion -- that female desire shaped evolution. (Read the review.)

'BEHAVE: THE BIOLOGY OF HUMANS AT OUR BEST AND WORST' By Robert M. Sapolsky (Penguin Press). Sapolsky, a neurologist and the recipient of a MacArthur Foundation ''genius'' grant, offers a masterly cross-disciplinary scientific study of human behavior: What in our glands, our genes, our childhoods explains our species' capacity for both altruism and brutality? This comprehensive and friendly survey of a ''big sprawling mess of a subject'' is leavened by an impressive data-to-silly joke ratio. It has my vote for science book of the year. (Read the review.)

'GHACHAR GHOCHAR' By Vivek Shanbhag, translated by Srinath Perur (Penguin). There's a whole universe folded into this slender, spiny novel. It's a parable of rising India and of violence against women, and a sly commentary on translation (it's one of the first books written in the Indian language of Kannada to be published in the United States). Shanbhag is an heir to Babel, and this story of a family's moral unraveling and descent into cruelty after it comes into sudden wealth -- capped by a hair-raising ending -- already feels like a modern-day classic. (Read the review.)

'SING, UNBURIED, SING' By Jesmyn Ward (Scribner). Ward's National Book Award-winning third novel sings America. A death-haunted, drug-addicted woman and her children take a road trip to collect her white husband from prison, picking up a mysterious hitchhiker on the way: the ghost of a 12-year-old boy who's on a quest of his own. Delving into the long aftershocks of a hurricane, the ties between slavery and the mass incarceration of black men, and the opioid epidemic devouring rural America, this is a searing, timely novel inspired by classics of American literature, notably Toni Morrison's ''Beloved,'' and it takes its place among them. (Read the review.)

Janet Maslin

Mine is the strangest of these lists. I left The Times's staff two and a half years ago, but apparently I won't go away. I write intermittently about books with the potential to be popular.

The good ones are hard to find. So rather than stick to books I actually reviewed this year, I drew on favorite things I read in 2017, even though one dates back to 1993 and another was reviewed by Dwight Garner. One criterion for this list is: ''Is this something you'd give to a friend?'' Everything on my list meets that standard.

I've left out major titles, like Ron Chernow's ''Grant,'' that I reviewed but hardly need attention here. I'd like to mention two first-rate books by actors: Tom Hanks's ''Uncommon Type,'' a short-story collection that offers him a second career path if this movie thing doesn't work out, and Alec Baldwin's frank memoir ''Nevertheless.'' Finally, thanks to Bill O'Reilly for ''Old School'' (written with Bruce Feirstein). He's right about many things, particularly when it comes to the rigidity of thought on college campuses. But the very idea of a morality lecture from O'Reilly made this the best unintended humor book of 2017.

'STICKY FINGERS: THE LIFE AND TIMES OF JANN WENNER AND ROLLING STONE MAGAZINE' By Joe Hagan (Knopf). You need not have the slightest interest in Wenner, his magazine or even the music it celebrated to find this a terrifically astute work of pop-cultural history. Hagan chronicles the 50-year arc of longhairs turned climbers turned power brokers, and he does it with insight and flair. A great read, mixing wall-to-wall dish with long-view acuity. This is the book I gave to friends most often this year. (Read the review.)

'THE DRY' By Jane Harper (Flatiron). Harper's swift, dazzling debut thriller is set in a desperately parched part of rural Australia, where nothing is what it seems. The book delivers a twist or shocker or sneaky trick on virtually every page. Harper may be the all-time best advertisement for online courses in fiction writing. Her follow-up, coming in February, will be set where there's mud. (Read the review.)

'THE FORCE' By Don Winslow (William Morrow). Steel yourself for this brutal, gut-punching story of an elite Manhattan police task force trying to maintain some semblance of decency. Winslow's New York cop story brings to mind Sidney Lumet, Richard Price and other stars of the genre, but he is strictly his own man. Procedural at its start, this story of trapped, corrupted, once-clean Detective Denny Malone is a killer by the time it's over. (Read the review.)

'WE ARE NEVER MEETING IN REAL LIFE: ESSAYS' By Samantha Irby (Vintage). Here's a madly hilarious blogger who really came into her own this year. Food is her ostensible subject, but she can get anywhere from there. The book is dedicated to Klonopin, and its essays include ''I'm in Love and It's Boring,'' ''Thirteen Questions to Ask Before Getting Married'' and ''A Case for Remaining Indoors.'' (Read the review.)

'DEVIL'S BARGAIN: STEVE BANNON, DONALD TRUMP, AND THE STORMING OF THE PRESIDENCY' By Joshua Green (Penguin Press). A fair and fascinating portrait of Steve Bannon that explains two crucial things: who he is and how he got that way. Green traces the formation of Bannon's basic beliefs, and finds the roots of the bellicose worldview that helped get President Trump elected. Filled with candid Bannon commentary about Bannon, it's required reading for anyone interested in the future. (Read the review.)

'SAINTS FOR ALL OCCASIONS' By J. Courtney Sullivan (Knopf). Reminiscent of both Colm Toibin's ''Brooklyn'' and Matthew Thomas's ''We Are Not Ourselves,'' this enveloping novel follows a fraught Irish family through unimaginable trials. It introduces its two main characters as young sisters ready to emigrate from Ireland to America, and follows them through the rest of their lives. All of Sullivan's characters leap off the page. You don't read this book; you breathe it. (Read the review.)

'THE MIDNIGHT LINE: A JACK REACHER NOVEL' By Lee Child (Delacorte). It was a great year for the usual suspects, the big-name crime writers who always publish in mid-fall. After a brief period of the doldrums, a reinvigorated Child bounced back with an unusually impassioned story. The book's first half feels like business as usual. Then it takes a sudden turn toward something important and genuinely wrenching. Child's finales can be crazily far-fetched, but the last part of this one really matters. (Read the review.)

'TWO KINDS OF TRUTH' By Michael Connelly (Little, Brown). Connelly had a banner year. This summer, in ''The Late Show,'' he introduced a youngish new series heroine, René Ballard, who'll come in handy as Harry Bosch moves through his late 60s. But Bosch is a ball of fire in this exceptionally good police procedural that tackles the opioid crisis -- a ubiquitous plot point this year -- head-on. And Harry gets to go undercover as a ''pill shill.'' Dive into this tightly plotted detective story for details. (Read the review.)

'CAMINO ISLAND' By John Grisham (Doubleday). Every now and then Grisham tries something new. This year he hit a bull's-eye with a beach book featuring a bunch of writers, not a bunch of lawyers. There's a huge sense of fun to this little experiment, which is good enough to be worth continuing. And for fans rattled by novelty, Grisham also delivered ''The Rooster Bar'' this year, a sharp-clawed attack on student debt and the for-profit law school racket. Good idea; good, vengeful execution. (Read the interview with Grisham.)

'LOST TYCOON: THE MANY LIVES OF DONALD J. TRUMP' By Harry Hurt III (Echo Point Books). When president-elect Trump booted the author of this 1993 unauthorized biography off one of his golf courses, I sensed that Hurt's book might be of interest. Yes, indeed. It's a prescient account of Trump's business ethics, calculated manipulation of his inner circle, flair for fact-free hyperbole and nascent political ambitions at a time when anyone who knew him thought he was joking. P.S.: It's filled to the gills with gossip. Read with caution.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

(PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALESSANDRA MONTALTO/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C19; C26; C27) 

Document NYTF000020171208edc80003p



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Discloses New Total Of 2,000 Troops in Syria

By JOHN ISMAY 
507 words
7 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- About 2,000 American troops are in Syria fighting the Islamic State, a Pentagon spokesman said on Wednesday, almost four times the total previously disclosed as the Trump administration changes how troop numbers are publicly counted.

The new total, ordered disclosed by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, counts service members on temporary duty of six months or less who were not included in Obama-era totals. The 1,500 or so previously undisclosed troops in Syria include traditional combat forces like infantry, artillery and forward air controllers trained to call in airstrikes, as well as support personnel, said Eric Pahon, a Pentagon spokesman.

He called the previous public total of 503 an ''artificial construct'' that became increasingly inaccurate as the campaign against the Islamic State progressed.

Military officials said that the 2,000 personnel in Syria represented something of a high-water mark as the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria winds down. The American-led coalition has retaken 97 percent of the territory once held by the militants, and the military is working to stabilize recently liberated areas, including the restoration of basic essential services, the removal of explosive materials and the distribution of humanitarian aid.

''The campaign to defeat ISIS is now in a new phase in Iraq and Syria,'' Col. Robert Manning, a Pentagon spokesman, said, using an acronym for the Islamic State.

The updated figure does not reflect troops assigned to classified missions and some Special Operations personnel, Mr. Pahon said. The number also does not include combat aircrews flying from bases outside Iraq and Syria, nor from Navy aircraft carriers at sea.

Mr. Mattis directed the Pentagon months ago to revise how it accounts for deployed personnel fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. The Pentagon also announced revised troop numbers in Afghanistan in August, acknowledging publicly for the first time that about 11,000 troops were deployed there.

The numbers of American service members in Syria rose after a decision by President Trump in March to allow subordinate military commanders set the levels of troops they needed. But Colonel Manning said the number of troops in Syria ''are generally trending downward,'' and noted that an artillery battalion of 400 Marines deployed near Raqqa, the capital of the Islamic State's self-declared caliphate, had recently returned to the United States.

Colonel Manning said troop numbers would continue to decline as the American-led coalition transitioned to missions to train and advise local forces.

The Pentagon also announced Wednesday that about 5,200 American troops are serving in Iraq. Colonel Manning said that total did not constitute a troop increase, but rather was a result of the change in the way troop numbers were accounted for and disclosed.

About 3,000 Islamic State fighters remain in Syria, mainly in a strip of land along the Euphrates River Valley south of Deir al-Zour, according to military estimates provided by Mr. Pahon.

Document NYTF000020171207edc70007q



World; Europe
Plot to Kill U.K. Prime Minister Foiled, Court Hears

By ALAN COWELL 
752 words
6 December 2017
12:56
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON —ounterterrorism officers thwarted a terrorist attack targeting the British prime minister, Theresa May, prosecutors said when two suspects in their early 20s appeared in court on Wednesday.

Word of the planned attack coincided with what the authorities have depicted as mounting concern about the intensity, scale and pace of conspiracies by violent extremists.

There have been five terrorist attacks in Britain this year alone, killing dozens of people in total. An official report on Tuesday said the worst of those assaults —t a concert by the pop star Ariana Grande in Manchester in May —ight have been averted “ad the cards fallen differently.”

The planned attack on Mrs. May was to begin with a bombing of the security gates that protect 10 Downing Street —he home and office of British prime ministers —s a prelude to an attempt to stab her to death, prosecutors said.

Two suspects —aa’mur Zakariyah Rahman, 20, and Mohammed Aqib Imran, 21 —ere arrested Nov. 28. Mr. Rahman, a resident of north London, is accused of planning the bombing and knife attack. Mr. Imran, from Birmingham in the English Midlands, is accused of preparing acts of terrorism by traveling to Libya to join the Islamic State militant group.

Mark Carroll, a prosecutor, told the Westminster Magistrates’ourt on Wednesday that Mr. Rahman had planned to set off explosives at the gates of 10 Downing Street. In the ensuing chaos, he hoped to gain access to Mrs. May’ office and stage a “econdary attack”sing “ suicide vest, pepper spray and a knife.”is purpose was to “ttack, kill and cause explosions.”

The accused did not indicate how they would plead when the case went before a higher court at the Old Bailey, London’ central criminal court, on Dec. 20.

In Parliament on Tuesday, the home secretary, Amber Rudd, said 22 Islamist plots had been prevented in the past four years, nine since March, when an assailant in a sport utility vehicle ran over pedestrians and stabbed a police officer outside Parliament. Five people died in that attack, including the assailant, a 52-year-old Briton, Khalid Masood.

In May, Salman Abedi, a 22-year-old Briton of Libyan descent, blew himself up outside the concert hall in Manchester, killing himself and 22 other people.

In June, three men —huram Shazad Butt, a British citizen born in Pakistan; Rachid Redouane, a failed asylum seeker who said he was Moroccan or Libyan; and Youssef Zaghba, an Italian of Moroccan ancestry —drove a van into pedestrians on London Bridge and then used knives to attack people around the nearby Borough Market. Eleven people died, including the three assailants, who were shot by the police.

Later that month, a British man, Darren Osborne, drove a van into a crowd of worshipers outside Finsbury Park mosque in London. One man died soon afterward, and Mr. Osborne has been charged with murder.

On Tuesday, an official report into attacks in May and June said counterterrorism officers had misinterpreted two items of intelligence handed to them before the killings in Manchester. Mr. Abedi was not being actively investigated at the time of the attack, but the items of intelligence could have led to an inquiry had their “rue significance been properly understood.”

Counterintelligence officers “ot a great deal right,”he report said. “articularly in the case of Manchester, they could have succeeded had the cards fallen differently.”

The report was written by David Anderson, a senior lawyer commissioned by Ms. May to examine counterterrorism efforts.

Separately, Scotland Yard said on Tuesday, “he U.K. is facing an intense threat from terrorism, one which is multidimensional, evolving rapidly and operating at a scale and pace we have not seen before.”

Counterterrorism specialists have said one source of concern is that Islamic State combatants may be returning to Britain after military defeats in Iraq and Syria. Ms. Rudd said on Tuesday that Britain’ security services were embroiled in more than 500 investigations involving more than 3,000 people.

* Deadly Attack Near U.K. Parliament; Car Plows Victims on Westminster Bridge

* Terror Alert in Britain Is Raised to Maximum as \b ISIS\b0  Claims Manchester Attack

* In Manchester, a Loud Bang, Silence, Then Screaming and Blood

Police officers outside 10 Downing Street in London, the official residence of the British prime minister, on Wednesday. | Toby Melville/Reuters | Prime Minister Theresa May. | Daniel Leal-Olivas/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171206edc6003e9



THE CARPETBAGGER
The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECT
Kumail Nanjiani on How to Shut Down Racist Hecklers

By CARA BUCKLEY 
859 words
5 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Kumail Nanjiani's movie ''The Big Sick'' was among the bigger indie hits of 2017, earning $55 million worldwide and holding steady at a 98 percent approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes.

It stars Mr. Nanjiani, previously known for the HBO series ''Silicon Valley,'' and tells a fictionalized version of the early stages of his relationship with his then-girlfriend, and now wife, Emily V. Gordon. She had been put into a medically induced coma after coming down with an extremely rare illness, adult-onset Still's disease.

At the time Mr. Nanjiani, a Pakistani-American, was hiding their relationship from his parents, who wanted him to enter into an arranged marriage. Mr. Nanjiani wrote the screenplay with Ms. Gordon, who is played onscreen by Zoe Kazan, and the film is a strong contender for various awards nominations.

Mr. Nanjiani sat down with me at the Lambs Club in Midtown Manhattan last week to talk about what it's like revealing a deeply personal story to the world, the challenges of bridging two cultures, especially when one is demonized in this country, and how he learned to shut down racist hecklers. Here are excerpts from our chat.

Was it when Emily was sick that you told your parents about your relationship?

It was pretty similar to how it happens in the movie, except it was on the phone.

And did they temporarily disown you the way they seem to in the movie?

No. In real life my mom was immediately very concerned about Emily, asking, ''Is she O.K.?'' And then as soon as Emily woke up, she was, like, ''Why did you do this to me? How could you?''

Was Emily on board from the beginning, to tell the story of your lives?

It took a little convincing. Emily's a therapist, so in a way she's very good at not revealing herself unless she wants to. And even though I had a big problem talking about myself, I'm weirdly less private. I remember we were sitting at Sundance, the first screening, 1,500 people, a real audience seeing the movie, and she was, like, ''This is the last time this story will be ours.''

One of the things that was so refreshing about the movie is how you were one step ahead of the racist hecklers in the audience. How did you get to that point?

''Go back to Isis,'' that thing? I'd been heckled like that a few times in my stand-up, and at some point I realized, ''This is happening enough that I can't be rattled by it.'' Here's the problem. When someone's racist to you, even though you know it's their fault, it still hurts your feelings. It still flattens you. It still reduces you. You still feel weirdly bad about yourself. Onstage when you really need to be in control, when someone heckles you, it's a big loss of control. So I had anticipated the lines based on what people had yelled at me before, and I'd written comeback lines.

What was your response again?

The response was, ''That's right, I am a terrorist. I just do stand-up comedy on the side to keep a low profile.'' I had others. Before [Osama bin Laden] was caught they would yell, ''Where is Osama?'' And I would be, like, ''I don't know; he hasn't texted me in forever.''

That must be in your past now, right?

Yeah, it doesn't happen, mostly because most people come to see me now.

Why do you think people liked the movie so much? What are you hearing back?

I think first-generation or second-generation immigrants, people who are in my parents' position, connect to it because they understand the struggle of trying to hold onto a culture when you're in a culture where that culture is not valued, in fact is actively demonized and attacked. So that's, I think, a very noble struggle.

People connect to my situation, where you're negotiating the culture you're from and the culture you're in, and how you forge an identity that services both of those, which is sort of the current challenge of my life. People generally understand disappointing your parents. People connect to it because they've been sick or they know someone who's been sick. After the first screening at Sundance, as we were walking to our after-party, people were coming up to Emily and showing her their surgery scars, like, immediately.

You hear stories of people who opened a food truck together, where one of them is Pakistani, one of them is a white American person. You hear from people where the clash was too much, where it didn't work out.

It's a real American story, in the best sense.

What's been really satisfying is we gave up our story to the world, but then we got thousands of stories back.

Follow Cara Buckley on Twitter: @caraNYT.

Document NYTF000020171205edc50003j



The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
'S.N.L' Returns, Ready to Catch Up

By SOPAN DEB 
1,262 words
4 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

There was no shortage of news for ''Saturday Night Live'' to tackle after being off last weekend. It was the show's first episode since the firing of the NBC morning television host Matt Lauer, and it aired one day after President Trump's former national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, pleaded guilty to lying to the F.B.I. The writers took aim at both Mr. Flynn and Mr. Lauer right at the top.

The cold open began where many ''S.N.L.'' episodes do: in the Oval Office, with Alec Baldwin playing a scowling Mr. Trump. This time, the sketch was a parody of ''A Christmas Carol.'' Mikey Day appeared in chains as Mr. Flynn and identified himself as the ''Ghost of Witness Flipped,'' and he warned Mr. Trump to come clean ''for the good of the country.''

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

''Before all this, I had a great life, Donald,'' Mr. Day said. ''I was an honorable, twice-fired military man who loved to talk about how Hillary Clinton had a child sex ring in a pizza shop.''

Mr. Day then warned Mr. Baldwin that ghosts of Mr. Trump's past would be visiting him that same night. The first one was the former ''Today'' show host Billy Bush, played by Alex Moffat. Mr. Bush, who appeared on the ''Access Hollywood'' tape that emerged near the end of the presidential campaign, was suspended by NBC and ultimately left the network.

''Frankly, I'm looking pretty good in the NBC News division right about now,'' Mr. Moffat said, in the night's first reference to Mr. Lauer. ''Remember, Donald, these things catch up with all of us. If you worked at NBC right now you would be fired, fired, fired. And out of money.''

''S.N.L.'' has recently found itself in the uncomfortable position of criticizing names close to the show. Aside from being one of NBC's biggest stars, Mr. Lauer has only slight ties to ''S.N.L.'' compared with recent targets like the comedian Louis C.K. and Senator Al Franken of Minnesota. After Mr. Moffat departed, Beck Bennett resurrected his impersonation of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, followed by another ghost of Mr. Trump's past: Hillary Clinton, played once again by Kate McKinnon, and wearing a black robe.

''You, Donald, have given me the greatest gift of all: sexual gratification in the form of your slow demise,'' Ms. McKinnon said.

The other digs at Mr. Lauer came later during the ''Weekend Update'' segment.

''I almost forgot about this week's batch of predators,'' said the co-host Colin Jost, with a picture behind him of Mr. Lauer, the hip-hop mogul Russell Simmons and the radio personality Garrison Keillor. ''It's just a whole new segment of the news now. You've just got to read the names every week like Powerball numbers.''

Mr. Jost followed up: ''On Wednesday, the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree was lit, and so was Ann Curry,'' a reference to Ms. Curry's much-publicized exit from the ''Today'' show in 2012.

Brutal Song of the Week

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

A digital short titled ''Welcome to Hell,'' featuring this week's host, Saoirse Ronan, as well as Aidy Bryant, Cecily Strong, Kate McKinnon and other female members of the cast, was a searing sendup of the public shock at the flood of powerful men recently accused of sexual misconduct.

''All these big, cool, powerful guys are turning out to be -- what's the word? Habitual predators?'' Ms. Bryant said, with lollipops, rainbows and clouds in the background.

''Now 'House of Cards' is ruined,'' sang Ms. Ronan. ''And that really sucks. Well, here's a list of stuff that's ruined for us.''

''Parking and walking and Uber and ponytails. Bathrobes and nighttime and drinking and hotels and vans!''

''S.N.L.'' has struggled to find the proper tone to address the spate of sexual misconduct allegations that have dominated the news cycle. Some of this has been because of timing. When the Harvey Weinstein allegations initially broke, it was late in the week and the show shelved a sketch before airtime. A week later, the show aired an uncomfortable sketch riffing off a panel of actresses at the New York Film Festival discussing Mr. Weinstein. During an episode in early November, Alec Baldwin, in the headlines himself for making awkward comments about sexual harassment, cracked jokes as President Trump about Mr. Weinstein.

Charming Song of the Week

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Try to keep the song by Ms. Ronan out of your head. The New York-born actress's game attempt to teach the American public how to pronounce her Irish name was catchy, amusing and actually useful. Previously, Ms. Ronan has worn a sign on ''The Ellen Show'' that bore a handy guide: ''Hello. My name is Sur-sha.''

'Weekend Update' Takes On the Tax Bill

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Mr. Jost and Michael Che spent a large portion of ''Weekend Update'' bashing Senate Republicans for their sweeping tax overhaul and also targeting Mr. Flynn.

Here are some of the quips:

''Well, the good news for President Trump is that his tax plan just passed the Senate. The bad news is he might not be president long enough to sign it,'' Mr. Jost said. After summarizing Mr. Flynn's guilty plea, he mocked Fox News's coverage: ''Or as Fox News reported it, did Hillary Clinton secretly join ISIS?''

On the tax bill, Mr. Jost said, ''Wow, I knew Trump was going to run the country like a business. I just didn't know he was going to run it like one of his businesses.''

Mr. Che went on this riff:

You know, once the Republicans get this tax bill passed, they won't need Donald Trump anymore. I mean, they already got what they wanted. You know, I mean, it's like -- it's not like they like you.

Don't you think it's a little odd that they passed this bill at 2 a.m. without reading it the same night they found out Flynn was snitching on you? They know something. It's like your family showing up to your hospital room saying, ''Look, you need to sign this will tonight.'' ''Can I read it first?'' ''No time.''

Sketch of the Week

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

This week's sketch about a man who is discovered to have a suspicious affection for American Girl dolls in the aftermath of a gas line explosion was fairly brilliant. The way Mr. Day's character starts hesitant and evasive before finding himself unable to refrain from expressing his obsession with his doll is a deft arc. The laserlike focus on Mr. Day's peculiar fascination by all the sketch's characters -- even in the midst of the explosion's debris -- was a neat bit of commitment from the writers.

Deskside Bit of the Week

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Kate McKinnon playing Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain was, unsurprisingly, amusing. Ms. McKinnon aimed to portray Ms. May as a stiff world leader now willing to engage in ''social media fisticuffs'' with Mr. Trump. The escalation from ''Mr. Kim Jong-un. Good sir. Do grow up. #Please,'' to telling Prince Harry, ''You look like Ed Sheeran minus the abilities,'' was a bizarre and worthwhile journey.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020171204edc40005t



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Jailed With a Serial Killer, Beginning at Birth

By ROD NORDLAND; Jawad Sukhanyar, Fahim Abed and Zabihullah Ghazi contributed reporting. 
1,724 words
4 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

JALALABAD, Afghanistan -- Meena got chickenpox, measles and the mumps in prison. She was born there, nursed there and weaned there. Now 11 years old, she has spent her entire life in prison and will probably spend the rest of her childhood there as well.

The girl has never committed a crime, but her mother, Shirin Gul, is a convicted serial killer serving a life sentence, and under Afghan prison policy she can keep her daughter with her until she turns 18.

Meena was even conceived in prison, and has never been out, not even for a brief visit. She has never seen a television set, she said, and has no idea what the world outside the walls looks like.

Her plight is extreme, but not unique. In the women's wing of the Nangarhar provincial prison here, she is one of 36 children jailed with their mothers, among 42 women in all. But none of the other children have spent such a long time in custody; most of their mothers' sentences are much shorter.

Locking up small children with their mothers is a common practice in Afghanistan, especially when there are no other close relatives, or fathers are absent or estranged. Child advocates estimate that there are hundreds of imprisoned Afghan children whose only crime is having a convicted mother.

There is a program that runs orphanages for children whose mothers are imprisoned, but the women have to agree to let their sons and daughters be taken, and the program does not cover many areas of Afghanistan, including Jalalabad.

At Meena's prison, the women's cells are arranged around a spacious courtyard, shaded by mulberry trees, and the children have free rein of it. There is a set of rusting, homemade swings, monkey bars and slides that end in muddy puddles.

A schoolroom is in one of the cells, with a white board and a mixture of benches and chairs, seating 16 children at eight desks. A single teacher looks after three grades, first through third, an hour a day for each grade; at age 11, Meena has reached only the second grade.

[Video: The story of a child in prison in Nangarhar Watch on YouTube.]

When I met with Meena, she sat down, clutching a yellow plastic bag under her shawl. ''My whole life has passed in this prison,'' she said, during a tense interview in the women's wing last month. ''Yes, I wish I could go out. I want to leave here and live outside with my mother, but I won't leave here without her.''

Meena was soft-spoken, composed and well-mannered, with a cherubic round face framed by a modestly drawn hijab. Her mother was chain-smoking, brash and outspoken, tattooed in a country where tattoos are considered irreligious, her head scarf askew to reveal henna-streaked hair.

''How do you think she feels?'' Ms. Gul said, impatient at what she derided as stupid questions. ''It's a prison, how should she feel? A prison is a prison, even if it's heaven.''

A question about why Ms. Gul would not let her daughter leave infuriated the mother even more. She launched into a diatribe against the Afghan president. ''You, Mr. America, tell that blind man Ashraf Ghani, your puppet, your slave, tell him to get me out of here,'' she said. ''I didn't commit any crime. My only fault is that I cooked food for my husband who committed a crime.''

The man she calls her husband, Rahmatullah (they were never legally married), was convicted along with her son, her brother-in-law, an uncle and a nephew for their role in the murders and robberies of 27 Afghan men in 2001 to 2004. Afghan prosecutors said Ms. Gul was the ringleader.

Working as a prostitute, Ms. Gul brought home her customers, many of them taxi drivers, and served them drugged kebabs, after which her family members robbed, killed and then buried them in the yards of two family homes.

All six were sentenced to death, and the five men were hanged. Ms. Gul, however, got pregnant while on death row, so her own hanging was delayed. After she gave birth to Meena, her sentence was commuted to life in prison by the president at the time, Hamid Karzai, according to Lt. Col. Mohammad Asif, the head of the women's cellblock here.

Ms. Gul first claimed that she had never confessed to the crimes, then said she had been tortured into confessing to them. Frustrated, she made clawing gestures across a table and hissed, ''I'll kill you. I'm going to come over there and take out your eyes.''

Meena touched her lightly on the shoulder to try to calm her down, put a forefinger to her lips and said, ''Shh.'' Her mother subsided, briefly.

The girl was still holding the yellow plastic bag; inside was a bundle wrapped in a carefully folded red and white kitchen towel.

''What's in there, Meena?'' I asked.

''Pictures of my father.''

She proudly unwrapped them to show them off. Meena and her mother rarely get visits, and never from family members or friends, all of whom are either dead or estranged. Part of the reason Meena is still behind bars is that she has no surviving relatives who would take her, even if her mother allowed it.

Or as Ms. Gul explained it: ''I have many enemies. I wouldn't trust anyone to take Meena outside.''

The photos were of Rahmatullah, whom Meena calls her father: portraits, snapshots on holiday, pictures of him with Ms. Gul.

Rahmatullah (who like many Afghans had only one name) was also convicted of killing Ms. Gul's legal husband, a police colonel, when Ms. Gul and Rahmatullah were having an affair. The colonel's body was among those found buried in the yards of the family homes in 2004. Rahmatullah was also a convicted pedophile and thief and reputedly a former Taliban commander.

What he almost certainly was not, however, was Meena's biological father; the dates do not fit. He was already in jail when he implicated Ms. Gul in the murders, and they were in different prisons in different cities at the time of Meena's conception. Afghan officials said that an unknown prison officer was Meena's birth father, and officials accused Ms. Gul of deliberately getting pregnant to avoid the gallows.

Meena went through the photographs one after another, lingering over some, including two of Rahmatullah dead, after his hanging, in a burial shroud but with his face visible; it was not a pretty sight.

In a 2015 interview with The New York Times, Ms. Gul admitted that she and Rahmatullah had killed her husband together.

She denied it when I spoke to her. ''It was all Rahmatullah's fault,'' Ms. Gul said. ''I would not be here if it wasn't for him. They should execute me, then Meena would have cried for one day, and it would be over. Instead I am crying every day; it's a slow death, dying all the time.''

In her calmer moments, Ms. Gul had a simple, chilling message to convey: Meena deserves her freedom. But she won't get it unless her mother does, too.

''Tell Ashraf Ghani that!'' she demanded.

Children in jail is a scandal without an easy solution, advocates say. ''When you didn't commit a crime, you shouldn't be punished for it, and those children did not commit any crimes,'' said Bashir Ahmad Basharat, the director of the Child Protection Action Network, a quasi-governmental agency.

Keeping the children in prison is against both international norms and Afghan law, Mr. Basharat said, despite the practice being so widespread. ''But it's something where we don't have other alternatives.''

The country's approximately 30 women's prisons have several hundred children accompanying their mothers, he said. The women's wing at the Pul-e-Charkhi prison in Kabul now has 41 children who are younger than 5.

As Afghan prisons go, Nangarhar's women's facility appeared to be comparatively uncrowded and well maintained. The 36 children there on the day I visited ranged in age from three days to 11 years; Meena was the oldest.

The women and their children share 10 relatively large cells, with two double bunk beds each, so many of them sleep on mattresses on the floor. Only the compound as a whole was locked up, not the individual cells, so it did not appear prisonlike, aside from the huge steel gates to the outside and the coils of barbed wire atop two rows of surrounding double walls.

Meena sat through her mother's tirades impassively, sometimes with a thin, sweet smile. She became more animated talking about her best friend, Salma, 10. She said their favorite pastime was playing with their dolls.

''Dolls?'' her mother shrieked at an Afghan reporter. ''This stupid person is asking about her dolls? These foreigners are only interested in childish things.''

Meena said she and Salma created their own dolls, named Mursal and Shakila, out of bits of cloth and string. ''Both of them are girls,'' she said.

This was too much for Ms. Gul to bear. ''What you should do, Mr. America, is get her a TV. You're my visitor, you came to talk to me. We don't even have a TV. I should get ISIS to come and cut off your head.''

When it was time to say farewell, Meena shook hands with everyone politely, then went to the other end of the courtyard with Salma, arm in arm, still carrying her yellow plastic bag.

Ms. Gul, who had calmed down by then, shook hands politely as well, her gaze bold and challenging. ''Give me some money,'' she said.

Follow Rod Nordland on Twitter @rodnordland

Prosecutors say Shirin Gul, left, led a killing spree of 27 men. She can keep her daughter, Meena, with her until the girl turns 18. (A1); Meena, far left, with other children on Saturday at the women's ring of the Nangarhar provincial prison in Jalalabad, Afghanistan. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MAURICIO LIMA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A9) 

Document NYTF000020171204edc40004y



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
OpEd; SECT
No longer a terrorist haven

By MICHAEL P. DEMPSEY 
1,237 words
4 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The International New York Times
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Conventional wisdom holds that withdrawing all or a significant number of American troops from Afghanistan would lead to a Taliban takeover and the creation of a new safe haven for militants bent on attacking the United States. This threat was cited by President Trump during a speech in August where, in laying out his strategy for the war, he asserted that ''a hasty withdrawal would create a vacuum which terrorists, including ISIS and Al Qaeda, would fill, just as happened before Sept. 11.'' It was also echoed in numerous National Security Council meetings I attended during the Obama administration.

But such dire consequences are far from certain. Here are five reasons I believe it's time to re-evaluate our assumptions about Afghanistan's potential as a terrorist safe haven. (These views do not reflect the position of the United States government.)

First, while the Taliban are resilient enemies who have battlefield momentum and effective control over much of the country, they are far from being able to conquer all of Afghanistan. Their forces remain overwhelmingly outnumbered by the Afghan security forces, and some Afghan units -- notably the Special Forces -- have demonstrated improved battlefield performance. In addition, the United States and the West would almost certainly continue to offer financial backing, intelligence support and military advice and equipment to the Afghan government even after a drawdown. Therefore, while the Taliban would certainly gain significant ground after an American withdrawal, an outright Taliban victory is far from likely.

In fact, the Taliban's public statements this year have cited a Quranic justification for peace talks and have expressed a desire for reconstruction and development assistance, perhaps reflecting the organization's recognition that seizing Kabul by force is unlikely and would, in any event, render effective governance virtually impossible. The group's most important supporters, especially Pakistan, have also become more wary of what a truly empowered Taliban could mean for regional stability, and would probably prefer to follow a more cautious strategy with the group than backing an all-out Taliban offensive to take over the capital.

Second, even if the Taliban were to conquer Kabul, would they be willing to host an influx of international terrorists determined to strike the United States? The Taliban leader, Mawlawi Haibatullah Akhundzada, recently marked the Muslim religious holiday of Eid al-Adha by publicly declaring that any area under Taliban control would not be used for bringing harm to other nations.

Is that credible? Yes, because Taliban leaders are deeply aware that sheltering Al Qaeda before the Sept. 11 attacks resulted in an American-led invasion that forced them into political exile, killed thousands of their fighters and commanders and eroded their international legitimacy. Taliban leaders also recognize that even with a reduced footprint, the United States military would, if provoked, still be capable of inflicting grievous pain on the group, as evidenced by the missile strike in May 2016 in a remote area of Baluchistan, Pakistan, that killed their leader at the time, Mullah Akhtar Muhammad Mansour.

Third, the Taliban and Islamic State dislike each other intensely, so the notion of the Taliban welcoming an Islamic State base in Afghanistan seems implausible. Press accounts suggest that more Islamic State fighters have been killed by the Taliban than by Afghan security forces, and there have been violent clashes between the groups recently in Nangarhar Province that displaced hundreds of Afghan citizens.

At the heart of this enmity is the Taliban's deep local roots and their focus on nationalist rather than international objectives. The Islamic State's extreme interpretation -- even by Taliban standards -- of Sunni Islam and its close adherence to the Wahhabi-Salafist tradition also create tensions. Far from cooperating beyond isolated tactical agreements involving local commanders, the Taliban's leadership appears much more interested in killing Islamic State loyalists than hosting them.

As for Al Qaeda, the core of the group that planned the Sept. 11 attacks and established itself in Pakistan after the American-led invasion has been devastated by American and allied counterterrorism operations. Today the group's focus is on its affiliates, especially in Syria and Yemen, not South Asia. The remaining terrorists in Afghanistan, often described by the State Department as the reason Afghanistan is a hotbed of international terrorism, are a patchwork of groups focused primarily on local and regional grievances, with thus far no demonstrated ability or intent to operate internationally.

Fourth, in the wake of the Arab Spring and the profound instability that has gripped countries from Syria to Yemen, there are ample safe havens where international terrorists operate, devaluing Afghanistan's utility to them. Why would large numbers of Arab terrorists want to travel to Afghanistan when they have bases nearby? Wouldn't it be easier and more logical for Islamic State fighters from Iraq or Syria to flee to central and southern Libya, eastern Yemen or the Sinai Peninsula, than to Kandahar? The same logic applies to terrorists from Southeast Asia, the Sahel and parts of sub-Saharan Africa.

In fact, it's clear that Islamic State is trying desperately to cling to a foothold in eastern Syria and along the Iraqi border in the face of tremendous United States military pressure. It is also telling its operatives to remain where they are and to launch attacks from there, especially in Europe. Afghanistan was an attractive terrorist base of operations before Sept. 11, but it simply does not have the same resonance or utility today.

Finally, American counterterrorism and homeland defense capacities have improved by an order of magnitude since Sept. 11. The old model of terrorists training unimpeded in Afghanistan and then traveling to the United States to conduct attacks is more difficult to envision. It's easier to imagine a cell of jihadists with good computer skills plotting against the United States from an apartment in London, Paris or Brussels than from remote parts of Afghanistan.

So, what does this mean for American policy? In my view, the latest troop surge will help the Afghan government counter, but not defeat, the Taliban. The additional 4,000 troops -- which would bring the United States total to over 12,000 -- will also offer a critical morale boost to the government of the Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani. But it will do little to break the political stalemate among Afghan factions fighting over the distribution of power. In addition, the deployment of thousands of additional United States troops will most likely bolster the Afghan public's confidence and potentially help stem the flow of refugees to Western Europe, while allowing the United States to keep a platform from which to conduct operations regionally.

These are all worthwhile objectives. But it's far less certain that a larger United States military commitment in Afghanistan will have much impact on our fight against international terrorists. Given the cost -- as much as $40 billion a year -- and with the potential for more American casualties, we need to rigorously test our assumptions about the Taliban and the terrorist threat. It is time to clarify precisely what we hope to achieve in Afghanistan.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Michael P. Dempsey, a career intelligence officer, is the national intelligence fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, a government-sponsored position.

Document NYTF000020171204edc40004h



Retro Report
U.S.
In a Deadly Obsession, Food Is the Enemy

By CLYDE HABERMAN 
1,262 words
4 December 2017
00:30
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

This is a season of gustatory excess, when families gather at ample tables, offices hold lavish parties, and people eat and drink till they are beyond sated. Not everyone, though. There is a grimmer corner of America. It is populated by men and, more commonly, women who shun food not because they are too poor to afford it, but because they are too troubled to desire it.

The country’ obesity epidemic deservedly draws constant attention, but many have a diametrically opposite problem: They are obsessively, and perilously, thin. Some experts estimate that 30 million Americans are plagued at some point in their lives by disorders like anorexia nervosa, binge-eating and bulimia. About one-third of them are men, belying broadly held assumptions that this is almost exclusively a female concern. Many are blacks, Latinos and Asians, countering another routine belief that this is a whites-only issue.

Some get better, and stay that way. Others cycle through periods of recovery and relapse. And some, roughly a third of them, remain chronically ill or die. The National Eating Disorders Association describes anorexia as having “he highest mortality rate of any psychiatric illness.”

Retro Report, a series of video documentaries exploring the continued impact of major news stories of the past, examines how public understanding of this issue has evolved since the startling death of the singer Karen Carpenter in 1983. Her illness, anorexia, had long been familiar to medical professionals. An English doctor, William Gull, gave it its name in the 1870s, but the condition had been recognized for centuries. A few women proclaimed saints by the Roman Catholic Church are believed to have been anorexic.

Although the problem was always hiding in plain sight, Ms. Carpenter’ death at 32 made everyone see it clearly. She and her brother, Richard, were the hugely popular Carpenters duo, their records selling in the tens of millions with 1970s hits like “lose to You,”“e’e Only Just Begun”nd “Rainy Days and Mondays.”

The demons that plagued Ms. Carpenter led to extreme dieting. As is typical with anorexics, no amount of weight loss was enough for her. Fans at her live performances were shocked by what they saw. The 145 pounds once on her 5-foot-4-inch frame had dropped to 91 pounds in 1975. By September 1982, she was down to 77 pounds. That was when she was admitted to Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan with a critically low potassium level. “er face was all eyes,” friend later recalled.

Doctors and nurses helped her put on weight, but irreparable damage had been done. Ms. Carpenter went into fatal cardiac arrest on Feb. 4, 1983.

Since then, public awareness of eating disorders has come more sharply into focus, in part because celebrities began to reveal their struggles. To name but a few, their ranks have included Jane Fonda, Lady Gaga, Kelly Clarkson, Calista Flockhart, Fiona Apple and Paula Abdul. When Amy Winehouse died in 2011 at 27, the cause was said to be drug and alcohol abuse. But her brother has said that her system might have better withstood the chemical onslaught were it not compromised by frequent bouts of bulimia.

Those in the grip of a disorder like anorexia do not always command the sympathy of others. A frequent reaction is finger-wagging that boils down to: Snap out of it. Just eat, for goodness sake.

Life, though, is rarely that simple for someone in torment —omeone like Ayanna Bates, 20, who lives in Queens and works with Project Heal, a nonprofit that helps people with eating disorders pay for treatment. Typically, eating disorders take hold in adolescence, and Ms. Bates was no exception. When anxieties overwhelmed her at 13, she began to push food away. “tarving was used to hurt myself,”he told Retro Report, but “t was also used for control.”

“t was an exciting feeling because I felt, like, at the time that was the only thing I was good at,”he said. “o it gave me a sense of empowerment.”

Health professionals now understand that the disorder is not so much a willful refusal to eat as a complex interlacing of psychological, biological and environmental issues. “here’ been increasing understanding over the last several decades that this is a serious psychiatric illness,”aid Dr. Evelyn Attia, director of the Center for Eating Disorders at NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital. “his is a brain-based disorder.”

Some people are believed to be genetically predisposed to the malady. Some react to childhood traumas and other triggers. And then there is a “ocial environmental”omponent, said Jillian Lampert, chief strategy officer for the Minnesota-based Emily Program, which treats eating disorders. Society’ imperative “ells us to be thin and beautiful and attractive and strong and muscular and all that other stuff,”r. Lampert said.

Look no further than the Miss America pageant. In July, The Atlantic magazine cited the body mass indexes of women who won this most famous beauty contest going back nearly a century. The index measures a person’ weight in relation to his or her height. An index that exceeds 25 qualifies as overweight; above 30 is obese. Dipping below 18.5 is considered underweight.

Studies showed that the typical index for Miss Americas in the 1920s was 22, which is what it would be for a woman who is 5 feet 6 inches tall and weighs 136 pounds. By the 2000s, pageant winners were down to 16.9, equivalent to that 5-foot-6 woman reduced to 105 pounds.

In the main, Dr. Lampert said, no single factor explains an eating disorder. Genetics, trauma, visions of beauty —“t’ usually the confluence of them,”he said.

Western countries are where the problems have tended to lie, but as eating habits change across the globe, other societies are experiencing similar issues. In the United States, access to treatment is far from uniform. Some states recognize anorexia and bulimia as mental health concerns; others do not. Some insurance companies provide coverage, others not. At the federal level, the help that may be provided could depend on the fate of the besieged Affordable Care Act.

Even now, decades after Karen Carpenter’ death, some people cannot grasp an anorexic’ agony. Carrie Arnold studied the issue in her 2012 book, “ecoding Anorexia: How Breakthroughs in Science Offer Hope for Eating Disorders.”he herself has struggled with anorexia. Her skin at one point turned a grayish yellow, she said. Her hair fell out. Clothes slipped off her shrunken frame. “nd yet, at the same time,”he said, “’ get questions from people asking me, you know, ‘ow did you do it?’

“ike they were asking me for diet tips even as, you know, my heart was giving out.”

The video with this article is part of a documentary series presented by The New York Times. The video project was started with a grant from Christopher Buck. Retro Report, led by Kyra Darnton, is a nonprofit video news organization that aims to provide a thoughtful counterweight to today’ 24/7 news cycle. Previous episodes are at nytimes.com/retroreport. To suggest ideas for future reports, email retroreport@nytimes.com.

* ‘o the Bone’pens Frank Dialogue on Eating Disorders: ‘hey Steal Your Voice’

* An N.F.L. Executive, Honoring His Lost Sister, Speaks Out About Anorexia

* Questioning Evolution: The Push to Change Science Class

* What Doomsday Cults Can Teach Us About \b ISIS\b0  Today

Document NYTFEED020171203edc3004s9



THE THREAD
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The 11.19.17 Issue

861 words
3 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

RE: AIRSTRIKES

Azmat Khan and Anand Gopal wrote about their investigation into the drastic undercounting of civilian deaths in Iraq.

Thank you for this exceptional investigative journalism. I am not at all surprised by the conclusions. I am saddened and ashamed -- but again, not surprised -- that our military is negligent and unwilling to admit that these precision killing machines, drones, are only as precise as our faulty intelligence. The lies and obfuscation about the errors and damage are inexcusable. The foundation of the American presence in Iraq -- the mission to save Iraq from Saddam Hussein, the weapons of mass destruction -- is all lies. I oppose forces trying to re-establish a caliphate and the terror they rain upon their brothers and sisters.

I wish there was a real way for the United States to help those suffering under the terror of ISIS and other fundamentalists. But the U.S. government is doing its best to create new terrorists with our continued role in the wars and the damage we inflict on people. It astounds me that we learned so little from Vietnam that we have been waging war for almost two decades -- wars that are not winnable. Anne Wilson, San Diego

Kudos for this foray into the very real and very ugly side of continuous war. Perhaps it will provide some impetus to hold Congress accountable for their failure to repeal the Authorization for Use of Military Force.

This is the price of constant aerial bombardment, drone ''accuracy'' or not. The Joint Special Operations Command and other military entities have been on a rampage since Sept. 11, if for no other reason than to expend costly arms and munitions to justify their existence and the continual purchase of replacement arms.

The bottom line is that constant war is a moneymaker. Start with that idea as fact, and all military actions make perfect sense. Civilian lives are inconsequential collateral damage as long as the military/industrial/banking complex uses the A.U.M.F. as legal grounds to terrorize the U.S.-subjugated fiefs in their cross-hairs. Jonathan Harder, Killingworth, Conn.

This article shows a terrible, tragic outcome of the war in Iraq. The criticisms of the U.S.-led force are understandable. But I do wonder how much more could be done to reduce civilian deaths, and it's clear that during a war like this, there is no way to eliminate civilian deaths.

The airstrikes that kill civilians are often based on bad or outdated information. But in war, there will always be bad and outdated information. It isn't possible, even with all our vaunted technology, to be absolutely certain that an airstrike will not affect any civilians, or that a target has not moved elsewhere.

I just don't know what the alternative is. If the United States pulls out of this conflict, then the Iraqi government will be waging the war, and I would bet that civilian deaths would rise. Also ISIS would have an easier time establishing itself, facing a weaker enemy. Every time it seizes territory, civilian deaths there rise.

It's a horrible outcome, but I can't see much of a way around it. ISIS must be eliminated, and that will take combat. That combat will kill civilians, and so will ISIS. It's a terrible time to be in Iraq or Syria, hence the millions of refugees. And I can't see any good answer to the problems. Dan Stackhouse, New York City, on nytimes.com

RE: BARSTOOL

Jay Caspian Kang wrote about a new crowd of sports ''bros'' embracing Barstool Sports.

This article provides another example of what is becoming an all-too-common thing these days: A segment of the population comes together and has their tender insecurities justified and then exploited by a small group of people. If people can't enjoy sports and banter while exhibiting basic decency to others, then they should take a look in the mirror and ask themselves: ''Who's the problem here? Is it people who defend the dignity of others being taunted, or is it me?'' Gareth Matthews, Leawood, Kan.

Women are sports fans, too. We play sports. We watch sports. We buy lots of sport merchandise. We sign our kids up for sports.

A lot of us are really over the rape-culture endorsement, the casual racism and the fat jokes, and we will not take our clicks and our money to straight, white, ''rapey'' bro fests.

I don't want my son learning that this is a normal part of being a Massachusetts sports fan. The cheating and the poor sportsmanship are bad enough in New England. It has nothing to do with ''political correctness'' and everything to do with wanting to live in a society of decent human beings. Baseball Fan, Framingham, Mass., on nytimes.com

Send your thoughts to magazine@nytimes.com.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Illustrations by Giacomo Gambineri.

(PHOTOGRAPH BY GILES PRICE/INSTITUTE ILLUSTRATIONS) DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS BY GIACOMO GAMBINERI) 

Document NYTF000020171203edc30007u



WEALTH MATTERS
Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
Still Wary In a Trump Economy

By PAUL SULLIVAN 
1,392 words
2 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Some of President Trump's least controversial tweets involve him boasting about the stock market. It has certainly done well since he was elected a year ago, with the Dow Jones industrial average up more than 30 percent in that time.

On Thursday, the Dow hit a milestone when it closed above 24,000 for the first time, prompting Mr. Trump to take to Twitter again. ''Stock Market hits new Record High. Confidence and enthusiasm abound,'' he wrote. ''More great numbers coming out!''

Few would have predicted a year ago that the market would do so well. Investors who had the fortitude to stay in have benefited mightily by the increase. But the wary ones put their money in more secure assets.

Right before Mr. Trump was elected, I wrote a column on what a Trump presidency would mean for the economy. Most of the people I interviewed were nervous, and they were making defensive moves in their investments -- away from equities and into hard assets like real estate -- or putting plans in place to weather a downturn.

Michael Sonnenfeldt, a New Yorker who made his fortune in real estate, is the chairman of Tiger 21, an investment club for very wealthy people. When I talked to him last year, he revealed the uncertainty investors were facing.

''The combination of potential interest rate shocks and a China implosion and the geopolitical situations with Russia, China, Iran, the Middle East, ISIS, and the difficult political situation in the U.S. with the most challenging, strangest presidential election we've had in our lifetime -- it all adds up to many generic concerns,'' he said at the time.

So how did the market rocket past expectations, and how should investors plan for 2018?

Mr. Trump is not unique among presidents for taking credit for a strong stock market and the broader economy. Most do it, if they can -- just as surely as they try to skirt responsibility when there is a slump.

But the last 12 months of great returns lack the euphoria a person might expect after an increase in the Dow of nearly 30 percent.

Advisers say that is because many individual investors remain afraid that the eight-year bull market is going to collapse, while others struggle to separate Mr. Trump's harsh political language from the strong fundamentals of American companies.

Individual investors are still seeking safe havens. One measure is bond funds, assets that help defend against a downturn. According to Yardeni Research, money continues to flow into bond funds.

''We've had a year of record-low volatility, strong returns and strong macroeconomic indicators,'' said Michael O'Sullivan, chief investment officer for international wealth management at Credit Suisse. ''But politically -- we're in a political recession. People have difficulty squaring the two.''

The firm's global wealth report, released in November, showed that the world had grown wealthier in the last 12 months and not just at the top of the economic pyramid.

''The markets are focused very much on the business cycle, which is picking up,'' Mr. O'Sullivan said. ''That's been a positive surprise, given how badly many people would have said the economy would have fared.''

In other words, the stock market is rising not because of Mr. Trump but in spite of him.

''Our view continues to be that politicians are not as important to investing as they would like investors to believe,'' said Richard Bernstein, chief executive and chief investment officer of Richard Bernstein Advisors, an investment advisory firm. ''That's always been our working model.''

Mr. Bernstein said corporate fundamentals remained strong. ''Corporate profits remain healthy, liquidity remains abundant, and investors generally remain scared of stocks,'' he said.

If presidential tweeting has not been driving the stock market, what should individual investors look for in equities? Analysts said investors should start by separating the political noise from the signals companies were sending out.

For one, any corporate tax cut is not necessarily a short-term gain for the stock market. Edward J. Perkin, chief equity investment officer with Eaton Vance, said a tax cut could actually result in a short-term drop in stock prices. And the companies that have been driving the stock market's growth, like health care and technology firms, will not benefit as much from a tax cut as smaller domestic companies that had not been able to take advantage of the loopholes and deductions under the current tax system.

Other analysts argue that the prospect of tax cuts ceased being a factor in this rally a few months into Mr. Trump's presidency, when he and the Republican Congress failed to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

''Corporate tax cuts are not priced into the market, because there is still skepticism toward the legislative process,'' said John Lynch, chief investment strategist at LPL Financial.

For 2018, analysts are predicting that the stock market will continue to do well but with greater swings.

''I always love corporate profits,'' Mr. Lynch said. ''We can all get really geeky with these valuation measurements, but if you think about it, we have record profits growing slightly above historical rates. The Fed is tightening policy, and we're still growing. That's a pretty good recipe for equity investors.''

Anthony Roth, chief investment officer of Wilmington Trust, said one difference in his strategy was a plan to use more active managers who pick stocks and to cut passively managed index funds. He said Wilmington Trust's research showed that active managers were outperforming the market as a whole.

Or put another way: The skill that an active manager has is valuable in an environment when tweets about politics and people rattle less sophisticated investors.

Today, Mr. Sonnenfeldt said, he and the 580 members of Tiger 21, who have an average net worth of about $100 million, have nearly three-quarters of their money in private equity, real estate and publicly traded stocks.

Over the last year, he said, the group's concern has not been with the political environment but with interest rates and wondering how long they will stay as low at they are. The group remains bullish on the advantages that American businesses have, like lower energy and transportation costs, over competitors in other countries.

So what could end the stock market's run?

CTBC Bank USA put that question to affluent investors in California, New Jersey and New York, all blue states that would be affected by a loss of deductions for state and property taxes. The poll found that they remained confident about the economic and investment landscape, but that they feared a political threat like a conflict with North Korea or a large terrorist attack in the United States.

''The only thing we worry about is this geopolitical risk,'' said Noor Menai, president and chief executive of CTBC Bank USA. ''Nothing gets amplified. Markets take it in stride.''

Yet Mr. Menai said seasoned financial services professionals and institutional investors had a distinct advantage over individual investors.

''We've been through three crises over the past 25 years, and each time the market has reconstructed itself,'' he said. ''Over time, the insiders such as me have come to understand what the hype is versus what can happen.''

But individual investors do not have that knowledge. They still get scared about investing in a rising stock market because they fear it's going to collapse. When that happens, said Judith Ward, a senior financial planner at T. Rowe Price, she asks clients to focus on what they can control.

For example, if they are near retirement and cannot weather a 20 or 30 percent drop in their assets, she said, they should invest more conservatively.

''There is anxiety and uncertainty about the political climate, but my sense is people are looking at their personal situation and asking how is all of this going to impact them,'' she said. And that, she said, can be summed up in one question: ''How long can this bull market last?''

I'll bet you won't find that answer in a tweet.

The New York Stock Exchange on the morning after President Trump's election in 2016. The market has risen significantly since. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JUSTIN LANE/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) (B2) 

Document NYTF000020171202edc200062



U.S.; Politics
American Detained by Military Wants a Lawyer, Government Acknowledges

By CHARLIE SAVAGE 
989 words
30 November 2017
21:23
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —n American citizen who has been held in military custody in Iraq for 11 weeks refused to talk to F.B.I. interrogators without a lawyer after he was warned of his Miranda rights to remain silent and have a lawyer present, the Justice Department told a federal judge on Thursday.

“he individual stated he understood his rights, and said he was willing to talk to the agents but also stated that since he was in a new phase, he felt he should have an attorney present,”he department said in a court filing Thursday afternoon. “he agents explained that due to his current situation, it was unknown when he would be able to have an attorney, and the individual stated that it was O.K. and that he is a patient man.”

The filing came in response to an order by Judge Tanya S. Chutkan of the Federal District Court of the District of Columbia, after a contentious hearing earlier on Thursday during which she warned that the Trump administration seemed to be claiming “nchecked power that is, quite frankly, frightening.”

The case centers on an American who was captured by a Syrian militia in mid-September, apparently fighting for the Islamic State, and turned over to American military forces. Although the International Committee for the Red Cross has visited the detainee twice, the government has kept secret even the most basic facts about him, including his name.

But a senior administration official has told The New York Times that the detainee was born in the United States to foreign parents and raised in an unidentified Middle Eastern country. The official also said that after being interrogated for intelligence purposes, the detainee was read the Miranda warning and had not talked since then.

But Judge Chutkan said on Thursday that she did not want to rely on news reports and wanted the government to disclose such information.

The detainee has raised a dilemma because national security officials believe the man was an Islamic State fighter and do not want to release him, but they lack sufficient evidence to charge him with a terrorism-related crime, officials have said.

At the same time, keeping him in long-term wartime detention without trial as an enemy combatant is seen as unpalatable inside the government, in part because it would give a judge an opportunity to rule that the congressional authorization to fight Al Qaeda does not extend to the Islamic State.

The hearing centered on a habeas corpus lawsuit filed by the American Civil Liberties Union in October on behalf of the man. The rights group is asking Judge Chutkan to order the government to give its lawyers access to the detainee and, more broadly, to declare that his continued indefinite detention without charges is unlawful.

But the Justice Department has argued that the A.C.L.U. has no standing to bring the lawsuit because it has no relationship with him and has not even gained permission from his relatives to represent his interests in court. For that reason, it said, Judge Chutkan lacks jurisdiction and must dismiss the case.

During the hearing, Judge Chutkan, a 2014 appointee of President Barack Obama, signaled discomfort with that position. She accused the Justice Department of employing “ircular reasoning”ince the government’ own actions have prevented him or his relatives from having contact with the lawyers.

The judge also expressed incredulity that the government, two and a half months into the man’ detention, was still trying to decide what to do with him, asking whether there was any limit to how long officials could take.

“ don’ have an answer,” Justice Department lawyer, Kathryn Wyer, replied. She said the government was “iligently”orking on the problem.

The judge also suggested the government was saying it could “natch any U.S. citizen off the street and hold him as an enemy combatant in another country”ndefinitely without letting him or her talk to a lawyer. She then made her comment about frighteningly unchecked power, and she also portrayed the government as essentially saying, “ust trust us; we know what we’e doing.”

Ms. Wyer pushed back, emphasizing that the government took custody of him on a battlefield. Citing a 2008 case about Guantáamo detainees, she said the Supreme Court had said that the government has a right to take some time to decide what to do with prisoners captured in wartime before they may file habeas petitions.

Jonathan Hafetz, an A.C.L.U. lawyer, told the judge that the case was a “ightmare scenario”nd urged her not to dismiss the case, saying that at a minimum she should ask the detainee whether he wanted to file a habeas corpus petition and, if so, wanted the A.C.L.U. to represent him.

But Ms. Wyer argued that Judge Chutkan lacked the authority to carry out even that kind of intervention if the A.C.L.U. had no standing to file the case in the first place.

The court filing suggested that American officials had not raised the issue of a habeas corpus case with the detainee, saying the Justice Department was “ot currently aware of any additional information regarding the individual’ wishes in connection with his invocation of constitutional rights or pursuit of remedies in U.S. courts.”

Follow Charlie Savage on Twitter: @charlie_savage.

* American Held as \b ISIS\b0  Suspect, Creating a Quandary for the Trump Administration

* An American Held as an \b ISIS\b0  Suspect Deserves a Prompt Hearing

An American citizen who was captured by a Syrian militia while apparently fighting for the Islamic State is being held by the United States military. | Ahmad Al-Rubaye/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Judge Tanya S. Chutkan of United States District Court for the District of Columbia. | United States Courts 

Document NYTFEED020171130edbu008sp



Op-Ed Contributor
Opinion
An American Held as an  ISIS  Suspect Deserves a Prompt Hearing

By STEPHEN I. VLADECK 
1,027 words
30 November 2017
11:45
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

AUSTIN, Tex. —he story has a Kafkaesque quality: For nearly two months, the United States government has refused to identify an American suspected of being an Islamic State fighter who is being detained in Iraq.

We may learn more about his story on Thursday when a Federal District Court judge in Washington is scheduled to hear arguments on whether the government, by refusing to identify the man, is effectively frustrating his constitutional right to a judicial review of his detention.

The government is expected to argue that it has the authority to hold the man as an “nemy combatant.”t will also ask Judge Tanya Chutkan to dismiss a lawsuit filed by the American Civil Liberties Union seeking a writ of habeas corpus on the unnamed citizen’ behalf because the group has no relationship to or connection with him.

But even if Judge Chutkan rules against the government and allows the A.C.L.U.’ suit to go forward (as she both can and should), the government has already won a far more important and alarming victory: It has avoided even a preliminary judicial hearing in the case for 11 weeks. Where the liberty of American citizens is concerned, the courts can —nd must —ove faster.

According to news accounts, the man surrendered in Syria on Sept. 12 to rebels affiliated with the Syrian Democratic Forces, reportedly telling them that he had been fighting alongside the Islamic State. A few days later, the Syrians turned the man over to the United States military.

The case has presented a serious quandary for American officials. The Pentagon wants the Justice Department to prosecute him, but Justice officials have been reluctant to take custody of him without more evidence. The man, meantime, has languished in an Iraqi jail, reportedly asking for a lawyer on several occasions, but with no contact with the outside world beyond two visits from the Red Cross.

All the while, the government has refused to identify the man —hich, by design or unintended effect, has greatly complicated the effort to challenge his detention. This is because lawyers who seek to represent him don’ know who he is and can’ obtain permission from him or from family members to proceed on his behalf.

The man’ difficulties in obtaining judicial review are especially problematic because it is not at all obvious that his detention is lawful. Although the Supreme Court ruled in Hamdi v. Rumsfeld in 2004 that the government could detain an American fighting for the Taliban in Afghanistan until the end of hostilities, there are three problems with extending that case to cover this one.

First, the rationale for the Hamdi ruling was based on Congress’ authorization of military force against the perpetrators of the Sept. 11 attacks. But it remains an open question whether that authorization, enacted long before the Islamic State existed, also allows the government to use military force against that group and its members.

Second, even if the 2001 authorization does allow the use of force against the Islamic State, a 1971 law requires a clearer statement from Congress to permit the detention of American citizens, which that 2001 authorization arguably lacks, at least with respect to the Islamic State.

And third, and most important, the Hamdi case held that the Constitution’ due process clause guarantees citizen detainees a meaningful opportunity to contest the factual basis for their detention before a neutral decision maker. Clearly, the man being held in Iraq has had no such chance.

In light of these concerns, on Oct. 5, the A.C.L.U. filed a habeas petition ostensibly on the man’ behalf. The government has argued that the A.C.L.U. should not be allowed to proceed because it cannot demonstrate that it is the man’ “ext friend”—n other words, that it has the necessary permission from him or his closest relatives. The A.C.L.U.’ lawsuit thus appears to present a superficially irreconcilable tension between a citizen’ constitutional right to judicial review and the constitutional limitations on the power of the federal courts, which cannot hear lawsuits brought by plaintiffs who lack “tanding,”ncluding a direct, personal stake in the outcome of the proceeding.

In fact, there’ an easy way for Judge Chutkan to resolve this case: She can simply order the government to ask the prisoner if he authorizes the A.C.L.U. (or any other person or group, else, for that matter) to proceed on his behalf. Assuming he would say yes, the court could then proceed to settle the legality of his detention.

But even if that’ the outcome of Thursday’ hearing, the government will have detained a citizen for at least 11 weeks before even having to provide such a basic judicial process. In ordinary criminal cases, the Supreme Court has held that the Constitution requires suspects to be brought before neutral magistrates within 48 hours of their arrest. Such a short window is, of course, impractical for individuals picked up by the military overseas.

But if 48 hours is too short, 11 weeks is far too long. Once a habeas petition is filed, courts should give the government days, not months, before requiring it to defend the detention of its own citizens without charge.

After all, without the judicial review that the government has so far been able to avoid, how can we be so sure that the prisoner is, in fact, an “nemy combatant” And what’ to stop the government from holding any of us without charge for 11 weeks, as well?

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Stephen I. Vladeck is a professor of law at the University of Texas at Austin.

The Syrian city of Raqqa in September. An American citizen accused of being an Islamic State fighter surrendered in Syria that month and has been detained in Iraq since. | Delil Souleiman/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171130edbu003s6



Foreign Desk; SECTA
The Stories Behind 3 Anti-Muslim Videos Shared by Trump on Twitter

By MEGAN SPECIA; Nour Youssef contributed reporting from Cairo, and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul. 
997 words
30 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
12
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Early Wednesday morning, President Trump set off international outrage when he shared a series of videos depicting Muslims in a negative light.

The videos, taken in three countries at three different times, all have one thing in common: They all purport to show violence carried out by Muslims and offer no clear explanation of what is happening in front of the camera.

But a closer look at the clips, first tweeted out by Jayda Fransen of the fringe nationalist group Britain First and then retweeted by Mr. Trump, reveals more, including that one video misrepresents the facts of what the viewer is seeing, while the other two lack context about what is happening.

Here is a breakdown of what we know about the videos.

'Muslim migrant' beating up Dutch boy was himself Dutch

The first video was of a teenager attacking another boy, and was presented in the tweet as footage of a ''Muslim migrant'' attacking a Dutch boy.

But according to local officials, both boys are Dutch, and neither is a migrant.

The clip was taken in May in Monnickendam, a small town in the North Holland province of the Netherlands. It shows a teenager punching and kicking a boy holding a crutch.

The public prosecutor's office in the province said the aggressor was a 16-year-old who was ''born and raised in the Netherlands.'' He was arrested after the video came to light, officials said.

The video gives no indication of the background of either teenager. Both are speaking Dutch in the clip.

Marleen van Fessem, a press officer for the public prosecutor, said in a statement that the teenager was sentenced under a program for juvenile offenders.

Mrs. van Fessem would not elaborate on the religion of either of the teenagers, saying it was not policy to discuss such information. But she said the rapid spread of the video without the facts was detrimental.

''News travels fast, even local news!'' she said. ''Missing context information clearly can affect its reliability.''

On Wednesday afternoon, the official Twitter account of the Embassy of the Netherlands in the United States pointed out the facts of the case to the president.

It is unclear where Ms. Fransen's version of events came from when she tweeted the video early Wednesday with the caption ''Muslim migrant beats up Dutch boy on crutches!'' Britain First did not respond to requests for comment.

Statue of Virgin Mary destroyed by Syrian extremist

The second video retweeted by Mr. Trump shows a man smashing a statue of the Virgin Mary in Syria.

The original tweet with the video describes the man simply as ''Muslim.'' But he is an extremist Syrian cleric, Abo Omar Ghabra, who was in the militant Islamist group Jabhet al-Nusra at the time. The destruction of religious iconography carried out by extremist Islamist groups has long been condemned by the wider Muslim population. The tweet lacks this context.

The incident took place in October 2013 in Qunaya, a village in the northern countryside of Idlib Province, said Nazir Abdo, 28, who lived in the village at the time.

Mr. Abdo now works as a media activist documenting human rights violations in Syria and was reached in Turkey by phone. He said the cleric later joined ISIS in Raqqa but fled when United States-backed forces captured the city. Mr. Ghabra was eventually detained by Syrian rebels in Aleppo.

Before this incident, Jabhet al-Nusra militants destroyed another statue of the Virgin Mary on the city's main roundabout by chopping it with an ax and then demolishing it. They later erected their flag there.

The footage of Mr. Ghabra was widely circulated by several groups in 2013, including the Iranian state-run news outlet Al Alam and Alex Jones' InfoWars -- the right-wing site that often propagates conspiracy theories and rumor -- which posted this piece on it that year. It has continued to find new life in the world of far-right, anti-Muslim outlets and conservative media activists.

Footage of man pushed from building during Egypt unrest

The last clip retweeted by Mr. Trump was described in the original tweet as: ''Islamist mob pushes teenage boy off roof and beats him to death!''

The footage was taken on July 5, 2013, during clashes in the Sidi Gaber neighborhood of Alexandria, Egypt, between supporters of Mohamed Morsi, who had recently been ousted as the democratically elected president, and his opponents. That information was missing from the tweet, as was any explanation of the complex political situation in Egypt at the time.

The episode occurred days after the Egyptian military overthrew Mr. Morsi, when tensions were running high across the political spectrum. After Mr. Morsi's removal, there was a wave of clashes between his supporters, opponents and the police in different parts of Egypt. That violence was then later dwarfed by the military's dispersal of Islamist sit-ins in Cairo that August, which killed over 800 protesters in a single day.

[Video: Sidi Gaber 5 July 2013 Watch on YouTube.]

A man in the background of the video can be seen carrying a black flag, which was initially carried by many supporters of different Islamist groups before it became synonymous with the Islamic State.

The man with the black flag, Mahmoud Ramadan, was found guilty of murder for the death of one of the teenagers pushed off the roof; he was hanged in March 2015. The teenagers on the roof were believed to have thrown stones at an anti-military rally, which may have provoked the assault captured on video, according to Egyptian state media.

While the video was a clear depiction of violence, tweeting it without context fails to take into account the political unrest and the actions from many parties that were driven by political affiliations.

Document NYTF000020171130edbu0006y



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
OpEd; SECT
Will lying lead to war with Iran?

By MEHDI HASAN 
1,185 words
30 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The International New York Times
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A decade and a half ago, in the run-up to the invasion of Iraq, President George W. Bush's administration conjured up not only terrifying images of nuclear mushroom clouds but also of Saddam Hussein plotting with Osama bin Laden to attack the United States.

Mr. Bush himself declared that Mr. Hussein ''aids and protects terrorists, including members of Al Qaeda'' while Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld called links between Iraq and Al Qaeda ''accurate and not debatable.''

It wasn't true, of course. But it helped make the case for war.

That may be why a similar lie is getting trotted out again now, except this time the target is Iraq's neighbor, Iran.

On Oct. 13, in his statement decertifying the Iran nuclear deal, President Trump claimed that Tehran ''provides assistance to Al Qaeda.'' The following week, his C.I.A. chief, Mike Pompeo, went further: ''It's an open secret and not classified information that there have been relationships, there are connections,'' Mr. Pompeo said at an event hosted by the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, a neoconservative think tank. ''There have been times the Iranians have worked alongside Al Qaeda.''

On Nov. 1, the C.I.A. released a new batch of nearly 470,000 files recovered in the 2011 raid on Osama bin Laden's compound in Pakistan. But the agency did more than just release the documents to the public. It provided advance copies to the foundation's online publication, Long War Journal. (The C.I.A. said it was common practice to distribute declassified documents to the news media and academic organizations on an embargoed basis and that the only agenda in releasing these files was ''to enhance public understanding'' of Al Qaeda.)

Long War Journal homed in on a 19-page document by an unidentified Qaeda official who claimed that the Iranian government had offered ''Saudi brothers'' in Al Qaeda ''everything they needed,'' including money, arms and training in Hezbollah camps in Lebanon, ''in exchange for striking American interests in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf.'' Yet the Iranian offer, admitted the official, was never accepted by Al Qaeda -- if such an offer was in fact made.

The timing of these latest claims from the president and his C.I.A. chief are hardly coincidental. Tensions in the Middle East are ramping up. America's chief allies in the region, Saudi Arabia and Israel, are pushing even more aggressively than usual to confront Iran. With the Obama administration gone, they have found a soul mate in the White House.

President Trump has staffed his administration with hawks who believe that the road to solving the Middle East's problems runs through Tehran. Nikki Haley, the American ambassador to the United Nations, has accused Iran of trying to ''hold the world hostage to its bad behavior.'' Defense Secretary James Mattis once described the three biggest threats to American national security as ''Iran, Iran, Iran.''

A former State Department official who worked under Mr. Trump's secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, told me that the Trump administration is ''obsessed'' with Iran in the same way that the Reagan administration was obsessed with the Soviet Union. Inside the government, the former official added, ''Iran, ISIS, Al Qaeda, are all mentioned in the same breath, as a menacing threat.''

But Americans aren't exactly itching for a new war. (A majority, in fact, believes the country would be better off staying in the nuclear deal with Iran.) So how can the Trump administration build a case for a pre-emptive strike?

Those claims of a nefarious alliance with Al Qaeda might help. The ''bomb Iran'' crowd has long pointed to the presence of senior Qaeda officials, including members of the Bin Laden family, inside Iran since late 2001.

But Iran is far from being a base or command center for Al Qaeda. In 2001, after hundreds of Qaeda fighters crossed into Iran from Afghanistan fleeing American airstrikes, the Iranians deported most of them back to their countries of origin. In 2003, the Iranians offered to swap Qaeda members held under house arrest for members of Mujahedeen Khalq, a militant group that seeks to overthrow the Iranian government, who are being detained by American forces in Iraq.

The relationship between the Salafi Sunnis of Al Qaeda and the Shiite clerics of Iran is ''not one of alliance'' but ''highly antagonistic'' and ''largely based on indirect and unpleasant negotiations over the release of detained jihadis and their families, including members of Bin Ladin's family,'' according to a 2012 report by the Combating Terrorism Center at the United States Military Academy at West Point. The report said that Iran held onto senior Qaeda figures not to protect or assist them but to use them as bargaining chips with the United States and also as a deterrent against Qaeda attacks.

When I asked terrorism experts what they made of the alleged Iran-Al Qaeda ties, they were unanimous in their incredulity.

''I've never seen any evidence of active collaboration,'' said Jason Burke, the author of an acclaimed book on Al Qaeda.

Ali Soufan, a former F.B.I. agent and the author of the new book ''Anatomy of Terror,'' dismissed the coverage of the C.I.A.'s documents as an ''oversimplification of the facts'' and a result of ''the Trump administration joining Saudi Arabia's anti-Iran campaign.''

Few would deny that Iran has sponsored groups listed by the United States as ''foreign terrorist organizations,'' such as Hamas and Hezbollah. But, say the experts, support for Al Qaeda is another matter altogether. As William McCants, a former American government adviser on extremism and author of a recent book on the Islamic State, put it, Iran and Al Qaeda ''never embraced as lovers.''

So far, none of the documents newly released by the C.I.A. contains a smoking gun. Have Iranian security forces and members of Al Qaeda had contacts, or done deals? Probably. Are there Qaeda figures still living in Iran? Almost definitely. Does that mean there's an anti-American alliance between Iran and Al Qaeda? No.

Mr. Trump, like Mr. Bush before him, is beating the drum for war in the Middle East. But he needs a pretext for an attack on a sovereign nation that, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency, is complying with the terms of the nuclear deal. The American public fell for a false pretext in 2003 -- and it cannot afford to do so again. Saddam Hussein was not allied with Al Qaeda; for all its faults, neither is the Iranian government.

As Mr. Bush himself once famously tried, yet failed, to say: ''Fool me once, shame on you; fool me twice, shame on me.''

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Mehdi Hasan (@mehdirhasan) is the host of Al Jazeera English's program ''UpFront,'' a columnist for The Intercept and a contributing editor to New Statesman.

Document NYTF000020171130edbu00052



THE CARPETBAGGER
The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
'The Post' Wins Big With Board of Review

By CARA BUCKLEY 
548 words
30 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
3
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

After big wins at Monday night's Gotham Awards, ''Get Out,'' ''Lady Bird'' and ''Call Me by Your Name'' picked up more awards season momentum on Tuesday, when the National Board of Review announced its top movies and performances of the year.

But it was ''The Post,'' the coming Steven Spielberg film about The Washington Post's role in publishing the Pentagon Papers, that collected the top prizes: best picture, along with best actor and actress for Tom Hanks and Meryl Streep.

Greta Gerwig also won big, landing best director for her film ''Lady Bird,'' which also garnered a supporting actress award for Laurie Metcalfe.

''Call Me's'' young star, Timothé Chalamet, won the board's breakthrough performance award -- after collecting the same prize the night before at the Gothams -- and Jordan Peele won best directorial debut for ''Get Out,'' having won the same prize at the Gothams, too. ''Get Out'' also won the board's best ensemble award.

And Willem Dafoe was named best supporting actor for the ''The Florida Project,'' after losing best actor at the Gothams to James Franco (of ''The Disaster Artist''). Pixar's ''Coco'' won best animated film, and the Jane Goodall biopic ''Jane'' landed best documentary.

Another stop on the seasonal circuit, the National Board of Review prizes are loosely predictive of Academy Award nominees and winners, and yet another indicator of where the winds are blowing. Last year, board winners Casey Affleck and Kenneth Lonergan went on to nab Oscars; the board also named ''O.J.: Made in America'' best documentary and ''The Salesman'' best foreign-language film, foreshadowing those Oscar wins as well.

The NBR Awards Gala will be held Jan. 9 at Cipriani 42nd Street.

Here is the full list of winners:

Best Film: ''The Post''

Best Director: Greta Gerwig, ''Lady Bird''

Best Actor: Tom Hanks, ''The Post''

Best Actress: Meryl Streep, ''The Post''

Best Supporting Actor: Willem Dafoe, ''The Florida Project''

Best Supporting Actress: Laurie Metcalf, ''Lady Bird''

Best Original Screenplay: Paul Thomas Anderson, ''Phantom Thread''

Best Adapted Screenplay: Scott Neustadter and Michael H. Weber, ''The Disaster Artist''

Best Animated Feature: ''Coco''

Breakthrough Performance: Timothé Chalamet, ''Call Me by Your Name''

Best Directorial Debut: Jordan Peele, ''Get Out''

Best Foreign Language Film: ''Foxtrot'' (from Israel)

Best Documentary: ''Jane''

Best Ensemble: ''Get Out''

Spotlight Award: ''Wonder Woman,'' Patty Jenkins and Gal Gadot

NBR Freedom of Expression Award: ''First They Killed My Father''

NBR Freedom of Expression Award: ''Let It Fall: Los Angeles 1982-1992''

Top Films

''Baby Driver''

''Call Me by Your Name''

''The Disaster Artist''

''Downsizing''

''Dunkirk''

''The Florida Project''

''Get Out''

''Lady Bird''

''Logan''

''Phantom Thread''

Top 5 Foreign Language Films

''A Fantastic Woman''

''Frantz''

''Loveless''

''Summer 1993''

''The Square''

Top 5 Documentaries

''Abacus: Small Enough to Jail''

''Brimstone & Glory''

''Eric Clapton: Life in 12 bars''

''Faces Places''

''Hell on Earth: The Fall of Syria and the Rise of Isis''

Top 10 Independent Films

''Beatriz at Dinner''

''Brigsby Bear''

''A Ghost Story''

''Lady Macbeth''

''Logan Lucky''

''Loving Vincent''

''Menashe''

''Norman: The moderate Rise and Tragic Fall of a New York Fixer''

''Patti Cake$''

''Wind River''

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020171130edbu0002u



Briefing
Matt Lauer, North Korea, Reno: Your Wednesday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,591 words
29 November 2017
11:39
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

Getting to a yes on tax cuts.

•epublicans sound increasingly optimistic about the fate of the Senate’ tax bill, after the Budget Committee voted along party lines on Tuesday to advance the $1.5 trillion package. Follow the latest developments on our live briefing.

Here’ what the bill would mean for 25,000 middle-class families.

With a procedural vote planned today, the Republican mood is far different from earlier this year: “t this point in the health care debate, people were walking out and talking about each other’ mamas and getting mad and it just wasn’ healthy, it wasn’ productive,”ne senator said. “t was like a bunch of kids in the back of a minivan.”

•lso on Tuesday, the effort to avert a government shutdown next month got off to a rocky start after talks between President Trump and Democratic leaders broke down.

NBC fires Matt Lauer.

•The network has dismissed Mr. Lauer, its leading morning news anchor, over a sexual harassment allegation.

Andrew Lack, the network’ president for news, said in a memo sent to staff today that a “etailed complaint from a colleague”gainst Mr. Lauer “epresented, after serious review, a clear violation of our company’ standards. As a result, we’e decided to terminate his employment.”

•r. Lauer’ co-host, Savannah Guthrie, announced the news on “oday”his morning. Appearing on the verge of tears, Ms. Guthrie said, “ll we can say is we are heartbroken; I’ heartbroken.”Read a transcript of her remarks.)

North Korea says entire U.S. is in range.

•yongyang said today that it had successfully tested a missile that could deliver nuclear warheads anywhere in the continental U.S.

President Trump said “e will handle”he situation. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis noted that the rocket “ent higher, frankly, than any previous shot they’e taken.”

•xperts said the launch underscored the increasing sophistication of North Korea’ program.

The president’ changing reality.

•resident Trump once said that the infamous “ccess Hollywood”ape of his making vulgar comments about women was authentic. Now, he’ not so sure.

“e don’ think that was my voice,”r. Trump told a senator in January. And the president has continued to seed doubt about the tape. The White House declined to comment, but some of Mr. Trump’ advisers say he harbors a handful of conspiracy theories that have no grounding in fact.

The aides say that behind closed doors, Mr. Trump has questioned former President Barack Obama’ birth certificate and claimed that he lost the popular vote last year because of fraud.

•his morning, the president shared videos on Twitter supposedly portraying Muslims committing acts of violence. The images were originally posted by a far-right activist in Britain.

Gunman opens fire in Reno.

•An assailant took a hostage and opened fire from the eighth floor of a luxury high-rise condominium in Reno, Nev., on Tuesday, shooting for about 20 minutes onto the streets below, the authorities said.

No injuries were reported in the episode, which was reminiscent of the mass shooting in Las Vegas in October. The gunman died, though it was unclear whether he had been killed by police gunfire or had shot himself.

•eparately, the Air Force said it had failed to report dozens of service members to a federal gun background-check database as required. The Air Force also didn’ report the domestic violence conviction of the gunman in this month’ church shooting in Texas.

The diary that could upend the Olympics.

•ournals kept by a chemist provide a new level of detail about Russia’ elaborate cheating at the last Winter Olympics.

The notes, seen exclusively by The Times, are among the critical pieces of evidence that could result in Russia being absent from the next Games.

•lympic officials will announce their decision on Dec. 5.

“he Daily” The unpaid price of fighting ISIS.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•n a win for President Trump, his pick, Mick Mulvaney, will be the acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.

•t usually doesn’ take much to get internet users worked up. To get them really worked up, make the topic internet regulation.

That includes our tech columnist, who says that killing so-called net neutrality rules would also kill the internet as we know it.

•etail jobs don’ need to be bad, our economics columnist writes.

•.S. stocks were up on Tuesday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

• movie stylist offers tips for style on a budget.

•ow to paint your apartment, with tips from a professional.

•ecipe of the day: Hearty split pea soup can be even better with bacon. (Not all readers agreed.)

Noteworthy

•he physical internet.

In today’ 360 video, visit Herald Square in New York City, where we identify the objects that help make our online lives possible.

•ow far will Sean Hannity go?

The Fox News host is willing to defend President Trump at all costs, and he is reaching 13.5 million people a day doing it.

The Times Magazine profiled the man whom Stephen Bannon calls “he single most important voice for the ‘eplorables.’”

•gly Baby’ pretty dishes.

A memorably named Thai restaurant in Brooklyn offers items rarely seen in New York City, our critic Pete Wells writes.

•est of late-night TV.

Bernie Sanders received a Grammy nod for the audiobook version of “ur Revolution.”“e was nominated in the shouted-word category,”Seth Meyers said.

For late-night hosts, being sharply critical of President Trump has been a winning strategy. That’ bad news for Jimmy Fallon and “he Tonight Show.”

•uotation of the day.

“here’ no way we could survive if there were more fires than snakes.”

—Prayul Krongyos, deputy director of the Bangkok Fire and Rescue Department, which has responded to more than 31,000 calls about snakes this year. Some pythons have even slithered up through toilets.

Back Story

Call it the Trumpchi conundrum. China finally feels it has a car capable of following vehicles from Japan, Germany and South Korea into the U.S. market. But its biggest roadblock might be its name.

The Chinese automaker GAC Motor insists that its popular Trumpchi vehicles, which went into mass production in 2010, have nothing to do with the U.S. president.

Even so, when we reported last week on plans to sell the Trumpchi in the U.S. by 2019, GAC officials said that they might rethink the branding.

Automotive history, littered as it is with unfortunate car names, suggests this is probably a good idea.

There’ been the Mazda Scrum Wagon, the Mitsubishi Lettuce, the Nissan Homy Super Long and the Isuzu GIGA 20 Light Dump, not to be confused with the Honda Life Dunk.

Volkswagen offered the Tiguan, a mash-up of tiger and iguana, Ford shortened cougar into Kuga for some markets, and Renault famously had Le Car.

General Motors has long been ridiculed for marketing the Chevy Nova in Spanish-speaking countries, where the name translates to “oesn’ go”“o va”. The Nova actually sold well in Latin America.

GAC officials told our Shanghai bureau chief that, in Chinese, Trumpchi sounded a little like “assing on happiness.”ny decision on changing the name, they said, would be announced in January —t an auto show in Detroit.

Charles McDermid contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated all morning. Browse past briefings here.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can get the briefing delivered to your inbox Sunday through Friday. We have four global editions, timed for the Americas, Europe, Asia and Australia, and an Evening Briefing on weeknights. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Follow Chris Stanford on Twitter: @stanfordc.

Protesters against the proposed tax overhaul were detained on Capitol Hill on Tuesday. | Tasos Katopodis/Getty Images | At the White House on Tuesday, President Trump sat between empty seats meant for Senator Chuck Schumer and Representative Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic leaders. | Doug Mills/The New York Times | Matt Lauer in New York in 2014. | Larry Busacca/Getty Images | The diary of Grigory Rodchenkov, the former director of Russia’ antidoping lab. | Hilary Swift for The New York Times | A python at a fire station in Bangkok. Most of the snakes rescued by firefighters are eventually released in the wild. | Amanda Mustard for The New York Times | A Trumpchi electric car at a motor show in Guangzhou, China, this year. | Billy H.C. Kwok for The New York Times | Although Donald Trump publicly apologized after the release of a video in which he admitted to groping women, people close to him say that privately he has expressed doubts that the voice in the recording is his. | By ROBIN LINDSAY | The writer and artist Ingrid Burrington helps us identify the physical objects that make up the internet all around us everyday. | By JOSEPHINE SEDGWICK, NICOLE FINEMAN and TIM CHAFFEE 

Document NYTFEED020171129edbt002mh



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Driver's Plea In Rampage On Bike Path: Not Guilty

By VIVIAN WANG 
658 words
29 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
18
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The man accused of driving a pickup truck down a crowded Manhattan bike path in what officials called the deadliest terrorist attack on New York City since Sept. 11, 2001, pleaded not guilty on Tuesday to multiple charges of murder and attempted murder in aid of racketeering.

The man, Sayfullo Saipov, was charged in Federal District Court in Manhattan with eight counts of murder in aid of racketeering activity, 12 counts of attempted murder in aid of racketeering activity, providing material support and resources to a foreign terrorist organization, and violence and destruction of motor vehicles.

The racketeering activity referred to the terrorism of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS; according to the indictment handed up by a grand jury on Nov. 21, Mr. Saipov acted ''for the purpose of gaining entrance to ISIS.''

After plowing through bikers and pedestrians on the Hudson River Greenway shortly after 3 p.m. on Oct. 31, Mr. Saipov leapt out of his rented Home Depot truck and brandished a pellet gun and a paintball gun, shouting ''Allahu akbar,'' Arabic for ''God is great,'' before he was shot by a police officer, the authorities said.

Investigators also found handwritten notes in Arabic near the truck that indicated allegiance to the Islamic State. On Mr. Saipov's cellphone, F.B.I. agents discovered thousands of videos and images, including those of Islamic State fighters and instructions for making an explosive device, according to the criminal complaint filed Nov. 1.

At Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan, where Mr. Saipov was taken after being shot, he asked officials to hang the Islamic State flag in his hospital room, the complaint said. He told them he ''felt good about what he had done.''

Mr. Saipov, 29, appeared before Judge Vernon S. Broderick on Tuesday in greenish-gray pants and a dark blue shirt that hung loosely on his rail-thin frame. While he arrived in a wheelchair to his first court appearance on Nov. 1, he walked on his own on Tuesday.

His lawyer, David Patton, the chief federal public defender in New York City, announced Mr. Saipov's not guilty plea. Mr. Saipov spoke only once, answering ''Yes'' in a loud, strong voice when the judge asked if he could hear his Uzbek interpreter. (Mr. Saipov immigrated from Uzbekistan in 2010.)

The murder charges and the charge of violence and destruction of motor vehicles carry a possible death sentence. President Trump has called for Mr. Saipov to receive the death penalty, but officials have not decided whether they plan to pursue it. The final decision usually rests with the attorney general.

After the attack, Attorney General Jeff Sessions said the administration would use ''all lawful tools at our disposal'' to prosecute terrorism.

Mr. Patton told the judge he plans to submit a recommendation for learned counsel, or a lawyer with experience in death penalty cases, within a month.

It is rare for federal prosecutors to seek the death penalty. In Manhattan, federal prosecutors have not sought the death penalty since the case of Khalid Barnes, who was convicted in 2009 of two drug-related murders. A jury sentenced him to life in prison.

In the murder of two New York police detectives, juries in Federal District Court in Brooklyn sentenced Ronell Wilson to death in 2007 and again in 2013, after an appeals court vacated the first sentence. A federal judge struck down the second sentence in 2016.

In another high-profile terrorism case, a Boston jury in 2015 sentenced Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, who was convicted of orchestrating the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing, to death; it was the first time a federal jury had sentenced a terrorist to death in the post-Sept. 11 era, Kevin McNally, director of the Federal Death Penalty Resource Counsel Project, said at the time.

Follow Vivian Wang on Twitter: @vwang3

Sayfullo Saipov 

Document NYTF000020171129edbt0005p



ART REVIEW
The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
Arabic-Galactic Wonder

By HOLLAND COTTER 
1,729 words
29 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates -- A decade in the planning and five years past its due date, the Louvre Abu Dhabi has finally opened here in this sun-scoured capital city of the United Arab Emirates. And whatever else can be said of the new museum, it's a sight to see.

Starchitecture is out of fashion these days, but it can still produce visual wonders. The look of the Louvre Abu Dhabi, designed by Jean Nouvel, might be described as Arabic-galactic. In the form of an immense, filigreed gray half-sphere resting on a low base infiltrated by water channels, it could pass as a spaceship, an unfinished mosque or a Venetian pavilion set on the edge of the Persian Gulf.

Seen from beneath, the filigree is porous and open to the sky, but so densely layered as to create a light-dappled shade. And the dome completely covers a cluster of white-walled, flat-roofed museum buildings -- galleries, an auditorium, a cafe -- that look both white-box Modern and like traditional-style Emirati houses seen in villages outside this vertical glass-and-steel city.

The museum is technically in the city, though not in a way that feels organic. It stands on a large outcropping named -- probably by the powerful, government-run Abu Dhabi Tourism and Cultural Authority, or its development arm -- Saadiyat Island, or ''Island of Happiness.'' Connected by a bridge to the mainland, this site will eventually be a ''cultural district,'' bristling with hotels, condos, malls and other museums, including an Abu Dhabi Guggenheim. Paid for with hydrocarbon cash and built largely by South Asian laborers, Saadiyat has been fabricated primarily as a destination for a global leisured class.

The Louvre Abu Dhabi is a fabrication, too. It isn't an official Louvre franchise. For the equivalent of $1.15 billion, the museum has temporarily leased the Louvre brand. It can use the illustrious name for 30 years and borrow works from the Louvre and a dozen other French state institutions (the Musé d'Orsay, the Centre Pompidou, the Bibliothèue Nationale, etc.) for a decade. This will give the new museum time to assemble a permanent collection -- the acquisition process is well underway -- and create its own version of a global art history.

And what does that history, currently fleshed out with loans, look like? Item by item, pretty sensational. And how does it read as a narrative? The narrative is engagingly well paced, but -- and this is true of every encyclopedic museum I'm familiar with -- sugarcoated and incomplete.

Spread through 23 galleries, the inaugural display of some 600 objects -- 300 from French museums, two dozen from Middle Eastern collections and around 230 from the Louvre Abu Dhabi itself -- adheres to a textbook timeline. Where it is innovative is in being intercultural, with Western and non-Western work shown side by side.

A few big international museums have experimented with this kind of mix. None that I know of have committed to it, made it a house style. Elsewhere, old colonialist classifications, shaped along geographic and ethnic lines, are still deeply ingrained, not to mention politically useful. But the Louvre Abu Dhabi has not only gone with a fully integrated model; it also promotes that model as its distinguishing feature.

The way it works is clearly set out in an introductory ''vestibule,'' where vitrines hold small groups of thematically related objects. A bronze statuette of the Egyptian goddess Isis nursing the infant Horus, from 400-800 B.C.; a 14th-century ivory Virgin and Child from France; and a 19th-century carved wood mother and child from the Democratic Republic of Congo together project a common image of maternity across cultures and millenniums. Three gold funerary masks -- from ancient China, Peru and Syria -- suggest a widely shared association of precious materials with immortality and remembrance.

This sort of grouping can be simplistic and historically inexact, but as a strategy, it has its uses. It's really the only way to go for a broad-spectrum collection in progress. Although the Louvre Abu Dhabi has done a lot of buying -- prehistoric to contemporary -- since 2009, its rapidly gathered holdings have breadth but not depth. To show single strong objects from all over the map is a way to make a virtue of this limitation.

A mix-and-match approach also has potential advantages for education and visitor engagement. The Louvre Abu Dhabi is banking on the theory that pointing out links among a wide variety of cultures will make all art feel more approachable to the global audience it hopes to attract. Once viewers gain the habit of spotting connections, they may come to accept that all cultures are equally valuable and personally relevant. That, at least, seems to be the thinking, and it makes sense.

After the introductory gallery, the installation moves on in epochal chunks, from ''The First Villages'' to ''The Global Stage'' of the 21st century, with religion, trade and politics as driving themes. The route, as laid out, doesn't offer much in the way of scholarly news, but fabulous images abound.

A monumental sculpture of a two-headed, joined-at-the-shoulders human form is hand-modeled in plaster (you can almost see the impression of thumb prints) and dated around 6500 B.C. On loan from the Department of Antiquities in Jordan, it's Giacometti before Giacometti. Nearby and much smaller, but every bit as magnetic, is a statuette of a gamin-faced Bactrian ''princess,'' dated 2300-1700 B.C., from what is now modern Afghanistan, wrapped in what looks like a floor-length puffer coat. That this sculpture is a recent Louvre Abu Dhabi acquisition confirms that there's some smart (and provenance-challenging) shopping going on.

Both sculptures are naturals in a Middle Eastern museum. But there are surprises to come a few galleries on, in a pairing of globalist soul mates: A wood sculpture of a near-nude Jesus from 16th-century Bavaria and an entirely nude male ancestor figure from Mali stand side by side. Elsewhere, Qurans, Bibles and Buddhist sutras float together in protective darkness. Far-flung place names -- Beirut, Dakar, Dubai, Fontainebleau, Jingdezhen, Mathura, Teotihuacan -- appear on adjacent labels.

Works that qualify as instantly recognizable ''classics'' to a Western viewer feel surreally exotic in this multiculturalist environment. Leonardo da Vinci's ''La Belle Ferronnièe'' (1495-99), a kind of second-tier ''Mona Lisa'' sent by the Louvre in Paris, is one. Another is an 1822 Gilbert Stuart portrait of a schoolmarmish George Washington that has taken up permanent residence here. (The Louvre Abu Dhabi owns it.) And then there's Jacques-Louis David's towering, storm-racked equestrian image of Napoleon Bonaparte crossing the Alps, looking very far away indeed, in both miles and mood, from its home in Versailles.

The David has been dutifully integrated into a thematic ensemble, but to some of us -- and probably more and more of us in the internet age -- it's a rock star.

In an ''Arab world'' museum, the presence here of a hagiographic image of Napoleon, colonialist invader of Islamic North Africa and pilferer of non-Western art, is ripe with political irony. Yet nothing is made of this. Only further on, in a section of late-19th- and early-20th-century works grouped under the label ''Modern Orientalism,'' is the impact of colonialism on art acknowledged. And there it is given a positive spin.

At no point, in fact, does the overall installation, basically an illustrated chronicle of world cultural history, raise basic critical issues. Slavery, ubiquitous through the ages, and notably on the Arabian Peninsula, goes unmentioned. Ideological repression, political and religious, is skimmed over. Warrior culture, the wielding of power through almost exclusively male aggression, is given a pass; more than that, it's glamorized. In a section called ''The Art of War,'' the message seems to be: Look how well fighters dressed!

In short, the Louvre Abu Dhabi fails where most, if not all, encyclopedic art museums do: in truth-telling. And the failure applies to the present as much as to the past. In news releases and public advertising, the institution promises to be ''a museum for everyone''; to show ''humanity in a new light''; to embody an ''openness'' and ''harmony'' reflecting the ''tolerant and accepting environment'' of Emirati society. But in the years since the building broke ground, international human rights groups have repeatedly criticized the Abu Dhabi government for mistreatment of immigrant laborers at work on Saadiyat Island projects.

During the museum's inaugural week, two Swiss journalists, filming laborers as part of their coverage of the opening, were arrested by the police, grilled, forced to sign a ''confession'' and then expelled from the country. Over the past several years, people campaigning for workers' rights have been barred from entering Abu Dhabi, or deported.

A walk through Mr. Nouvel's domed museum complex, with its luminous shade and its breeze-channeling sea vistas, is an enchantment, almost enough to make you forget grim physical and social realities that went into creating it. And the manifold beauty of galleries filled with charismatic objects nearly persuades you not to remember that art is a record of crimes as well as of benign achievements. It takes an exercise in ethical balance to engage fully with our great museums, to walk the shaky bridge they construct between aesthetics and politics. A mindful visit to the Louvre Abu Dhabi requires this balance. That may be what is most universal about it.

The Louvre Abu Dhabi

United Arab Emirates; louvreabudhabi.ae.

Top, Jacques-Louis David's image of Napoleon Bonaparte crossing the Alps, on loan to the Louvre Abu Dhabi from Versailles. The new museum in the United Arab Emirates was designed by Jean Nouvel and is temporarily leasing the Louvre brand. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KATARINA PREMFORS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C1); Clockwise from top: ''Walking Man, on a Column,'' by Auguste Rodin, and Jenny Holzer's marble relief of cuneiform text; the ''First Great Powers Gallery,'' with works from Egypt and Iraq; a 1498 Pentateuch from Yemen; ''Food for Thought -- Al Muallaqat,'' by Maha Malluh; a sculpture circa 6500 B.C. is ''Giacometti before Giacometti.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KATARINA PREMFORS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; JONATHAN GIBBONS/LOUVRE ABU DHABI) (C7) 

Document NYTF000020171129edbt00034



TEHRAN'S TURN: THE NEW PATRIOTS
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Iranians United By Foreign Foes

By THOMAS ERDBRINK 
1,807 words
27 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

TEHRAN -- The busiest square in Tehran is dominated by an enormous billboard with a drawing of a young man in the uniform of the Revolutionary Guards Corps, extending his hand to invite Iranians to follow his path. Underneath the image, teenagers line up, flashing victory signs, as they take selfies with the placard in the background.

In life, the man on the billboard, 26-year-old Mohsen Hojaji, was just as anonymous as the thousands of other Iranians who have rotated in and out of war zones in Iraq and Syria in recent years. But after having been taken prisoner, videotaped and later beheaded by the Islamic State in August, Mr. Hojaji has been transformed by Iran's government into a war hero, the face of a new surge in Iranian nationalism.

After years of cynicism, sneering or simply tuning out all things political, Iran's urban middle classes have been swept up in a wave of nationalist fervor.

The changing attitude, while some years in the making, can be attributed to two related factors: the election of President Trump and the growing competition with Saudi Arabia, Iran's sectarian rival, for regional dominance.

Iranians listened during the 2016 campaign as Mr. Trump denounced the Iran nuclear treaty as ''the worst deal ever negotiated'' and promised to tear it up. They watched in horror when, as president, he sold more than $100 billion worth of weapons to the kingdom of Saudi Arabia and participated in a traditional war dance in Riyadh. And they are alarmed at the foreign policy moves of the young Saudi crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, whom they see as hotheaded and inexperienced.

At the same time, they now believe they have something to be proud of, with Iranian-led militias playing a central role in defeating the Islamic State militant group in Syria and Iraq, increasing Iran's regional influence in the process.

The two most popular stars in Iran today -- a country with thriving film, theater and music industries -- are not actors or singers but two establishment figures: Gen. Qassim Suleimani, the leader of Iran's regional military effort, which is widely seen as a smashing success; and the foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, the symbol of a reasonable and measured Iran.

In short, it appears that Mr. Trump and the Saudis have helped the government achieve what years of repression could never accomplish: widespread public support for the hard-line view that the United States and Riyadh cannot be trusted and that Iran is now a strong and capable state capable of staring down its enemies.

On the day of a state-orchestrated commemoration ceremony for Mr. Hojaji, Morteza Hosseinzadeh, a 33-year-old graduate of theater studies at Tehran University who considers himself a reformist, came out early to pay his respects. Dressed in black and holding a poster bearing the portrait of the new martyr, he looked every bit like the hard-line supporters of the clerical government.

''There are many here like me, who don't care for the Islamic Republic and its rules,'' he said. ''But today is about something bigger than that, one of us has been killed. At the same time this American president is breaking our hearts with his rhetoric and threats. We have to choose sides. I choose for my country.''

Iran's hard-liners are savoring the reversal in their fortunes, after losing influence in the Obama years. ''Thanks to Trump's dishonest, cheating and crazy remarks, he has proved what we have said for a long time: America cannot be trusted,'' said Hamidreza Taraghi, a hard-line political analyst. ''Many didn't believe us, but now they do.''

The seeds of the new nationalism were planted with the election of the moderate Hassan Rouhani as president in 2013. It was the first glimmer of hope for Iran's urban middle classes since the brutal crackdown on street protests following the 2009 presidential election, widely seen as rigged.

President Rouhani promised a nuclear deal, to escape the suffocating international sanctions over Iran's nuclear program that had depressed and distorted the economy and isolated the country. When the treaty was signed in 2015, Iranians rejoiced over the chance, finally, to become a ''normal'' country.

Then came the Trump administration, and its singular focus on Iran as the source, as the defense secretary, Jim Mattis, has said on numerous occasions, of all the troubles in the Middle East.

Iran's leaders have begun promoting patriotic causes, recognizing in the changing mood a chance to reinforce their credibility, which had been flagging.

Recently, missiles were put on display in city centers so that families and children could pose for photos in front of them. State-run television has been promoting an annual pilgrimage where millions participate in a walk into neighboring Iraq, as a symbol of national and religious strength. Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who rarely comments on music, cited ''Iran, if They Break Your Heart,'' a homage to Iran, as one of his favorite songs.

Many Iranians now cheer when a missile is tested, said Hamidreza Jalaeipour, a professor of sociology and a leading reformist, ''even those who are completely secular.'' The tests, he added, ''are making them feel strong and safe.''

The pressure from the United States and the growing threats from Saudi Arabia are creating an us-against-them atmosphere, Mr. Jalaeipour said.

The new solidarity in the face of outside threats is not new in Iran, nor is it insulating the government from all criticism. After the earthquake earlier this month in western Iran, for instance, many people blasted state officials on social media for failing to provide timely help.

Yet, in a demonstration of the newfound spirit, Iranians from across the country pitched in to gather water, food and tents and transported the aid with their own cars to the disaster zone.

''There is just a big feeling of unity,'' said Pouria Gorji, an office manager who personally delivered four trucks of supplies to the quake area. ''We come together when we are hurt.''

The state's theocratic ideology has long dictated an artificial version of nationalism, where everything is related to Islam. Love for Iran's long pre-Islamic history has been illegal in some instances, and often deliberately ignored by officials and state television.

But in light of the new national unity, those restraints have been relaxed so long as the presentations encourage patriotism.

In October, for example, the government allowed one of the former palaces of the despised, pro-Western shah, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, to be used for a multimedia performance where actors re-enacted parts of the ''Shahnameh,'' or book of Kings, which describes Iran's long pre-Islamic history. The epic poem depicts a time -- much like now -- when Iran was surrounded by rivals and isolated.

One evening around 4,000 middle-class Iranians, with men wearing suits and women carrying designer handbags, gathered at the palace in North Tehran. Images of Persepolis, the ancient palace of Darius the Great, were projected on the building, as famous actors played legendary figures from Iran's long history.

As an encore, a traditional singer, Homayoun Shajarian, performed ''My Iran,'' a love song to the country. People stood out of respect, many with tears streaming down their faces. The venue was sold out for 30 days straight.

''I felt so proud. There was an overwhelming sense of unity,'' said Soghol Sheikhan, an accountant, who was at the concert. ''I got goose bumps.''

Borders and geography are other rallying points for nationalists. When Mr. Trump in October gave a speech outlining his Iran strategy, he called it a ''dictatorship'' led by ''murderous'' leaders who ''spread death, destruction and chaos all over the globe.'' But what really riled up Iranians was when he called the Persian Gulf the ''Arabian Gulf.''

Within minutes, Iranian news media, state-run and otherwise, began denouncing his use of the name.

Two hours later, Mr. Rouhani, in a live rebuttal of Mr. Trump's speech, wasted no time with the litany of accusations by Mr. Trump and cut straight to the point.

''How is it that a president has not learned the name of the international historical gulf?'' the Iranian president said. ''The same Persian Gulf unfortunately frequented by the American navy, unduly and constantly. Trump should ask his military who have the maps what is written as the name of this gulf.'' (In fact, United States Navy maps say ''Persian Gulf.'')

Iranians attacked Mr. Trump's Instagram account, leaving nearly three million comments about the Persian Gulf, or profanities. An Iranian journalist based in the United States, Bahman Kalbasi, wrote in a tweet that he ''couldn't think of a faster way to unite the public in Iran behind the government: go after the nuclear deal (vital to the economy) and don't use Persian Gulf.''

There are limits to the new nationalism. Iranians who tried in October to commemorate the ancient King Cyrus with a gathering at his tomb found roads blocked and a high fence around the site. Well-known nationalists were sent text messages warning them not to participate.

Arvand Dashtaray, a liberal-minded theater director, who has frequently injected veiled criticism of Iranian society and its leaders into his plays, now says that he and like-minded reformists and moderates were wrong to bet on the United States.

Mr. Dashtaray still dreams of bringing the experimental American playwright Robert Wilson to perform in Iran. But as for Mr. Trump, ''he is the true face of the U.S., an unfair, weapons-exporting nation that doesn't care about anybody and especially not about us.''

He added: ''We need to understand that the U.S. has been playing with us all along. Trump is proving that our hard-liners were right all these years, to say that America cannot be trusted.''

Iran's leaders, on the other hand, long regarded by Mr. Dashtaray as irresponsible in foreign policy, have now ''become the logical party,'' he said. ''Of course, I love them more.''

A billboard in Tehran featuring Mohsen Hojaji, whom the government is depicting as a martyred war hero. It says ''Let's go.'' (A1); Women holding posters with the image of Mohsen Hojaji at his funeral, above, in September. He was taken prisoner by ISIS and later beheaded. At right, a scene from ''Let's Keep It Between Us'' directed by Arvand Dashtaray, a reformist theater director who now sides with hard-liners.; Seeking to capitalize on a wave of nationalism, the Iranian government is bringing out missiles and other weapons, like these antiaircraft guns in a Tehran square, where families can pose for photos. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ARASH KHAMOOSHI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A8) 

Document NYTF000020171127edbr0003y



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Why Does  ISIS  Kill Sufi Muslims? Because It Sees Them as Heretics

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
1,132 words
26 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The suicide bomber who stepped inside the gold-domed shrine in southern Pakistan in February was wearing a vest packed with ball bearings, bolts and screws. When he hit the detonator, he killed more than 80 people.

To the world, they were Muslims.

But to the Islamic State, which quickly claimed credit for the attack, they were something else: Mushrikin, an Arabic word meaning polytheists.

Because the worshipers who died at the shrine of the Sufi philosopher Lal Shahbaz Qalandar had come bearing offerings of rose petals and had prayed at the tomb of the revered saint, hard-liners saw their faith as an affront to Islam, which holds that there is a single, indivisible God.

Since at least 2016, Islamic State militants have targeted Sufis, who practice a mystical form of Islam that includes the veneration of saints, often at their tombs. The extremist group has systematically razed the tombs of Sufi saints and dynamited their shrines. Just over a year ago, the Islamic State began carrying out mass executions of Sufi worshipers during prayer.

While no group has claimed responsibility for the killings of more than 300 people on Friday in Egypt's Sinai Peninsula, that attack also took place inside a Sufi mosque. Egyptian officials on Saturday said the attackers were carrying the black flag of the Islamic State, though the group has so far remained mum on whether its fighters were behind the savage violence.

After every attack of this nature, observers are perplexed at how a group claiming to be Islamic could kill members of its own faith. But the voluminous writings published by Islamic State and Qaeda media branches, as well as the writings of hard-liners from the Salafi sect and the Wahhabi school, make clear that these fundamentalists do not consider Sufis to be Muslims at all.

Their particular animus toward the Sufi practice involves the tradition of visiting the graves of holy figures. The act of praying to saints and worshiping at their tombs is an example of what extremists refer to as ''shirk,'' or polytheism, according to Brill's Encyclopedia of Islam.

''Shirk literally means association. It is the act of associating God with other entities,'' said Jacob Olidort, a scholar of Islam, a foreign policy adviser to Senator Orrin Hatch and the author of several reports for the Brookings Institution on these and other concepts. ''What they take the Sufis to task principally for is the intercession, the use of other media, to access God, rather than going directly.''

Alexander Knysh, the author of two studies of Sufism and a professor of Islamic Studies at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, agreed. ''They believe Sufi shrines are the most egregious expression of that shirk,'' he said. ''You are turning to a mediator, who is inserting himself between the believer and God, and in this way it becomes a kind of idol.''

Sufis venerate mystics, who in their lifetime were seen as close to the divine. They bring votive gifts to their graves, like rose water or rose petals. Merchants heading on long voyages will come and make an offering, promising to make another if their venture is successful, Mr. Knysh said.

Sufis, he said, are monotheistic and, to them, the practice does not supplant or create an equal to God. But hard-liners don't see it this way, and instead see Sufis as ''grave worshipers.''

The debate over what constitutes idolatry in the Muslim faith is centuries old. In the early 1800s, fundamentalists in Saudi Arabia went so far as to try to blow up the tomb of the Prophet Muhammad, Mr. Knysh said.

The notion of who is and isn't Muslim has also occupied numerous Qaeda theologians, long before the rise of the Islamic State. While the older terrorist group also holds Sufis to be heretics, Al Qaeda's official branches have been more restrained in its violence. When Qaeda fighters in northern Mali destroyed the tombs of Sufi saints in Timbuktu, the group's emir in the region sent them a multipage reprimand, warning that even though they were correct in principle, their actions could inflame Muslim sentiment against them.

One of the ways the Islamic State has departed from Al Qaeda and its official affiliates has been its willingness to use unbridled violence against Muslims they accuse of straying, including Shias and Sufis. In addition to the attack on the shrine in Pakistan in February, the Islamic State bombed a Sufi place of worship in Baluchistan in 2016, and has carried out targeted assassinations of Sufi clerics, including in Egypt.

The Islamic State's own publication made clear as far back as 11 months ago that it considered Sufism to be one of the main ''diseases'' it aimed to treat in Egypt. Rawda, the district where Friday's attack occurred, was mentioned as an area where it planned to ''eradicate'' Sufi beliefs.

In a question-and-answer with the Islamic State's magazine Rumiyah, the emir of the group's religious police in the area said: ''Our main focus, however, is to wage war against the manifestations of shirk and bid'ah, including Sufism,'' using the word bid'ah to describe heresy.

He goes on to say that ''shirk has become very widespread'' in the area, and outlines the main Sufi traditions in the region, calling it a ''disaster.''

''The Sufis believe that the dead have the power to bring about harm and benefit. Hence they direct various types of worship toward the dead,'' he said. ''They also claim that the dead are intermediaries between them and Allah, just as human kings have intermediaries between themselves and their subjects.''

The article includes images of a Sufi prayer hall in Sinai, and a photo of an old man kneeling as an Islamic State militant lowers a blade over his neck. He is identified in the photograph as Abu Hiraz, a Sufi cleric, who according to news reports was abducted in front of his home in late 2016.

In the article, the Islamic State acknowledged abducting the elderly man, who they say was sentenced to death because of his embrace of polytheism.

They also issued a warning to other Sufis living in Egypt, saying they were ''mushrikin'' and that their ''blood is filthy and permissible to shed.''

Follow Rukmini Callimachi on Twitter: @rcallimachi

Clockwise from top: Sufi worshipers at the shrine of the 11thcentury mystic Ali bin Usman al-Hajveri in Lahore, Pakistan; the funeral of a boy killed in February's bombing of a shrine in Sehwan, Pakistan; soldiers at the shrine in Sehwan. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ARIF ALI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES; PERVEZ MASIH/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020171129edbq0000f



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Attack Exposes Egypt's Lapses In Fighting  ISIS 

By DECLAN WALSH and DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK; Declan Walsh reported from Cairo, and David Kirkpatrick from London. Nour Youssef contributed reporting from Ismailia, Egypt. 
1,765 words
26 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CAIRO -- After militants massacred 305 people at a packed mosque on Friday in a stunning assault on a sacred place, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi responded as he knows best.

Mr. Sisi went on television vowing to ''take revenge'' and strike back with an ''iron fist.'' Moments later, Egyptian warplanes swooped over the vast deserts of the Sinai Peninsula, dropping bombs that pulverized vehicles used in the assault. Soldiers fanned out across the area.

But that furious retaliation, which follows years of battle in Sinai against a vicious Islamic State affiliate that downed a Russian passenger jet in 2015 and has regularly attacked Egyptian security forces there, revived the most troubling question about Mr. Sisi's strategy in the desert peninsula: Why is it failing?

One of the most striking aspects of the carnage that unfolded on Friday, the deadliest terrorist attack in Egypt's modern history, was how easy it was for the militants to carry it out.

In a statement issued on Saturday, Egypt's prosecutor general, Nabil Sadek, described the grisly scene in forensic detail.

Between 25 and 30 gunmen, traveling in five vehicles and carrying an Islamic State flag, surrounded a Sufi mosque on all sides in Bir al-Abed, a dusty town on a road that arcs across the sandy plain of North Sinai.

After an explosion, they positioned themselves outside the main entrance of the mosque and its 12 windows, spraying the worshipers with gunfire. Seven parked cars were set ablaze to prevent victims from escaping. Among the dead were 27 children.

For Sinai residents, the attack deepened an abiding sense of dread about life in a part of Egypt where many feel trapped between barbarous militants and a heartless military. At a hospital in nearby Ismailia, survivors recounted how they leapt through windows as militants raked them with gunfire, or of watching their friends and relatives die.

''If even mosques are being targeted, then where are we safe?'' said Mohamed Abdel Salam, 22.

For Sinai experts, the assault sharpened scrutiny of Egypt's counterinsurgency tactics against a dogged Islamist insurgency that has surged in strength since 2013, after Mr. Sisi came to power in a military takeover.

They paint a picture of a stubbornly outmoded approach that is unsuited to the fight, and that perpetuates the mistakes of successive Egyptian leaders.

For decades Egypt has seen Sinai through a military prism, taking an aggressive approach to an alienated local population. The military has engaged in summary executions and the destruction of whole villages, while offering little to solve the region's deep social and economic problems, including chronic unemployment, illiteracy and poor access to health care.

Egyptian soldiers and conscripts are hunkered down inside heavily protected bases, venturing out in armored convoys that barrel down long, exposed roads.

Those roads are filled with check posts manned by nervous soldiers, many of them conscripts. The insurgents, some with roots in Sinai's long tradition of smuggling, skirt through the desert.

''The Egyptians have failed to acknowledge that ISIS is not just a terrorism threat,'' said Andrew Miller, a former Egypt specialist at the National Security Council, now at the Project on Middle East Democracy in Washington. ''Killing terrorists is not sufficient. They need to deprive ISIS of local support, which is rooted in Cairo's historical neglect of the Sinai.''

But that support has been eroded by multiple accounts of torture and extrajudicial executions by the military, as well as indiscriminate military tactics that often inflict civilian casualties and sow widespread resentment.

''The military has never cared for civilian losses,'' said Mohannad Sabry, author of a book on Sinai. ''The excessive and reckless use of force has killed entire families. We've seen airstrikes blow people up in their homes. We've seen villages razed off the face of the earth. That tells you something about how they see Sinai society.''

Over the past year, Mr. Sisi has welcomed a line of foreign leaders to Cairo, where he signed deals for billions of dollars in advanced military equipment: German submarines, Russian combat helicopters, a French aircraft carrier and a military satellite. American military officials have tried quietly to persuade him to allocate his resources, including $1.3 billion in annual American aid, to tools and techniques better suited to fighting the insurgency in Sinai, like equipment and training for intelligence gathering.

But Mr. Sisi, they say, is not listening, and his generals prefer to buy tanks, jets and other heavy weapons for their bases around the Nile.

''They understand they have got a problem in Sinai, but they have been unprepared to invest in the capabilities to deal with it,'' said Steven Simon, a professor at Amherst College and a former senior director for the Middle East and North Africa on the National Security Council.

One person who did have some sway over Mr. Sisi was Egypt's chief of defense staff, Mahmoud Hegazy. American officials saw him as the only person in Mr. Sisi's inner circle with the authority to publicly contradict him, a former United States official said. They also had a personal bond: General Hegazy's daughter is married to Mr. Sisi's son.

But last month Mr. Sisi fired General Hegazy, after an outcry over a devastating militant ambush on a security convoy south of Cairo that killed 16 police officers, and possibly many more.

The move dismayed senior State and Defense Department officials who saw General Hegazy as a check on Mr. Sisi in a circle of advisers that has become ever smaller and, some fear, ever more sycophantic, said the former official, who spoke anonymously to protect internal deliberations on an important ally that rarely receives public criticism well.

Sinai presents a formidable arena for counterinsurgency that would challenge the most capable army: It is a vast terrain of desert and mountains, with long shorelines and a semiporous back door across the border into Gaza, which has been controlled by Hamas.

The collapse of Libya in 2011 has ensured a steady flow of weapons ever since, some from the depots of the deposed Libyan leader Muammar el-Qaddafi. In the past year, as the Islamic State's vision of a caliphate in Syria and Iraq has crumbled, experts have fretted about an influx of returning Egyptian jihadis, bent on bringing their fight back home.

So far, American officials say, a relatively small number of fighters have returned. But the collapse of Raqqa and Mosul has precipitated a sharp shift in the Islamic State's tactics in Sinai, with a greater emphasis on attacks against soft targets, like Coptic Christians and Sufis, in a bid to undermine Mr. Sisi by sowing sectarian hatred in Egyptian society.

Little of Egypt's fight against the Islamic State in Sinai is visible to the outside world, or even most Egyptians. Foreign reporters and most Egyptian ones are not allowed into Sinai. Concrete information about the conflict is hard to come by: On its Facebook page, the Egyptian military claims to have killed at least 3,000 Islamist militants, far more than the hundreds it once estimated were there.

A leaked videotape last April depicted those claims in a very different light. It showed a military unit, made up of Sinai locals and accompanied by senior army officers, executing detainees -- local men in jeans -- on a desolate patch of ground in Sinai. Earlier, on its Facebook page, the army had claimed the men died in a shootout.

Amnesty International, which confirmed the video's authenticity, said it was consistent with a pattern of military-led abuses it has documented in Sinai.

In private, Mr. Sisi's officials argue that they don't need to take lessons from the Americans. They point to what they say is a failure of American counterinsurgency ventures in Iraq and Afghanistan. And they add that their methods worked in the 1990s and 2000s, at least temporarily and in other parts of Egypt, when President Hosni Mubarak authorized harsh measures to disarm militants who attacked Western tourists at historical sites.

''They look back and say: This is how we did it, and it worked,'' said Zack Gold, a Sinai expert at the Hariri Center at the Atlantic Council. But, Mr. Gold added, the conditions are radically different in North Sinai, where residents have suffered years of neglect and mistreatment from the Egyptian mainland.

Sinai residents complain of feeling isolated, even culturally distant, from the Nile Valley where the vast majority of Egyptians live. Many in the North Sinai refer to other Egyptians as ''people of the valley,'' as though they were citizens of another country. Some speak nostalgically of more effective governance when the peninsula was under Israeli control, between the Israeli seizure of the area in the Six Day war in 1967 and its return to Egypt in 1982.

The Bedouin tribes who live there, often portrayed as outlaws in Egyptian popular culture, say they feel greater kinship with the tribes in Gaza -- a connection that has bred longstanding suspicion among officials in Cairo, especially since the Israeli occupation.

South Sinai, around Sharm el Sheikh, and Mount Sinai developed into a tourist destination. But the North remained loosely governed and some of the tribes who lived there considered smuggling a birthright, and resented Cairo's attempts to restrict it.

''Many Egyptians west of the Suez don't consider the Bedouin to be fully Egyptian,'' Mr. Miller, the analyst, said. ''They have poorer educational and employment opportunities, and they are largely shut out of government jobs and the security services.''

Cynicism about the central government was evident outside the Ismailia hospital on Friday, where an elderly Bedouin woman in black sat on the muddy lawn, huddled under a blanket for warmth. She refused to give her name, citing fear of reprisals from either the military and Islamic State. ''If either side sees our names, they will kill us. They are as bad as each other,'' she said.

''The military will keep jailing and killing local young people. The terrorists who hate us and the Christians will keep using it as an excuse to kill us,'' she added. ''There is no point in talking about anything.''

Follow Declan Walsh on Twitter @declanwalsh and David Kirkpatrick @ddknyt

Vehicles damaged in the deadly assault on a packed mosque in Bir al-Abed, Egypt, on Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS) (A10) 

Document NYTF000020171126edbq00081



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Militants Attack Mosque in Egypt, Leaving 235 Dead

By DECLAN WALSH and NOUR YOUSSEF; Declan Walsh reported from Cairo, and Nour Youssef from Ismailia, Egypt. David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from London, Rukmini Callimachi from New York, and David M. Halbfinger from Jerusalem. 
1,515 words
25 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CAIRO -- Militants detonated a bomb inside a crowded mosque in the Sinai Peninsula on Friday and then sprayed gunfire on panicked worshipers as they fled, killing at least 235 people and wounding at least 109 others. Officials called it the deadliest terrorist attack in Egypt's modern history.

The scale and ruthlessness of the assault, in an area racked by an Islamist insurgency, sent shock waves across the nation -- not just for the number of deaths but also for the choice of target. Attacks on mosques are rare in Egypt, where the Islamic State has targeted Coptic Christian churches and pilgrims but avoided Muslim places of worship.

The attack injected a new element into Egypt's struggle with militants because most of the victims were Sufi Muslims, who practice a mystical form of Islam that the Islamic State and other Sunni extremist groups deem heretical. And it underscored the failure of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, who has justified his harsh crackdown on political freedom in the name of crushing Islamic militancy, to deliver on his promises of security.

''The scene was horrific,'' said Ibrahim Sheteewi, a resident of Bir al-Abed, the small north Sinai town where the attack took place. ''The bodies were scattered on the ground outside the mosque. I hope God punishes them for this.''

A Sinai police officer said the dead included at least 15 children. A witness put the toll even higher, saying he had helped gather the bodies of 25 children.

Hours later the Egyptian military carried out several airstrikes near Bir al-Abed targeting militants fleeing in four-wheel-drive vehicles, an Egyptian military official said.

World leaders quickly condemned the mosque attack, with President Trump denouncing it as ''horrible and cowardly.'' He said later that it explained why the United States needed a border wall with Mexico and restrictions on immigration, which he referred to as ''the ban.''

Mr. Sisi has struggled to impose his authority over Sinai since he came to power in a military takeover in 2013. Islamist militants who had found a safe haven in Sinai for attacks on Israel then turned their guns on the Egyptian armed forces.

But even by recent standards in Egypt, where militants have blown up Christian worshipers as they knelt at church pews and gunned down pilgrims in buses, the attack on Friday was unusually ruthless.

''I can't believe they attacked a mosque,'' a Muslim cleric in Bir al-Abed said by phone, requesting anonymity for fear he could also be attacked.

No group claimed responsibility for the attack, but in the past year a local affiliate of the Islamic State has killed a number of Sufis in the area and singled out the district where the attack took place as a potential target.

The attack started midday during Friday Prayers when a bomb -- probably set off by a suicide bomber, security officials said -- ripped through Al Rawda mosque in Bir al-Abed, 125 miles northeast of Cairo. As worshipers fled, they were confronted by masked gunmen who, witnesses said, had pulled up outside in several four-wheel-drive vehicles.

The gunmen set fire to cars parked outside the mosque to hinder escape, and opened fire on ambulances as they arrived on the scene, a government official said on state television.

Mayna Nasser, 40, who was shot twice in the shoulder, drifted in and out of consciousness as he was rushed to a hospital. ''My children were there; my children were there,'' he said, according to Samy, a volunteer emergency worker who drove him there and who declined to give his last name.

Local emergency services were so overwhelmed that some of the wounded had to be transported to the hospital in the back of a cattle truck, he said.

Many were taken to the general hospital in the main northern Sinai town of El Arish, where medics described chaotic scenes as staff struggled to deal with a flood of dead and wounded, many with extensive burns or severed limbs.

''We are swamped,'' said one medical official, speaking by phone on condition of anonymity. ''We don't know what to say. This is insane.''

Other victims, like Mohammed Abdel Salam, a 22-year-old construction worker, ended up in a hospital in the nearby city of Ismailia. ''I wish I never stopped to pray,'' he said. ''I'm not even a Sufi. I was just there by accident.''

Mr. Sisi convened an emergency meeting of top security officials, including the interior minister, spy chief and defense minister. ''The military and the police will take revenge,'' he said in a televised speech.

Until a spate of attacks on Christian churches this year, Egyptian militants had avoided large-scale assaults on Egyptian civilians, perhaps because such attacks tend to backfire. After a massacre in Luxor that killed 62 people, mostly tourists, in 1997, President Hosni Mubarak began a sweeping crackdown that crushed an Islamist insurgency centered in southern Egypt.

When a new insurgency flared in north Sinai after the military takeover in 2013, its leaders were careful to focus their attacks on uniformed security forces. But as those militants embraced the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, they have gradually set aside that lesson.

An Islamist militia in Sinai, Ansar Beit al-Maqdis, pledged allegiance to the Islamic State in 2014 and has since proved to be one of its most effective local affiliates. The group's deadliest attack targeted a Russian jetliner that crashed shortly after takeoff from Sharm el Sheikh in 2015, killing all 224 people on board.

In an interview published in an Islamic State magazine last January, a commander in Sinai outlined the group's hatred for Sufis and their practices, including the veneration of tombs, the sacrificial slaughter of animals and what he termed ''sorcery and soothsaying.''

The interview, in English, identifies Rawda, the district where Friday's attack occurred, as one of three areas where Sufis live in Sinai that the group intended to ''eradicate.''

It featured a photograph of a black hooded figure brandishing a sword over the kneeling figure of an elderly Sufi cleric, Sulayman Abu Hiraz, who was executed in Sinai in late 2016. The Islamic State said the cleric, said to be 100 years old, had been killed for practicing witchcraft.

Many residents of Bir al-Abed, on the main road through northern Sinai, are Bedouins from the Abu Greir tribe, which is predominantly Sufi. Residents said that despite recent Islamic State threats, the town had been largely peaceful.

The Islamic State, a Sunni movement, has long considered Sufis, along with Shiite Muslims, apostates, and has a history of attacking their mosques in other countries. Sufis may be Sunni or Shiite but most are Sunni.

Since 2016, when the militant group released a video describing Sufism as a ''disease,'' it has claimed attacks that have killed at least 130 worshipers at Sufi shrines, most of them in Pakistan. Elsewhere, the Islamic State has made a spectacle of bulldozing Sufi shrines, describing their removal as a form of purifying the faith.

Egyptian security forces have closely monitored Islamic State fighters returning from Syria and Iraq, amid worries that an influx of battle-hardened jihadis could insert a volatile new element into Egypt's militant mix.

In October, Mr. Sisi ordered a major reshuffle of his security team after an ambush in the desert left at least 16 Egyptian security officials dead. That attack was later claimed by a previously unknown group called Ansar al-Islam, which is believed to have links to Al Qaeda.

Friday's attack was a blow to Egypt's hopes that it could stem the tide of Islamist violence in Sinai through the government's sponsorship of a Palestinian peace initiative involving Hamas, the militant group that controls Gaza.

Islamic State militants have previously used tunnels into Gaza to obtain weapons and get medical treatment for wounded fighters. One benefit for Egypt of the peace initiative, which Egypt's General Intelligence Directorate has mediated, is greater control over those tunnels.

In a statement, Hamas denounced the attack as a ''criminal explosion'' that ''violates all heavenly commandments and human values'' because it attacked a mosque. ''It is a grave challenge to Muslims worldwide,'' the group said.

Follow Declan Walsh on Twitter: @declanwalsh.

Friday's attack happened at a Sufi mosque. Sufi Muslims practice a mystical form of Islam that the Islamic State considers heretical. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A1); The midday attack during Friday Prayers wounded at least 109 people, including many children. Most worshipers at Al Rawda mosque, left, were Sufi Muslims. The mosque is in the town of Bir al- Bed in the Sinai Peninsula, about 125 miles northeast of Cairo. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES; EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) (A10) 

Document NYTF000020171125edbp0003q



EDITORIAL
Editorial Desk; SECTA
The Truth About the Cost of War

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
876 words
24 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
26
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A half-century ago, the Pentagon's misleading claims about civilian deaths in Vietnam eroded public trust and, ultimately, support for the war. The United States military today claims to have learned the hard lessons of that and subsequent wars. It's put in place an elaborate system intended to minimize civilian casualties, including an Obama-era requirement that forces have ''near certainty'' that no civilian will be harmed before launching an attack. Intelligence analysts select targets, ''targeteers'' study models to calculate the most precise angles to strike, teams of lawyers evaluate plans and the Pentagon later discloses the few civilians who still, inevitably and tragically, wind up getting killed.

It turns out this is all, at least partly, an illusion. The Pentagon is killing far more civilians than it acknowledges, according to a recent report in The New York Times and other findings. A system intended to ensure transparency and accountability appears, instead, to be enabling the Pentagon to fool itself as well as the rest of us about the true cost of its strikes. It is often feeding bad intelligence into its intricate targeting system in the first place and then failing to thoroughly investigate civilians deaths after an attack.

The American-led military coalition has claimed, for instance, that the ratio of civilian deaths to airstrikes in the operation against the Islamic State in Iraq is one for every 157 strikes. The New York Times Sunday Magazine's account found a ratio of one civilian death for every five airstrikes -- more than 31 times the Pentagon's claim. The true number, wrote the authors, Azmat Khan and Anand Gopal, ''is at such a distance from official claims that, in terms of civilian deaths, this may be the least transparent war in recent American history.''

Ms. Khan's and Mr. Gopal's reporting provided the first systematic, ground-based sample of airstrikes in Iraq since the operation began in 2014. They visited the sites of nearly 150 airstrikes in northern Iraq after ISIS was expelled, and they interviewed hundreds of witnesses, survivors and others. They photographed bomb fragments and mapped the destruction with satellite imagery, and they took the data to experts at the United States base in Qatar.

The article's organizing narrative was the tragic story of Bassim Razzo, whose wife, daughter, nephew and brother were killed in 2015 in coalition airstrikes on their side-by-side homes in Mosul, the main ISIS stronghold in Iraq. Video and written records showed that the coalition misidentified the two compounds as an ISIS car-bomb factory or command center. Before the writers took up the case, coalition officials had not included the Razzo family in its accounting of civilian victims. When Mr. Razzo asked for compensation, the military eventually offered the insulting sum of $15,000.

The Costs of War project at Brown University estimates over 200,000 civilians have been killed in Afghanistan, Iraq and Pakistan since 2001. Most experts attribute a majority of the civilian deaths to extremists.

Although international law obligates combatants to minimize harm to civilians, it is unrealistic to think that all civilian deaths can be prevented. Yet the reporting by Ms. Khan and Mr. Gopal suggests that America could be doing far more to protect civilians. They said they found a ''consistent failure'' by the American-led coalition to investigate claims carefully and to keep proper records. Some deaths occurred because civilians were close to ISIS targets. Many others, however, appear to have been recorded wrongly by ''flawed or outdated intelligence that conflated civilians with combatants.'' The article said the military seldom recognized its failures or made changes to prevent civilian deaths.

To some extent, the American people may be blind to this carnage, having been lulled by their military and political leaders into believing that advanced technology and precision strikes kill the bad guys while sparing the innocent. This seductive concept took hold with video of seemingly pinpoint strikes during the first Persian Gulf war and was reinforced since by widespread use of drone strikes by Presidents George W. Bush, Barack Obama and Donald Trump against faraway targets.

However precise the weapons, careful the planners and skilled the fighters, war inevitably includes mistakes that kill civilians. Leaders need to be honest that there is no such thing as antiseptic combat, while Americans need to understand the full cost and consequences of military actions undertaken in their names.

These are not idle concerns. The pace of attacks and civilian casualties seems to be rising, and with them the potential for alienating the very people America hopes to save. The anti-ISIS fight has quickened and moved into crowded cities, but the president has also given field commanders more authority to make battlefield decisions in an ill-defined hunt for terrorists.

Civilian deaths impose another penalty. They become a recruiting tool for terrorists and undermine counterterrorism operations. It's up to Congress to ensure true accountability and transparency, if the administration does not, by holding hearings and demanding answers.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY ANTOINE MAILLARD) 

Document NYTF000020171124edbo00047



Nicholas Kristof
How to Use Twitter

By LIRIEL HIGA 
2,121 words
22 November 2017
21:44
NYT Blogs
NYTB
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved 

Nicholas Kristof: My tutor on Twitter has been Liriel Higa ( @iDiplomacy ), who works on social media for The New York Times Opinion section. I asked her to write this quick “ow to Tweet”uide for the public. Liriel, a former nationally ranked gymnast, was a congressional reporter early in her career, then oversaw social media for the Half the Sky movement, and finally joined the Times in 2014 and has been with us since. Here’ her guide to how to make Twitter work for you.

It’ easy to hate on Twitter . It recently ditched its trim 140-character identity to become (to the naysayers) a bloated 280 characters. It verified (then unverified) a white supremacist , but it suspended Rose McGowan’ Twitter account , leaving the initial impression it had to do with her speaking out about Harvey Weinstein. It enabled racist, misogynistic trolls  o attack Leslie Jones.

But for all its flaws, Twitter is where so much public debate happens, much of it fascinating. t’ where you can actually reach beyond your bubble. It’ where you can leapfrog publicists and ides and interact with your idols. ere are my suggestions for ow you should use it —nd why it’ orthwhile.

Start by listening. here’ a misconception that the main use of Twitter is for self-promotion. Unless you’e @Beyonce , who has tweeted 10 times and has 15.2 million followers, chances are, you won’ have tons of followers when you’e starting out. Thoughtful tweeting certainly improves the platform as a whole, but you don’ need any followers to mine Twitter for useful information.

Don’ just follow people you personally know. ollow people who are experts in your fields of interest. Maybe you like comedy, in which case Aparna Nancherla ( @aparnapkin ) or Stephen Colbert ( @StephenColbert ) are must follows. f you’e a fan of cooking, try the chef Yotam Ottolenghi ( @ottolenghi ) for gorgeous food photos or Ruth Reichl ( @ruthreichl ), the former editor of Gourmet, for her scene-setting morning poems. To learn more about the universe, follow Neil deGrasse Tyson ( @neiltyson ). If you want insights on Sweden, @sweden  urns over the account to a new Swede each week. Regardless of your political persuasion, Republican Sen. Ben Sasse of Nebraska ( @bensasse ) has a terrific Twitter feed, especially for a politician —uthentic and humorous, while Democratic Sen. Cory Booker ( @CoryBooker ) is great bout replying to people. For those following the investigation of Russian meddling into the election, reet Bharara ( @PreetBharara ), Sally Yates ( @SallyQYates ) and Benjamin Wittes ( @benjaminwittes ) are ones to watch. Check out who they’e following and retweeting for more ideas of where to go from there.

Turn to Twitter for breaking news. ore so than any other social platform, Twitter excels at breaking news. (That means misinformation spreads fast too, but it’ typically quick to self-correct.) It’ helpful to follow news organizations —hen there’ big news, they’l all be tweeting about it. But individual journalists also regularly hare scoops on the platform. I learned about Osama bin Laden’ death because I followed @brianstelter , who tweeted  t 10:25 p.m. on May 1, 2011: Chief of staff for former defense sec. Rumsfeld, @keithurbahn , tweets: “’ told by a reputable person they have killed Osama Bin Laden.”resident Obama didn’ give his scheduled 10:30 p.m. speech till an hour later, by which point the networks had already interrupted programming 45 minutes prior after confirming the news with anonymous sources.

Join  worldwide support network. t has been less than wo months ince the Harvey Weinstein story broke , and famous, lecherous men continue to be toppled daily from their pedestals. But for the many people that aren’ famous, and weren’ harassed by anyone famous, there will probably not be a newspaper story written about their abuser. Yet the #metoo hashtag empowered women to share their stories on their own terms, and helped keep the momentum going. A more recent #MeAt14  ashtag in response to allegations about Roy Moore pushes back at the idea that a 14-year-old can consent to sex or sexual contact at that age.

Share your expertise when you tweet. Keep it conversational hether it’ professional or personal. One of my favorite recently discovered Twitter accounts is uba Baladzhaeva ( @cherity1313 ), a “ymnerd from Israel,”ho speaks Russian and will often tweet translated English summaries of books by Russian gymnasts such as Alexei Nemov , 2000 Olympic all-around champion, and Svetlana Khorkina , three-time all-around world champion. Share the articles or videos you’e enjoying, and explain what compelled you to share it (instead of just tweeting the headline). If you see someone asking a question that you know the answer to, respond. Or maybe you have a question or request of one of your idols. Dreams can come true . If you feel like you’e not sure what to say, join the conversation on live events such as the Oscars or State of the Union. Don’ worry too much about whether what you have to say is boring or people won’ care about it.

Share things that make you laugh, even —r especially —f it’ at your own expense. “hy do all of bruni’ recent column titles read like a terrible adult video library” @jack_hamilton tweeted , with a screenshot of Frank Bruni’ recent columns with headlines such as “oo Many Wonderful Women to Count,”“Jared Kushner , the Prince of Having It Both Ways,”nd “Donald Trump’ Dominatrix.”ather than ignore the critique, @FrankBruni engaged : “amn, you got me. I’e been pulling the phrases from the spines of discs lined up beneath my television set. The fun has just begun!”

That doesn’ mean anything goes. f you’e about to tweet something off color, or something that people who don’ know you could misconstrue, delete! One tweet made Justine Sacco the poster child for tweets gone wrong , when as a joke, she wrote before hopping on a plane: “oing to Africa. Hope I don’ get AIDS. Just kidding. I’ white!”uring her flight to Johannesburg, #HasJustineLandedYet become a top trend, and she ended up losing her PR job.

Just because you have 280 characters doesn’ mean you need to use them all. Sign up at twitter.com , or download the app. When choosing your username (it begins with an “”, make sure it wouldn’ urn off a future employer. ou can write text, upload GIFS, four photos or a video up to 2 minutes and 20 seconds. If you find yourself in the middle of a protest, try filming live video , and check in to your location so you will be easier to find. If you have the time and inclination, you can use a link shortener like bitly  r goo.gl  o your link doesn’ trail away into ellipses, or use a website’ share tool to tweet, which typically pulls up the headline and a shortened link.

When someone says something better than you could, retweet them. There’ no need for you to say the same thing, but less elegantly. But unless you know the person who did the original tweet, it’ a good idea to check out their bio and feed first so you don’ end up retweeting a conspiracy theorist. You can also retweet with a comment. That’ a opular activity ith @realDonaldTrump .

Give credit where it’ due. f you’e sharing a fascinating article, chances are the author is on Twitter , in which case use their handle in your tweet. This will alert them that you have mentioned them (when they check their notifications), and is the courteous thing to do. Or if you’e sharing something that you learned from someone else, it’ nice to give them a hat tip, or h/t, or say “ia @zoegberg ,”or example.

Tap into the wisdom of the crowd. David Farenthold ( @Farenthold ), who won a Pulitzer Prize for his coverage of President Trump, regularly crowdsources his reporting. He used Twitter  o help him find one of the portraits of Trump, paid for by the Trump Foundation, hanging in the Trump National Doral Miami gold course. You don’ need to be a reporter like Farenthold to ask the crowd —r an individual person —or advice (but do avoid asking anything you can easily learn by googling).

Don’ worry that friend who has annoying tweets hat just followed you. nlike Facebook , where you accept or decline a friend request, you can simply choose not to follow back. If you feel compelled to follow back out of social obligation but would rather not see their tweets, you can mute them . They won’ know you’e muted them, and you can unmute them at any time.

If your brilliance can’ be confined to 280 characters, try a threaded tweet. ukmini Callimachi ( @rcallimachi ), who covers ISIS, does great threaded tweets with timely analysis on events such as the recent Manhattan terrorist attack  nd the Vegas mass shooting . To make it a thread, reply to your previous tweet (instead of just composing a new tweet), so if someone clicks on one tweet, all the tweets will appear. And it’ good to number your tweets to signify that it’ part of a thread.

Don’ overuse hashtags. It looks spammy if you stick them in every tweet. But they can be great for live events and chats. For example, every Wednesday at 7 p.m. E.T., people with pugs and dog-loving lurkers join #pugchat  o answer questions such as : Does your pug have any hidden talents? #PugChat. Or, if you’e tired of scrolling, try the #longreads  ashtag for meaty reading recommendations.

You can survive the trolls. irst: Sorry, that stinks. econd, if ou get trolled, there’ a few ways to deal with them. One option is to simply not check your notifications, which is what Michelle Goldberg does ( @michelleinbklyn ). If you’e feeling conflict-averse, block them . They won’ be able to follow you, and won’ see your tweets, and vice versa. If you really want to be protected, you can make your account private, in which case you need to grant permission for people to follow you. You can also confront them and retweet with a comment to your followers. If someone is being racist or misogynist, they’e fair game for being called on it.

Use a profile photo. ake it easier for people to find you by using a photo, especially if your name isn’ unique. It also makes people who don’ know you less likely to mistake you for a troll or a bot. If someone is impersonating you or someone you know, report them . You can further personalize your profile by adding a header photo  nd pinning a tweet  hat represents you for people coming to your profile for the first time who are deciding whether they want to follow you.

Create or subscribe to lists about topics you care about. ay you’e conservative but want to keep tabs on what liberals are saying, without their tweets sullying your feed. You can create a “emocrats and liberals”ist that follows accounts like Nancy Pelosi ( @NancyPelosi ), Bernie Sanders ( @SenSanders ), Rachel Maddow ( @maddow ) and Talking Points Memo ( @TPM ). If you despise Donald Trump and want to know what he and the Trump clan are saying but don’ want to give him the satisfaction of having another follower, add realDonaldTrump o a list along with Melania Trump ( @Flotus ), Ivanka Trump ( @IvankaTrump ), Eric Trump ( @EricTrump ) and Donald Trump Jr . ( @DonaldJTrumpJr ).

The blue check mark isn’ everything. The blue check mark indicates an account is authentic, and is typically reserved for people with ublic profiles. “ verified badge does not imply an endorsement by Twitter .”t’ genuinely useful for accounts of people likely to be parodied, and a status symbol for some, but don’ let it crush your self esteem if you’e not verified, since the vast majority of people are not. You can follow @verified  o see the accounts that are verified.

If you’e wrong, acknowledge it. on’ perpetuate actual fake news. f you mess up, delete your tweet, write a new one  acknowledging you deleted a tweet with an error, and state the correct information.

 

Document NYTB000020171122edbm00001



World; Middle East
Assad and Putin Meet, as Russia Pushes to End Syrian War

By ANNE BARNARD 
1,649 words
21 November 2017
15:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon —hanking Russia for the military intervention he credited for “aving Syria,”resident Bashar al-Assad met with President Vladimir V. Putin amid preparations for new talks aimed at ending the civil war.

Mr. Assad’ visit on Monday to the Russian resort town of Sochi was made public on Tuesday, a day before a summit meeting there for the leaders of Iran, Turkey and Russia, who have taken an increasingly prominent role in diplomacy with Syria while the United States has put Mr. Assad’ fate on the back burner.

Russian officials have said that their aim is to ensure Mr. Assad’ support for a political process to end a conflict that began more than six years ago. But Mr. Assad has consistently resisted compromise with his Syrian opponents, and doubts remain about how much Russia is willing, or able, to push him to accept significant changes like substantive power sharing or reforms.

In another signal that political change in Syria is less and less an international priority, in a phone conversation with Mr. Putin on Tuesday that lasted more than an hour and was mostly about Syria, President Trump did not bring up the issue of political transition, an administration official said. Instead, the White House said the two leaders agreed on the importance of stability, ending the war, fighting terrorism and allowing refugees to go home.

The declarations of military victory may also be premature: The Islamic State has lost much of its territory, but its fighters remain an insurgent threat and armed opposition groups still hold significant sections of the country.

It was Mr. Assad’ second known trip abroad since the civil war in his country began in 2011; he visited  Moscow in 2015, soon after Russia began its pivotal air campaign in support of his forces. The Sochi stop came as his other main allies, Iran and the Lebanese militia Hezbollah, declared that they had defeated the Islamic State in its last major Syrian stronghold, Bukamal, near the Iraqi border.

Saying that “he military operation is really coming to an end,”r. Putin told Mr. Assad that it was time to work toward a lasting political settlement.

Parallel Russian- and American-led campaigns against the Islamic State have largely shattered the group’ territorial self-declared caliphate. But a solution to the underlying conflict —which began after  Mr. Assad’ forces cracked down on political protests —as remained elusive.

Insurgents unaffiliated with the Islamic State still hold patches of territory, besieged and bombarded by government forces, near the Syrian capital, Damascus; in the northern provinces of Aleppo and Idlib; and along the border with Jordan. Tens of thousands of people are missing, including civilians believed detained by the Syrian government. Twelve million Syrians, half the population, have been driven from their homes.

On Tuesday, the Syrian Network for Human Rights, which tracks war casualties through a database of victims identified by name, said that since March 2011, at least 26,446 children had been killed in the conflict, a vast majority by government forces.

“he main thing is to move to political processes,”r. Putin told Mr. Assad, according to Russian state news media. “ am pleased to see your readiness to work with everyone willing to establish peace and find solutions.”

Mr. Assad, who embraced the Russian leader and shook hands with a row of generals, replied, “e must admit that the operation made it possible to advance the process of political settlement in Syria.”

The United States and other international opponents have largely backed off their longstanding demand that Mr. Assad step down and have signaled willingness to accept a political transition that left him in power for at least some amount of time. But that remains unacceptable to many rebels and political opposition groups, and Mr. Assad has been accused in European courts of presiding over large-scale war crimes.

Suhair Atassi, an opposition activist, said the West appeared to be more and more willing to go along with Russia’ agenda for Syria.

Ms. Atassi was one of eight members to announce their resignation this week from the opposition negotiating group that has been attending the long-stalled talks sponsored by the United Nations in Geneva, including the committee’ leader, Riad Hijab. She said they were under pressure to make compromises they could not accept.

“hey told us very clearly, ‘ou, the opposition, will be out of the political scene if you don’ accept the fact that Bashar is staying,’”s. Atassi said.

“or the first time, I feel the international community is united,”he added “hey told us, ‘ou can beat Bashar in the election.’”

Ms. Atassi said the main international debate over Syria’ future was now about “mall details —hether Bashar will run for the next elections or not, how long he will stay in his term, his powers.”

She said Western countries had become more and more inclined to simply hand over the thorny matter of Syria to Russia and accept Moscow’ approach.

The Trump administration official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe the confidential call with Mr. Putin, said Mr. Trump’ emphasis on stability did not signal a change in American policy, just that the president considered peace the priority. Nor did Mr. Trump bring up Russia’ veto last week of a Security Council resolution that would have extended the investigation into who used chemical weapons in Syria, the official said.

“hings are obviously complicated with Russia,” State Department spokeswoman, Heather Nauert, told reporters.

Noting that the administration believes that Mr. Assad’ military used chemical weapons multiple times against civilians, Ms. Nauert gamely attempted to square that with a photo from Monday’ meeting of Mr. Putin enveloping Mr. Assad in a hug.

“ think that hug is proof that Vladimir Putin bears a certain responsibility for trying to help out Syria,”he said, “or trying to get Bashar al-Assad to —ell, trying to get that government —o put pressure on Bashar al-Assad so they don’ do something like that again.”

Opposition members like Ms. Atassi say lasting peace will be unattainable without accountability for war crimes like chemical weapons use and torture.

Russian state media said the Kremlin supported efforts by Saudi Arabia, which is the host for the opposition committee, to reorganize the opposition, presumably an effort to recruit a committee that would agree to new parameters. A new Geneva round is scheduled to begin next Tuesday.

Mr. Putin then plans to be the host at what he calls a Syrian Peoples’ongress in Sochi on Dec. 2. Initial plans for the meeting called for inviting 33 Syrian opposition groups, some tolerated by Damascus, as well as Kurdish groups — much broader range than those included in the Geneva process.

The meeting was postponed once over Turkey’ objections to inviting Kurdish groups that the Turks see as allied with Kurdish separatists in Turkey.

Another problem that remains unresolved is the fate of areas taken from the Islamic State by the Syrian Democratic Forces, a Kurdish-led, American-backed militia. The Syrian government has said it will fight to take the territory.

But the biggest problem for the Sochi talks, Neil Hauer, an analyst specializing in Russia’ involvement in Syria, wrote Monday, is “he opposition’ deep mistrust for Russia as a serious broker for an inter-Syrian settlement.”

Even before calling for the Sochi meeting, Russia had already carved out a parallel process to Geneva —alks in Astana, Kazakhstan, it has led with Iran and Turkey. That process, Mr. Hauer wrote, has largely functioned as an effort by those countries “o impose their own policies on Syria regardless of the whims of local actors.”

But some Syrian rebels have taken part in the talks, saying they see little option. The main result of the Astana talks has been the creation of four so-called de-escalation zones, which were meant to calm violence but where in practice heavy bombardment continues, hitting trapped civilians as well as armed groups.

Also on Tuesday, President Hassan Rouhani of Iran declared “he end”f the Islamic State and congratulated the peoples of Syria, Iraq and Lebanon as well as “ear brother”assem Soleimani, the commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps’lite Quds Force, who played a major role in battles in Iraq and Syria.

His remarks echoed those made on Monday by Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of Hezbollah, the Iran-backed Shiite militia group. Mr. Nasrallah spoke in more detail than he had previously done about Hezbollah’ involvement in Iraq, saying the group had sent many commanders to Iraq to aid in the battle against Islamic State.

Hezbollah has played an even larger and more prominent role in Syria. The new power, influence and weapons it gained in the process have roiled the region, as Saudi Arabia takes increasingly assertive steps to push back.

Mr. Nasrallah said his fighters would leave Iraq if they were no longer needed.

But as the United States has learned repeatedly, declaring “ission accomplished”n Iraq does not mean the fight is over.

Reporting was contributed by Hwaida Saad from Beirut; Ivan Nechepurenko from Moscow; Thomas Erdbrink from Tehran; and Peter Baker from Washington.

* Straightforward Answers to Basic Questions About Syria’ War

* Syrian War Drags On, but Assad’ Future Looks as Secure as Ever

* As \b ISIS\b0 ’ole in Syria Wanes, Other Conflicts Take the Stage

President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, left, and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia met in Sochi, Russia, on Monday. | Pool photo by Mikhail Klimentyev | The rebel-held town of Douma, Syria, last week after reported shelling by government forces. | Hamza Al-Ajweh/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171121edbl004v1



world
They Stayed Put, but Their City Disappeared; Damascus Journal

By SOMINI SENGUPTA 
1,507 words
21 November 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

DAMASCUS, Syria —n a cool evening in early November, in a back room of the Damascus Opera House, a women’ choir was rehearsing an old favorite, a sunny ballad from a childhood cartoon. When they reached the chorus —“ow sweet it is to live in one house, how sweet to live in one hometown”—ne of the singers, Safana Baqleh, began to weep into her hands.

The song reminded her of all that she had lost. Her closest friends had either left Syria or blocked her on Facebook over political disagreements. Sometimes, the solitude felt crushing. “ want to take my baby for a walk, but I have no one to visit,”s. Baqleh said. “o one. Absolutely no one.”

After more than six years of war, nearly a fourth of all Syrians live in exile. The loneliness of those who remain hangs like thick fog over Damascus, the capital. Lifelong Damascenes wonder why they are still here, when so many friends and family have packed up, died or disappeared. Newcomers, displaced by the war, move cautiously, unsure about their fate, or who is who.

I traveled to Damascus recently on a rare visa issued to an American journalist. I was almost always accompanied by a government-registered escort, which seemed to make some people reticent, and there were parts of the city I wasn’ allowed to visit.

Still, it was impossible not to notice how Damascus had been altered since pro-democracy protests erupted nearly seven years ago, only to be crushed by President Bashar al-Assad and then morph into a civil war that scattered Syrians across the world and turned their country into a chessboard for more powerful countries.

In recent months, Mr. Assad’ forces, helped by Iran and Russia, have reclaimed much of the country from insurgents. There are fewer checkpoints in Damascus than before, the streets are bustling later into the evenings and electricity has been completely restored. Still, some afternoons, government forces blast artillery into rebel enclaves on the city’ edge; in retaliation, rebels fire shells into the narrow lanes of the old section of the city, not long ago killing a shopkeeper playing backgammon with his neighbor.

In a park in the city’ center, families who fled the latest war zones sit with plastic bags and babies. A soldier sits in the bushes, keeping a close eye on everything and everyone.

On the main highway, shiny new restaurants cater to people who have enriched themselves during the war. In the middle of the workday, you walk in to find men in track suits silently smoking water pipes, watching everyone. And yet nearby, Damascenes who could once afford new clothes look through piles of secondhand sweaters because prices have shot up beyond reach. In a certain city market, I was told, the spoils of war show up for sale: refrigerators, pipes, chandeliers, all looted from towns recently reclaimed by the military. (I did not have a permit to visit the market myself.)

Every time I asked Syrians how they explained the events of the past seven years to their children, I was struck by how even the most garrulous among them fell into silence, or just shook their heads. They struggled to explain it to themselves.

Ms. Baqleh, 35, who is also a professional harpist, couldn’ say why she remained in the country. She knew only that she couldn’ stand the idea of living as a refugee abroad, seen as someone who needs charity rather than someone who belongs. So she stayed and tried to make a difference. She taught music. She sang. She volunteered at an animal shelter. Dogs and cats not only have been wounded in the war, she said, but also mutilated by children who had learned unspeakable cruelty.

“e need things to bind us,”he said. “e need each other.”

For their spring concert, the women’ choir —he Gardenia Chorus, they called themselves —ad chosen a repertoire of wedding songs representing the many peoples of Syria: songs in Arabic, Kurdish and Circassian, songs from places now synonymous with ruin, like Aleppo and Hama.

The conductor, Ghada Harb, 43, said it was their way of preserving a culture at risk of ruin. Also, she said, she hoped the songs would remind Syrians “o be accepting of each other.”

Ms. Harb considered herself lucky. She still had a home, a job. Her husband was too old to be conscripted into the military; her sons were too young. But every day, she prayed that her children would get home safely. She dreaded the day when they would leave her, as the adult children of so many of her relatives had done already.

The war had changed how she moves through the city. If a car with black windows cuts her off in traffic, she is reluctant to press her horn or complain out loud. There’ no telling who could be inside, or how they might react. One day, as she waited in a long line for fuel, she watched as a man in army fatigues angrily started slashing the plastic fuel containers that people had brought with them. She had no idea what set him off.

“he trace of war stays inside us,”he said. “e are working. We continue. But something inside us is sad and broken. We are very humiliated.”

At this, she began to cry.

We were sitting in a busy, brightly lit restaurant in a well-off part of the city. Waiters went from table to table, bearing enormous platters of grilled chicken, tabbouleh, onion rings. Water pipes were lit. Pomegranate juice was served.

“e feel like strangers,”he said after a while. “e are living in the same place but we have lost the people who lived here.”

In the narrow lanes of the old city, dominated by Hezbollah, the Lebanese Shiite militia and militant group that backs Mr. Assad, funeral posters announce the deaths of smiling young men. Men in their 20s and 30s, subject to military service, are the likeliest to leave, so much so that some employers say they prefer to hire and train young women instead. “ack Your Bags”s the name of a television serial, a comedy.

To remain in the country is especially stinging for those who once agitated against Mr. Assad’ authoritarian government. They find it hard to square the uprising they joined and the violence that followed, the kidnappings, car bombs and government sieges so crippling that children starved in Yarmouk, a Palestinian enclave in the heart of the capital. Or they find that their onetime friends spurn them.

“f they know your political affiliations,”ala al-Chach, a businesswoman, said, “hey treat you like someone who smells.”

The conflict has made violence numbingly ordinary.

An art dealer, Samer Kozah, lives in his ancient family house, surrounded by the works of artists who have fled.

In the past, young artists would trickle into his shop on Friday afternoons to show him their work, or just to talk about art and sip Mr. Kozah’ Nescafé Now there are hardly any artists left. Mr. Kozah, who established a gallery in his home 23 years ago, helped many of them establish themselves elsewhere —eirut, Vienna, Paris.

“ feel, sometimes, I don’ want to call it depression. I feel boring,”e said. “y mind is slowing down.”

Mr. Kozah and his wife, Olga, a jewelry designer, left for a while, too, only to be pulled back home earlier this year. He said he missed walking along the narrow warrens of the old city, greeting his neighbors, on his way to Nowfara, his favorite cafe. He missed the orange tree in his courtyard. He missed the quiet of the mornings. When there are no bombs, he said, you can still hear birds.

I asked him how the city had changed, which struck me as a harmless question, but it made him burst into tears. His wife left the courtyard where we were sitting.

One of her brothers disappeared four years ago and hasn’ been heard from since, Mr. Kozah said softly after she was out of earshot. Her father’ jewelry shop was looted clean.

“verybody has a story,”e said. “omebody died. Somebody lost their house. I walk here. I smell the jasmine, I go to Nowfara. I drink tea. Everybody, their faces changed. No one is the same.”

Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.

PHOTOS: A poster, above, in Damascus, Syria, depicting President Bashar al-Assad. At left, the Hamidiya market in the old part of the city. Residents who stayed say the capital has been altered by war. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY OMAR SANADIKI/REUTERS; LOUAI BESHARA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE —GETTY IMAGES) (A12)

* Marked for ‘e-escalation,’yrian Towns Endure Surge of Attacks

* Syrian War Drags On, but Assad’ Future Looks as Secure as Ever

* As \b ISIS\b0 ’ole in Syria Wanes, Other Conflicts Take the Stage

Document INHT000020171122edbl0000n



World; Europe
Germany Arrests 6 Syrian Migrants Suspected of  ISIS  Links

By DAN BILEFSKY and KATARINA JOHANNSEN 
846 words
21 November 2017
18:46
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The police in Germany arrested six Syrian migrants on Tuesday, suspected of plotting an attack and having links to the Islamic State, fanning fears that extremists posing as refugees were targeting Europe.

Millions of refugees, buffeted by conflict and civil war, have streamed into Europe in recent years, including an estimated one million who came to Germany in 2015. But while many Germans initially welcomed Chancellor Angela Merkel’ embrace of the refugees, viewing it as a powerful emblem of openness and liberalism, a backlash has been simmering after a spate of attacks across the continent.

Germans have dark memories of an attack in December, when Anis Amri, a Tunisian who had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State, hijacked a truck and plowed through a  Christmas market in central Berlin, killing at least a dozen people.

On Tuesday, Christian Hartwig, a spokesman for the Frankfurt prosecutor’ office, said that 500 police officers had stormed eight apartments in the German cities of Essen, Hanover, Kassel and Leipzig in early morning raids, and arrested the suspects. The men, ages 20 to 28, had been posing as refugees, Mr. Hartwig said.

He said the men were suspected of acting on behalf of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, and were planning an attack using weapons or explosives. They had arrived in Germany between December 2014 and September 2015, he added, a period when millions of refugees were heading to Europe. All six had applied for asylum, though Mr. Hartwig did not say if they had been granted that status.

The German newspaper Die Welt said that several cellphones, laptops and documents had been seized during the raids. It said that the suspects had arrived in Germany using fake identity papers and that the arrests had followed a tip from other refugees.

The news could hardly have come at a worse time for Ms. Merkel, who is facing a political crisis after negotiations to form a new government collapsed on Monday. The arrests could stoke criticism of Ms. Merkel for being too open to refugees and for allowing humanitarian imperatives to trump security concerns.

German news reports said the men had been plotting an assault on a Christmas market in Essen, in northwestern Germany, though Mr. Hartwig said it was too early to confirm the planned target or date. The authorities have called for added vigilance around festivities this year, and cities across Germany are planning to install concrete barriers around markets and to increase police presence.

After several terrorist attacks, anxieties about the threat of Islamist radicalism have grown, helping to embolden the far-right Alternative for Germany party, which broke a postwar taboo by entering the federal parliament for the first time in elections in September.

The latest arrests fueled concerns across Europe that terrorists were masquerading as refugees to infiltrate the continent. The influx of refugees has strained border controls and prompted alarm that a small but significant number of militants could use the turmoil to slip through the cracks.

According to Germany’ domestic intelligence agency, there are an estimated 24,000 Islamists in Germany, of whom about 700 are regarded as dangerous. The agency’ president, Hans-Georg Maassen, was quoted by the news agency Reuters in July as saying that seven terrorist attacks had failed or been thwarted in 2016.

Fears that terrorists disguised as refugees were entering Germany intensified last year after it emerged that an Algerian couple, suspected of planning a terrorist attack in Berlin, had arrived the previous year and applied for asylum as Syrian refugees. The couple, who had been under surveillance at a refugee shelter, were arrested in February in Attendorn, Germany, about an hour’ drive northeast of Cologne.

Hundreds of women were sexually assaulted and robbed during New Year’ celebrations on the New Year’ Eve in 2015 in Cologne, in attacks linked by the police to young men with Arabic or North African roots. The incident shook Germany and spurred debate about the integration of migrants from Muslim-majority countries.

Nations across Europe, including Austria, Denmark, Germany and Sweden, have been tightening immigration rules or border controls in response to anti-immigrant sentiment. In Germany, the authorities have been clamping down on bogus asylum claims and have expelled several  Afghan men.

Amnesty International recently accused European countries of putting thousands of Afghan refugee seekers, including children, at risk by sending them home.

Hungary, evoking the treatment of refugees during World War II, recently introduced plans to detain asylum seekers in small villages surrounded by razor wire.

* Angela Merkel Makes History in German Vote, but So Does Far Right

* Terrorism Suspects Are Posing as Refugees, Germany Says

* Deadly Berlin Christmas Market Episode Is Latest in Europe

Anis Amri, a Tunisian who had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State, hijacked a truck and   plowed through a Christmas market in Berlin last year, killing at least a dozen people. | Odd Andersen/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171121edbl006el



FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
Lost in the Wreckage

513 words
19 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
47
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Lost in the Wreckage

We visited the locations of nearly 150 airstrikes across northern Iraq, seeking to determine which air force launched them and whom they killed. The American-led coalition now acknowledges that it was the ''probable'' source of many more of those strikes than previously disclosed. Here are the stories of some of the victims.

A.K. and A.G.

HOME OF MOHAMMED TAYEB AL-LAYLA

Dhubat, eastern Mosul

Stated target ''Known ISIS weapons cache''

3 CIVILIAN DEATHS

Date Jan. 10, 2017

Ahmed al-Layla tried to persuade his parents to escape from Mosul with his sister, Eaman, and join him in Erbil, but they were stubborn. His father, Mohammed Tayeb al-Layla (below left), a former dean of engineering at Mosul University, refused to abandon his prized library, shelf after shelf of books on engineering and soil mechanics. As the Iraqi Army approached, neighbors told us, several ISIS fighters broke into the home, climbed to the roof and assumed sniper positions. Ahmed's father raced up in pursuit, with Ahmed's mother, Dr. Fatima Habbal (below right), a prominent gynecologist, close behind. Not long after, an airstrike flattened the home, killing the snipers, along with Ahmed's parents and sister.

HOME OF Salam al-Odeh

Downtown Qaiyara

Stated target''Known ISIS weapons cache''

7 CIVILIAN DEATHS

Date March 19, 2016

When ISIS left a mortar in Qaiyara's rail yard, a local informant passed on the coordinates for an airstrike. The strikes hit the rail yard (above), but ISIS had moved on. Instead, the homes of Salam al-Odeh and Aaz-Aldin Muhammad Alwan were hit. Salam's wife, Harbia, hung on until she reached the hospital, where she told her relatives what happened, then died of her injuries. A few weeks later, her son Musab died of his wounds, too. Of the eight people living in the two homes struck, only Rawa (below), who was 2, survived.

HOME OF RAFI AL-IRAQI

Al-Zirai, eastern Mosul

Stated target''Known ISIS HQ facility''

16 CIVILIAN DEATHS

Date Jan. 6, 2017

In early 2016, an ISIS patrol forced its way into the home of Rafi al-Iraqi (below, with his children), demanding the family's cellphones. Sama (right), Rafi's 10-year-old daughter, burst into tears and produced her mother's phone, which contained negative messages about ISIS that she had recently sent to her sister in Erbil. Rafi and his wife were arrested and interrogated, but only he was released. When Rafi asked about his wife, he was told, ''We'll bring her to you.'' Not long after, the family received her bullet-riddled body. Almost precisely a year later, at the height of the Mosul offensive, an airstrike leveled Rafi's house and two others next door. Only Rafi, his mother and his 12-year-old son, Mohammed (far left), survived.

(PHOTOGRAPH FROM AHMED AL-LAYLA) (MM46);  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AZMAT KHAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM49);  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANAND GOPAL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES.; RAFI AL-IRAQI.) (MM50) MAP 

Document NYTF000020171119edbj0006l



world
Slavery Ensnares Thousands in U.K. Here’ One Teenage Girl’ Story.

By CEYLAN YEGINSU 
1,549 words
18 November 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON —very Friday morning, as commuters arrived in London Victoria station, a teenage girl would board a train to Eastbourne, a coastal town about 60 miles outside the city.

Dressed in her sports uniform and carrying a shoulder bag covered in badges of pop icons, she tried to give the impression that she was on her way to school. But this teenager was already three hours into her workday.

Armed with a knife and carrying a large supply of Class A drugs, the 14-year-old girl had been instructed to travel to Eastbourne to sell crack and heroin.

If she failed to meet steadily increasing demands set by her boss at the time, a 48-year-old gang leader who lured her through a social media app, she was either beaten or sexually assaulted.

A report by a British government commission on modern slavery and human trafficking, released last month, described a sprawling practice that ensnares tens of thousands of people in Britain.

Many are immigrants. But the high number of victims from Britain was an unexpected shock —ases involving British citizens like the teenage girl were the third-largest grouping, after those involving Albanians or Vietnamese.

A majority of child-trafficking victims were also found to be British.

From nail salons and carwashes to farms and construction sites, thousands of vulnerable adults and children are being traded as commodities and are often subjected to violence and abuse, the report found.

“e kind of let it slip that we have vulnerable people in our own communities,”evin Hyland, Britain’ first independent antislavery commissioner, said in an interview. “nd they are vulnerable for a number of reasons, not just because they come from poverty. It may be that they have learning difficulties, educational issues or addiction.”

For months, no one noticed as the 14-year-old girl, whose identity is being concealed for her protection because her captors are still at large, sneaked out of her apartment before dawn, skipped school and came home late, once with bruises all over her body. No one saw the deep scratches on her arms and legs when she started to hurt herself.

Her mother acknowledged neglecting her daughter at times, occasionally staying away from their home for several nights at a time and ignoring calls from her daughter’ school reporting that she had failed to attend.

Then, during the school holidays in July last year, the teenager disappeared. It was not until seven months later, after her mother said she had resigned herself to the fact that her daughter might be dead, that a detective told her that she had been kidnapped and enslaved.

“nslaved?”he mother, whose identity is also being concealed to protect her daughter, recalled asking the officer. “ just kept repeating that word. I didn’ understand it,”he said in a London park where she often goes to try to manage a panic disorder that developed after her daughter’ disappearance.

During the months when her daughter was missing, “ thought about every possible scenario that could have happened to her,”er mother said. “ut slavery? I didn’ even know that happened in England.”

Britain recorded 2,255 modern slavery offenses across England and Wales last year, a 159 percent increase from the previous year. According to the government commission, the rise suggests that, while slavery might be increasing, so is awareness among the police and public. The report also said that different agencies were cooperating better.

But a recent inspection of police practice found significant deficiencies and inconsistencies that left many victims exposed and vulnerable to further exploitation.

“ictims who come into contact with the police are not always recognized as such and therefore remain in the hands of those who are exploiting them. Others are arrested as offenders or illegal immigrants,”the British Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services found.

Analysts say that some of the most vulnerable people are those who depend on welfare benefits and lack family life and support. As a result, they are easily influenced by people who suddenly appear in their lives.

“eople often get picked up when they are hanging around, either at hostels or soup kitchens,”aid Anne Read, an anti-trafficking response coordinator for the Salvation Army, a charity that manages the government support system for adult victims. “nd, of course, now there is the internet, which enables predators to enter people’ homes,”he added.

That is how the teenager met her captor more than a year ago, through a messaging app on her phone.

Her mother, who had just lost her job at a bakery, had cut off her weekly allowance of about $26. That caused the girl to spend less time with her friends and more time on the internet.

“ was broke, I couldn’ do nothing,”he girl, now 15, said in an interview with her caseworker by her side. “ got bored and started chatting to people on my phone, and that’ how I met him,”he said, referring to her captor, who has not been taken into custody and whose real name is unknown to investigators.

“e was really sweet when I met him,”he added with the slight stutter she developed in the months she was away. “e kept buying me phone credit, and told me he would look after me and teach me how to make money.”

The first day they arranged to meet, he took her to her favorite fish and chip restaurant and ordered the large family menu, just for the two of them.

The man was grooming the teenager to “o country,”eaning that she would become a drug runner. While most British citizens are trafficked for labor or sex, an increasing number of young people are being drawn into the drug world because of the relatively new phenomenon of distributing narcotics from urban hubs to small towns.

“hat we have are criminals who are predators, and who use other people as their instruments of crime,”r. Hyland said. “hey will use them however they can in whatever way they want to make money.”

The teenager’ boss promised her about $175 for every day she worked. The gang he ran made profits of about $2,400 a day, said her caseworker, who requested anonymity because she was not allowed to speak to the news media while the investigation into the teenager’ disappearance was underway.

In the first four months of working for the gang, she earned around $2,500 and received a new phone with unlimited data and a gold bracelet, which she still wears.

But one day last year, after making a drug run to Eastbourne, she was told by a gang member that the police had caught her on camera and were waiting to arrest her at her home in South London.

The teenager believed him.

The man, whom she knew as Ziggy, took her phone and money. He then drove her to a dark, squalid garage with no windows, where she lived for the next seven months with various drug addicts.

“verything changed,”he girl recalled. “iggy started to beat me and told me I wasn’ worth anything to them anymore.”

She was then taken off the runner rotation and forced into servitude, preparing drug supplies, transferring them between houses in the area and cleaning up after the addicts who lived there.

One night, as she slept on a mattress in the corner of the cold garage floor, Ziggy appeared and lay down next to her. “irst he undressed me and made me do things to him, but then he raped me,”he said, as tears streamed down her face and her hands started shaking.

“ thought about escaping so many times, but I had nowhere to go,”he said. “ thought they would either kill me or the police would arrest me.”

When members of the gang and different drug addicts started to rape her every night, she finally decided that nothing could be worse. The next day, she went to a local laundromat and asked to use the phone to call the police.

She returned home only after spending several months in a safe house undergoing a rehabilitation program. Her mother has had to move from their former home in South London because members of the gang that abused her daughter are still at large.

The teenager’ caseworker said that the biggest challenge was to make sure she completed her recovery process. Otherwise, she could risk falling back into the hands of traffickers, which happens often with young victims.

“’ really happy to be back with my friends,”he teenager said, smiling for the first time during a one-hour interview. “ut I really miss having a phone and money.”

PHOTO: The entrance to London Victoria station, where a teenage girl was forced to board a train every Friday to distribute crack and heroin. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW TESTA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

* A Woman’ Death Sorting Grapes Exposes Italy’ ‘lavery’

* Modern Slavery Estimated to Trap 45 Million People Worldwide

* To Maintain Supply of Sex Slaves, \b ISIS\b0  Pushes Birth Control

Document INHT000020171120edbi0000m



Reader Center
11 of Our Best Weekend Reads

By KALY SOTO 
584 words
18 November 2017
13:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

So much great journalism, so little time. It’ a modern problem, but this is the weekend. Sit back, relax, get another cup of coffee and lose yourself in one, two or 11 great stories.

‘he Lion King’ffect

Over 20 years, hundreds of South African performers have joined the musical in cities around the globe, The New York Times theater reporter Michael Paulson writes. Many play Rafiki, often learning to sing in languages not their own. Here are some of their stories, laced with hope, tragedy, homesickness and triumph. Arts & Leisure

Mother Knows Best

The Vanity Fair columnist James Wolcott looks at two portraits of modern matriarchy, reviewing Ivana Trump’ new book “aising Trump”nd “he Kardashians: An American Dream”y Jerry Oppenheimer. Book Review

The Uncounted

An on-the-ground investigation reveals that the United States-led battle against ISIS —ailed as the most precise air campaign in history —s killing far more Iraqi civilians than the coalition has acknowledged. The New York Times Magazine

Battlefield New York

With old maps in one hand and Google Maps in the other, the author Russell Shorto roams across the city’ five boroughs, searching for remnants of the American Revolution. Travel

My Thanksgiving

Behind the collective feast and public ritual is a personal dimension: the holiday as each of us has lived it, laughed about it, imagined it or reinvented it. Nine accomplished writers, including Wesley Morris, Masha Gessen, Elliot Ackerman and Jessica B. Harris, share their stories of the holiday.

And don’ forget to check out our feature The 400-Degree Thanksgiving, where Sam Sifton and Melissa Clark cook a feast in just eight hours. Food

A Hedge Fund Manager’ Escape Plan

Philip Baker admitted that he had defrauded his hedge fund clients. He was sentenced to 20 years in federal prison. Then he devised an escape plan. Business Sunday

For the First Family of Pleasure Products, Toys Are Us

Once sold in seedy bookstores, sex toys are now a chic, “ade in America”usiness, instilling customers with brand loyalty. Sunday Styles

The Doyenne of DNA Says: Just Chillax With Your Ex

“f we’e going to live to 150 years, the reality that you’e going to be with one person for 100 years is low,”Anne Wojcicki, the founder of 23andMe, says. Sunday Styles

Trillions of Flies Can’ All Be Bad

The world’ flies do much more than annoy us. Pollinating plants, cleaning up carcasses, swabbing drains —they're part of every strand of the web of life. Science

A Big N.F.L. Game Comes to Mexico City. These Guys Have It Covered.

The podcast Primero y Diez, or First and 10, exemplifies the passion for American football in Mexico and the kind of fans the league is cultivating. Sports

Overnight in Walmart Parking Lots: Silence, Solace and Refuge

Walmart’ practice of letting people populate many of its parking lots has made the retail giant’ stores a reliable destination and a place where an informal culture emerges before and after dark.

Brinkhoff Mogenbur | Eric Yahnker | Giles Price for The New York Times | De Agostini Picture Library/Getty Images | Melina Hammer for The New York Times | Aaron Vincent Elkaim for The New York Times | Graham Walzer for The New York Times | Peter Prato for The New York Times | Natural History Museum, London | Rebecca Blackwell/Associated Press | George Etheredge for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171118edbi002s1



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Crimes of the Caliphate: An Iraqi Bears Witness

By MARGARET COKER; Falih Hassan contributed reporting. 
1,528 words
18 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

HAWIJA, Iraq -- A shepherd heard the gunshots and the screaming.

As Islamic State fighters executed at least 60 people at a remote military base in northern Iraq one day last year, he cowered in his home nearby, terrified. When it was safe to go out, he found piles of bodies; many of them he recognized as his neighbors. He buried them himself.

''They were slaughtering people for all kinds of reasons, those caught using the internet, those suspected of being witches,'' the shepherd, Saad al-Omar, said at the site of a mass grave here on Tuesday. ''Here, I saw those victims, my neighbors. I saw bodies of mothers with their children. They had been shot. They had been burned. They were all dead.''

That executions routinely took place in his hometown, Hawija, was well known, proudly publicized by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, during its two-and-a-half year rule in the town. But Mr. Omar's grisly knowledge represents something rare in the quest for justice -- a witness who can lead the authorities to the bodies and identify many of them.

As Iraqi officials declared Friday that they had taken the last Iraqi town held by the Islamic State, reducing the group's self-declared caliphate to a tiny remnant on the Syrian side of the border, they are still trying to comprehend the scale of the group's horrors.

So far, they have found the sites of more than 70 mass graves, numbers that have overwhelmed the nation's police and forensics resources as well as the Iraqis' international partners helping to search for tens of thousands of missing people.

In September, the United Nations Security Council empowered a special adviser to help Iraq investigate potential war crimes, including mass killings, committed by Islamic State. The adviser's team will not arrive in Iraq until early 2018. Given the limited resources and costs of forensics, it is unclear how many mass graves could be properly exhumed, let alone how many -- if any -- suspects could face justice.

In Hawija, a small town in a flat, arid valley in southwestern Kirkuk Province, the head of civil defense, Col. Brahim Attiyah al-Jabbouri, said he fielded numerous, frantic requests each day from families searching for news of loved ones.

For him, the quest for answers is deeply personal.

Two of his cousins were detained by local Islamic State operatives and never seen again. One, a 45-year-old father of six, Nawaf al-Abdullah, had worked as an interpreter for American troops at the United States military base in Hawija. The Islamic State used the abandoned base, Forward Operating Base McHenry, as its execution site.

''Can you imagine a crueler fate?'' asked Colonel Jabbouri. ''To be murdered by your enemy at the place'' where you once worked.

The United States established the base in 2003 to train local residents to fight against the Al Qaeda-led insurgency. American country music stars held concerts in Hawija to build morale.

By the time American forces withdrew in 2011, the jihadi organization was in tatters and Iraqis took over the Hawija compound.

In 2014, the Islamic State juggernaut swept across the dusty valley, overwhelming Hawija, the base and the surrounding farming villages.

Today, the gravel-and-sand terrain of the former base resembles a gruesome obstacle course, its pathways littered with human femurs and jawbones laced with broken teeth.

Among the Islamic State's first targets were men who had worked in local law enforcement or with the Americans. Mr. Abdullah had done both. His younger brother, Watban, 21, had worked for the police. So the entire Abdullah family came under suspicion, according to Mr. Abdullah's sister, Saida, who spoke by phone from a camp for internally displaced Iraqis about 70 miles east of Hawija.

That included Mr. Abdullah, his wife and six children, as well as Watban, a newlywed whose wife had recently given birth to a girl.

For more than a year, their families tried to keep a low profile, as it was deemed too dangerous for the brothers to try to escape by slipping through the Islamic State's well-manned checkpoints. ''We were far away from anyplace safe,'' Saida al-Abdullah said. ''We had no escape.''

By late 2015, the Islamic State had made executions a routine event, according to the group's own propaganda videos. They were using the former base for their charnel house, in part because it offered a well-protected and remote space that would have hindered escape and prevented others from witnessing the activities there, Colonel Jabbouri said.

In January 2016, a group of Islamic State fighters drove into town, arrested Watban al-Abdullah and accused him of trying to sneak out of town, his sister said.

He disappeared in their custody, and the family had no way of knowing what had become of him.

Mr. Omar did. The 25-year-old shepherd lived on the outskirts of Hawija, near the former military base.

In February 2016, a couple of days after Watban al-Abdullah's arrest, Mr. Omar and his family heard the gunshots and screams emanating from inside the base.

Later that night, when the area appeared deserted, Mr. Omar climbed the earthen walls to see what had happened.

The scene surpassed his worst nightmares. Dozens of bodies, some clothed and some burned, lay scattered across the frigid ground in large sticky pools of blood. ''The stench was unbearable,'' Mr. Omar recalled, his weathered face pulled into a grimace. ''You can't imagine the feeling of seeing the bodies of children, of people that my family and I knew.''

Mr. Omar felt outrage about the killings, as well as the indignity of the unburied bodies' likely desecration by wild dogs. He shook off his fear of being discovered by Islamic State and tried to do the decent thing for the victims.

By starlight, for several nights in a row, he dug several shallow pits and pulled, by his count, 60 bodies into a makeshift grave, including the body of Watban al-Abdullah, whom he recognized.

''Some of the bodies were burned,'' Mr. Omar said. ''Some had been tortured. But I knew him.''

Mr. Omar got word to the Abdullah family about what he had seen. The Islamic State, however, never confirmed what happened, Mr. Abdullah's wife and sister said.

That news prompted Watban al-Abdullah's older brother, Nawaf, to risk an escape from town.

His wife Naeema said that the last time she saw her husband was Feb. 10, 2016. She presumes that the Islamic State caught him. She has not heard from him since he left.

The next time that Islamic State fighters entered the base, it was clear that someone had trespassed.

They began a search for the culprit, and immediately went to Mr. Omar's family farm, the closest homestead to the base.

The Omars denied any knowledge of the burials, but the family knew Mr. Omar was no longer safe. He went into hiding. By April 2016, he and his family fled Hawija for good.

''I had to run away,'' he said. ''I knew my fate would have been the same as theirs if I stayed.''

Mr. Omar carried his secret with him, until last month, when Iraqi forces liberated Hawija. He returned soon after and tracked down Colonel Jabbouri to tell him what he knew.

After fierce fighting to retake the town, about 60 local Islamic State members are believed to be at large, said the regional head of intelligence, Capt. Maath al-Obeidi. One of them is the man suspected of ordering executions in Hawija, a local Iraqi named Abdel Nasser Ghazi al-Mousa, Captain Obeidi said.

''We are working to hunt him down,'' he said.

More than a month after its liberation, Hawija remains a ghost town. Whole neighborhoods have been reduced to rubble, the commercial district torn apart by artillery fire. Most residents are waiting for local services to be restored before they leave their humanitarian aid camps and return.

The mass grave remains untouched, the countless sun-bleached bones scattered along the sand awaiting collection and identification.

Colonel Jabbouri said that although he was desperate for answers about what happened, he did not have the equipment or personnel needed for a thorough exhumation.

''I have dozens of people calling and writing to me on Facebook,'' he said, standing at the grave site. ''Everyone wants answers. We are frantic. But without experts, there is no way to really know who is here.''

Follow Margaret Coker on Twitter: @nytmargaret.

Iraqi forces searching the site of a suspected mass grave near Hawija containing the remains of victims of the Islamic State. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARWAN IBRAHIM/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A1); Saad al-Omar, left, a shepherd, heard shouts and screams from a mass execution by ISIS near Hawija, where he later found bones, shown in an image from a video, and bodies. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARGARET COKER/THE NEW YORK TIMES; KIRKUK GOVERNOR'S OFFICE, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A9) 

Document NYTF000020171118edbi0004p



World; Europe
Spain’ Secret Service Had Ties to Attack Leader, Official Says

By RAPHAEL MINDER 
649 words
18 November 2017
01:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

An imam who masterminded the August terrorist attacks in Barcelona and a seaside resort that killed 16 people had provided information to the Spanish secret service while he was in prison in 2014, a secret service official said Friday.

The secret service contacted the imam, Abdelbaki Essati, while he was serving a sentence on narcotics charges, according to the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss a security matter.

The official said that the imam was not a formal informant, but instead one of the contacts that the secret service, the National Intelligence Center, or CNI, cultivated to learn more about radical Islamist groups operating in Spain.

He would not say what kind of information Mr. Essati provided, or whether Mr. Essati remained in contact with CNI after leaving prison in 2014.

Most of the victims of the attacks were tourists who were mowed down by a van while walking along Barcelona’ most famous promenade, Las Ramblas.

Mr. Essati died on Aug. 16, shortly before the attacks, when the explosives he was manufacturing with the help of some of his young recruits blew up in their safe house in Alcanar, south of Barcelona.

In the rubble, the police found more than 100 gas cylinders. That accidental explosion forced the surviving members of the terrorist cell to abandon their plot for a large-scale bombing. Instead, they used vehicles to kill people in Barcelona, the capital of Catalonia, as well as in Cambrils, a Catalan seaside resort.

The disclosure of CNI’ links to Mr. Essati came amid a political crisis punctuated by an independence referendum in Catalonia, the dissolution of the region’ government by Madrid and the arrest of several of the separatist leaders.

Regional elections have been scheduled for next month in Catalonia, and Spain’ prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, hopes that the vote will deal a decisive blow to the independence movement and end a period of direct rule of the region by Madrid.

On Oct. 27, Mr. Rajoy’ government took full administrative control of Catalonia, using emergency constitutional powers, shortly after separatist lawmakers in the Catalan Parliament voted for independence from Spain based on the outcome of the referendum, which had been declared illegal by Spain’ constitutional court.

Mr. Essati was in prison on charges linked to drug trafficking between 2010 and 2014, when he was released from a penitentiary in eastern Spain. He then became the imam of a mosque in Ripoll, a Catalan town that was home to Younes Abouyaaqoub, who drove the van used in the Barcelona assault, and other members of a terrorist cell that planned the attacks.

Mr. Abouyaaqoub was killed by the police following a manhunt. Other suspected members of the terrorist cell are in jail awaiting a trial.

Mr. Essati is believed to have been the organizer of the cell, whose members included some teenagers and were mostly of Moroccan origin. He had ties with extremists that extended back more than a decade, and shared an apartment in the town of Vilanova that was raided by the police in 2006, as part of an investigation into another cell that recruited Islamic fighters for Iraq.

In the aftermath of the attacks, politicians and police officials in Madrid and Barcelona traded accusations over why the intelligence services had failed to detect Mr. Essati’ cell. He and some other members of the cell occupied the house in Alcanar for several months before the attacks, assembling a stockpile of bomb-making equipment.

* Police See Wider Plot in Spain and Say Carnage Could Have Been Worse

* Barcelona Attack Suspects Had Ties to Imam Linked to \b ISIS\b0 

* Spain, a Leader in Foiling Attacks, Falls Victim to One Anyway

* Van Driver in Barcelona Attack Is Killed by Police

Abdelbaki Essati | Catalonian Police 

Document NYTFEED020171118edbi000gp



The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
Listen to ‘he Daily’ Counting Civilian Casualties in Iraq

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
537 words
17 November 2017
12:12
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device :  Via Apple Podcasts  | Via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

Basim Razzo lost his family and his home in an airstrike by the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State. Video of the strike shows a target hit with military precision.

Why was Mr. Razzo’ home targeted? And how often does this happen?

Today’ show is the second of two parts about civilian casualties in Iraq. If you missed Part 1, you can find it here.

Today’ guests:

•asim Razzo, who survived an airstrike on his home in Mosul, Iraq.

•zmat Khan, an investigative reporter who has spent 18 months looking into civilian casualties in the war on the Islamic State.

Background reading:

•The investigation by Ms. Khan and Anand Gopal, the focus of this week’ Times Magazine, concludes that one in five strikes in the U.S.-led campaign results in civilian death, a rate more than 31 times higher than acknowledged.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if you’e interested in advertising with “he Daily,”rite to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

From your mobile device:

You can listen and subscribe to “he Daily”rom any podcast player. If you’e reading this from an iPhone or other Apple mobile device, tap this link to listen in Apple Podcasts. If you’e on an Android device, tap this link to listen in Stitcher or this link to listen in RadioPublic.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, managing producer; Christopher Werth, senior producer; Annie Brown, producer; Lynsea Garrison, producer; Rachel Quester, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director.

Azmat Khan contributed reporting.

* Listen to ‘he Daily’ Targeting \b ISIS\b0 , and Killing Civilians

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

Basim Razzo survived a coalition airstrike on his home in Mosul, Iraq, in 2015. His wife, daughter, brother and nephew were killed. | Giles Price/Institute, for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171117edbh003s5



Briefing
Leonardo da Vinci, U.C.L.A. Bruins, Ross 128: Your Thursday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,533 words
16 November 2017
11:25
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

Tax plan under threat.

•enator Ron Johnson of Wisconsin on Wednesday became the first Republican to declare that he would not vote for his colleagues’ill to rewrite the U.S. tax code. Other senators also expressed misgivings about the plan’ cost and effect on the middle class.

The House is set to vote on its own tax measure today. We looked at the key ideas in each proposal.

•“here are tough choices at the heart of the Republican tax bills speeding through Congress, and they make clear what the party values most in economic policy right now: deep and lasting tax cuts for corporations,”our tax and economics reporter Jim Tankersley writes.

A new twist in Alabama.

• lawyer for Roy Moore, the Republican Senate candidate, suggested that a purported message from his client, written in the high school yearbook of one of the women who have accused Mr. Moore of sexual misconduct, may have been forged.

The state’ Senate race grew increasingly uncertain after four more women came forward to accuse Mr. Moore of unwanted advances.

•tate Republican leaders met Wednesday night to discuss whether Mr. Moore should remain the party’ nominee for the Dec. 12 special election. No decision was announced.

The tactics of Weinstein’ sleuths.

•ntil 10 days ago, Black Cube, a private investigation firm established in 2010 by former intelligence analysts of the Israel Defense Forces, was largely unknown in the U.S.

But the company is now in the spotlight after the producer Harvey Weinstein hired it to investigate the actress Rose McGowan, who accused him of sexual assault.

•ur reporters got a rare look at the deceptive practices  the company used.

The end of an era in Africa.

•n placing President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe under house arrest on Wednesday, the nation’ military may have foreshadowed the end of more than just one political career.

The apparent coup echoed across a continent where the notion of the “ig man”eader is defined both by the lure of power in perpetuity and the risk that, one day, the edifice will crumble.

•e looked back at key moments in Mr. Mugabe’ nearly 40-year reign.

It’ no “ona Lisa.”

•ne of our art critics, Jason Farago, assessed “alvator Mundi,”he work attributed to Leonardo da Vinci that sold for a record-setting $450.3 million on Wednesday.

His verdict: “ proficient but not especially distinguished religious picture from turn-of-the-16th-century Lombardy, put through a wringer of restorations.”

•ther critics said the astronomical price attested to how much salesmanship drives and dominates the conversation about art and its value.

“he Daily” The U.S.-led war on ISIS.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Catch up at the end of the day.

•ike the Morning Briefing? Then consider subscribing to our Evening Briefing. It’ a rundown of the day’ biggest news and the stories you won’ want to miss.

•ree, right to your inbox. Sign up here.

Business

•t was one of the banking industry’ toughest watchdogs during the Obama era. Now, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency is becoming a vital player in the Trump administration’ campaign to roll back regulations.

Separately, the director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau said on Wednesday that he would leave the agency this month, removing a major opponent to the dismantling of regulations on businesses and on Wall Street.

•Time Inc. is said to be in talks to sell itself to the Meredith Corporation in an effort backed by the billionaire brothers Charles and David Koch.

• new phone comes out. Yours slows down. A conspiracy? No,  our tech columnist says.

•.S. stocks were down on Wednesday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ealth can cause its own anxieties.

•ave a home office? Show it some love.

•ecipe of the day: rich, fudgy chocolate-hazelnut brownies.

Noteworthy

•n Austrian village in China.

In today’ 360 video, visit Hallstatt, a small town in the Alps whose distinctive features have been replicated in southern China.

• prince throws caution to the wind.

Prince Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia, 32, is taking on members of the royal family, the country’ business elite, Iran and Hezbollah. Is he ambitious or simply reckless?

•elania 2.0.

“he clues were in the coats.”ur chief fashion critic, Vanessa Friedman, writes about the first lady’ new look.

•n sports.

U.C.L.A. suspended three men’ basketball players who were detained in China for shoplifting but were released after President Trump interceded.

Also on Wednesday, baseball gave its top pitching award, the Cy Young, to Max Scherzer of the Washington Nationals and Corey Kluber of the Cleveland Indians.

•est of late-night TV.

Samantha Bee addressed the pervasiveness of sexual harassment across the U.S.: “ach community has to kick out their own creeps.”

•uotation of the day.

“oss 128 is one of the quietest stars of the neighborhood.”

—Xavier Bonfils, the lead author of a paper describing the discovery of an Earth-size planet that could hold the conditions favorable for life.

Back Story

“e Beaujolais nouveau est arrivé”

Signs bearing these words appear today in restaurants and cafes across France and around the world, indicating that one of the year’ youngest wines is available on its traditional release day, the third Thursday of November.

The practice has a long history. “t’ a time when great gourmets stop drinking the grands crus and revel in the simplicity of a Beaujolais,”he writer and wine expert Frank Schoonmaker told The Times more than half a century ago.

To this day, the young wine’ release offers an excuse to gather with friends to opine on the year’ harvest and savor its fruitiness.

(If you have some spare time, do read this essay by Patricia Wells on the Beaujolais savored in Parisian wine bars in 1982.)

The Times first mentioned wine from the Beaujolais region in 1873. In 1955, we recommended it as “a good picnic companion.”

“he wines are as light on the wallet as they are in the glass,”ur critic, Howard Goldberg, wrote in 1987. “his frivolity makes them ideal quaffing wines for parties until New Year’ Eve, when Champagne takes over.

“esides, they are so short-lived they should be pretty much finished by then.”

Patrick Boehler contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated all morning. Browse past briefings here.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can get the briefing delivered to your inbox Sunday through Friday. We have four global editions, timed for the Americas, Europe, Asia and Australia, and an Evening Briefing on weeknights. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Follow Chris Stanford on Twitter: @stanfordc.

Leonardo da Vinci’ “alvator Mundi”t Christie’ in New York. The painting was sold on Wednesday for $450.3 million with fees, shattering the high for any work of art sold at auction. | Benjamin Norman for The New York Times | President Trump declared his 12-day trip to Asia a resounding success on Wednesday. We assessed his speech, in which he said that he had united the world against North Korea and insisted on reciprocal trade from Asian nations. | Tom Brenner/The New York Times | Jesmyn Ward won the National Book Award for fiction on Wednesday for “ing, Unburied, Sing,” dark, fablelike family epic set in contemporary Mississippi. Ms. Ward also won the award in 2011, for her novel “alvage the Bones.” John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, via Associated Press | An artist’ impression of a newly discovered planet and its red dwarf star, Ross 128, which are about 11 light-years away. The star does not have the violent eruptions of radiation that might wipe out any life on the planet before it had a chance to develop. | M. Kornmesser/European Southern Observatory, via Associated Press | Take the expert’ advice: Today is the day “hen great gourmets stop drinking the grands crus and revel in the simplicity of a Beaujolais.” Stephen Speranza for The New York Times | Roy S. Moore, the Senate candidate from Alabama, and his supporters are trying to discredit and diminish the mounting sexual misconduct allegations against him. | By CHRIS CIRILLO | The last moments of the historic bidding war for Leonardo DaVinci’ "Salvator Mundi." | By ROBIN POGREBIN | Enter Hallstatt, Austria, a small town in the Alps, and its replica in southern China in 360 video. Explore the towns’ore-than-similar architectural features. | By SARAH LI, SAM WOLSON, GUGLIELMO MATTIOLI and VEDA SHASTRI 

Document NYTFEED020171116edbg002ut



FACT CHECK
Politics; SECT
Trump's 'Tremendous Success' Abroad Is Overstated

By LINDA QIU 
899 words
16 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Trump marked his return from a five-country tour of Asia by recounting on Wednesday its ''tremendous success'' and that of his other trips abroad.

Deterred only by a struggle to quench his thirst, Mr. Trump listed numerous achievements against terrorism and for United States workers in claiming that ''America is back.'' But some of those statements don't hold much water. Here's an assessment.

He spoke of dealing ISIS 'one crushing defeat after another' since his meeting with Arab allies.

In detailing his May trip to Saudi Arabia, Mr. Trump said he spoke about ''our strategy to defeat terrorists by stripping them of financing, territory and ideological support'' and urged Arab states to drive terrorists from their societies.

It is true that the Islamic State has lost significant territory, including its de facto capital in Syria, ''since that time,'' as Mr. Trump said. But the extremist group had begun losing territory well before Mr. Trump's trip to Riyadh, and he has largely kept to plans laid out under President Barack Obama.

He exaggerated when he suggested that 'billions and billions of dollars are pouring' into NATO at his urging.

After repeatedly criticizing other countries in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization for not paying their fair share to the military alliance, Mr. Trump has since claimed credit for changing the trend. He said on Wednesday that ''NATO, believe me, is very happy with Donald Trump and what I did.''

Under NATO guidelines, member states agreed to commit a minimum of 2 percent of gross domestic product to the organization's defense efforts, but few nations actually do so. The secretary general of the alliance, Jens Stoltenberg, said in July that five countries contributed at least 2 percent of their G.D.P. He said he expected Romania to reach the benchmark this year, and Latvia and Lithuania to next year.

While it is conceivable that Mr. Trump ushered along the process, efforts to address the disparity predated his complaints. Members that were not meeting that bar of 2 percent pledged in September 2014 -- largely because of Russian actions that were continuing -- to do so over the next decade.

He overstated the overall American trade deficit.

Mr. Trump said that during his Asia trip, he gave a firm warning to every country ''that cheats, breaks the rules and engages in economic aggression,'' which, he said, is why ''we have almost an $800 billion a year trade deficit with other nations.'' That figure is accurate when examining only the trade balance in goods, about $750 billion last year.

Trade in services, however, reduced the overall deficit to $505 billion. The total trade deficit has actually increased under Mr. Trump's watch -- to $405 billion during the first nine months of 2017, compared with $370 billion during the first nine months of 2016.

He noted economic growth trends that predate his presidency.

Mr. Trump ticked off several accurate economic metrics: The unemployment rate is at its lowest level in nearly 17 years, the economy grew at over 3 percent in the last two quarters, and the stock market has been soaring. What he omits, however, is that those trends began under the Obama administration.

Almost all of the decline in the unemployment rate happened under Mr. Obama's watch. It peaked at 10 percent in 2009, dropped to 4.8 percent by the time Mr. Trump took office and continued to decline to 4.1 percent in October. Similarly, G.D.P. growth in the last two quarters -- 3 percent and 3.1 percent -- is certainly healthy but on par with numbers posted in the last three years.

He said Japan will make arms purchases 'worth many billions,' but Japan disputes that.

Mr. Trump played up Japan's commitment to its own defense capabilities and suggested that Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, whose name he mispronounced, had agreed to ''purchases of U.S. advanced capabilities, from jet fighters to missile defense.''

It is possible that Japan agreed to the arms sale, but if Mr. Trump and Mr. Abe did strike a deal, it would be in a very preliminary stage in a process that could take years. The Pentagon's Defense Security Cooperation Agency has yet to notify Congress of any intended sale, which must happen before negotiations can begin.

Japanese officials have also pushed back at the notion. In a report in The Japan Times last week, the Japanese chief cabinet secretary, Yoshihide Suga, said that Tokyo was following its existing defense procurement plan that was approved more than three years before Mr. Trump took office.

He claimed $250 billion in deals with China, a figure that includes nonbinding agreements.

The Commerce Department's breakdown of the $250 billion package includes several deals that are not guaranteed to proceed. For example, an $8 billion natural gas project and $83 billion in shale development projects were both agreed to in nonbinding memorandums of understanding. The breakdown also lists a $38 billion agreement for Boeing to supply China with 300 aircraft, which is in line with its 20-year forecast, and $2.2 billion in sales from General Motors to Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation, a large automaker in China that has a joint venture with G.M.

Wondering about a claim's accuracy? Email factcheck@nytimes.com.

Document NYTF000020171116edbg0004j



Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
An Expert In Pajamas, Battling Bots

By SHEERA FRENKEL 
1,359 words
13 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

SAN FRANCISCO -- Before the sun came up on Oct. 31, Renee DiResta sat in bed in her pajamas and logged into a virtual war room.

For years, Ms. DiResta had battled disinformation campaigns, cataloging data on how malicious actors spread fake narratives online. That morning, wearing headphones so she wouldn't wake up her two sleeping children, Ms. DiResta watched on her laptop screen as lawyers representing Facebook, Google and Twitter spoke at congressional hearings that focused on the role social media played in a Russian disinformation campaign ahead of the 2016 election.

Ms. DiResta knew the lines of questioning inside and out. Along with a handful of people with a similarly obsessive interest in mapping data across social media, she had helped prepare congressional staff members ahead of the hearings. That morning, they gathered in a dedicated channel on the Slack messaging app to watch and listen for answers to questions they had been asking for years.

''We were monitoring closely to see when the companies gave misleading or partial answers so that we could follow up,'' said Ms. DiResta, 36, who became immersed in disinformation campaigns in her spare time outside of her job as a founder and head of marketing at Haven, a shipping technology company.

How a small group of self-made experts came to advise Congress on disinformation campaigns is a testament to just how long tech companies have failed to find a solution to the problem. For years, the informal group -- about a dozen or so people -- have meticulously logged data and published reports on how easy it was to manipulate social media platforms.

In 2016, they monitored thousands of Twitter accounts that suddenly started using bots, or automated accounts, to spread salacious stories about the Clinton family. They watched as multiple Facebook pages, appearing out of nowhere, organized to simultaneously create anti-immigrant events. Nearly all of those watching were hobbyists, logging countless hours outside their day jobs.

''When I put it all together and started mapping it out, I saw how big the scale of it was,'' said Jonathan Albright, who met Ms. DiResta through Twitter. Mr. Albright published a widely read report that mapped, for the first time, connections between conservative sites putting out fake news. He did the research as a ''second job'' outside his position as research director at the Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia University.

Senate and House staff members, who knew of Ms. DiResta's expertise through her public reports and her previous work advising the Obama administration on disinformation campaigns, had contacted her and others to help them prepare for the hearings.

Rachel Cohen, a spokeswoman for Senator Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia, said in a statement that researchers like Ms. DiResta had shown real insight into the platforms, ''in many cases, despite efforts by some of the platforms to undermine their research.'' Mr. Warner is a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee.

One crucial line of the questioning -- on how much influence Russian-bought advertisements and content had on users -- was the result of work by Ms. DiResta and others with a Facebook-owned tool. ''Facebook has the tools to monitor how far this content is spreading,'' Ms. DiResta said. ''The numbers they were originally providing were trying to minimize it.''

Indeed, at the congressional hearings, the tech companies admitted that the problem was far larger than they had originally said. Last year, Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook's chief executive, said it was a ''crazy idea'' that misinformation on Facebook influenced the election. But the company acknowledged to Congress that more than 150 million users of its main site and a subsidiary, Instagram, potentially saw inflammatory political ads bought by a Kremlin-linked company, the Internet Research Agency.

Ms. DiResta contended that that is still just the tip of the iceberg. Minimizing the scope of the problem was ''a naïe form of damage control,'' she said. ''This isn't about punishing Facebook or Twitter. This is us saying, this is important and we can do better.''

In response, Facebook said it had begun organizing academic discussions on disinformation.

''We regularly engage with dozens of sociologists, political scientists, data scientists and communications scholars, and we both read and incorporate their findings into our work,'' said Jay Nancarrow, a Facebook spokesman. ''We value the work of researchers, and we are going to continue to work with them closely.''

A graduate of Stony Brook University in New York, Ms. DiResta wrote her college thesis on propaganda in the 2004 Russian elections. She then spent seven years on Wall Street as a trader, watching the slow introduction of automation into the market. She recalled the initial fear of overreliance on algorithms, as there were ''bad actors who could come in and manipulate the system into making bad trades.''

''I look at that now and I see a lot of parallels to today, especially for the need for nuance in technological transformations,'' Ms. DiResta said. ''Just like technology is never leaving Wall Street, social media companies are not leaving our society.''

Ms. DiResta moved to San Francisco in 2011 for a job with the O'Reilly Alpha Tech Venture Capital firm. But it wasn't until the birth of her first child a few years later, that Ms. DiResta started to examine the dark side of social media.

''When my son was born, I began looking into vaccines. I found myself wondering about the clustering effects where the anti-vaccine movement was concentrated,'' Ms. DiResta recalled. ''I was thinking, 'What on earth is going on here? Why is this movement gaining so much momentum here?'''

She started tracking posts made by anti-vaccine accounts on Facebook and mapping the data. What she discovered, she said, was that Facebook's platform was tailor-made for a small group of vocal people to amplify their voices, especially if their views veered toward the conspiratorial.

''It was this great case study in peer-to-peer misinformation,'' Ms. DiResta said. Through one account she created to monitor anti-vaccine groups on Facebook, she quickly realized she was being pushed toward other anti-vaccine accounts, creating an echo chamber in which it appeared that viewpoints like ''vaccines cause autism'' were the majority.

Soon, her Facebook account began promoting content to her on a range of other conspiratorial ideas, ranging from people who claim the earth is flat to those who believe that ''chem trails,'' or trails left in the sky by planes, were spraying chemical agents on an unsuspecting public.

''So by Facebook suggesting all these accounts, they were essentially creating this vortex in which conspiratorial ideas can just breed and multiply,'' Ms. DiResta said.

Her published findings on the anti-vaccine movement brought her to the attention of the Obama administration, which reached out to her in 2015, when officials were examining radical Islamist groups' use of online disinformation campaigns.

She recalled a meeting with tech companies at the White House in February 2016 where executives, policy leaders and administration officials were told that American-made social media platforms were key to the dissemination of propaganda by ISIS.

It was during that time that she first met Jonathan Morgan, a fellow social media disinformation researcher who had published papers on how the Islamic State spreads its propaganda online.

''We kept saying this was not a one-off. This was a toolbox anyone can use,'' Ms. DiResta said. ''We told the tech companies that they had created a mass way to reach Americans.''

A year and a half later, they hope everyone is finally listening. ''I think we are at this real moment, where as a society we are asking how much responsibility these companies have toward ensuring that their platforms aren't being gamed, and that we, as their users, aren't being pushed toward disinformation,'' Ms. DiResta said.

Follow Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @sheeraf

Renee DiResta became one of the leading experts on the use of bots and trolls to manipulate social media in her spare time. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON HENRY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B4) 

Document NYTF000020171113edbd0006q



World; Asia Pacific
Duterte Warms to Trump, but Keeps His Focus on China

By RICHARD C. PADDOCK and FELIPE VILLAMOR 
1,397 words
12 November 2017
07:13
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BANGKOK —he president of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte, seldom holds back.

His antidrug crusade has led to the extrajudicial killings of thousands of people. He is fond of boasting about how he has personally killed criminals and even strangers. He unleashes profane diatribes about countries and world figures he dislikes, with the United States often on the receiving end.

But more quietly, he seems to have warmed to the United States and President Trump, who also has a notably provocative style.

As his country hosted a summit meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, on Sunday, the more charming side of Mr. Duterte’ personality was on display, both in his meetings with Mr. Trump and in his foreign policy goal of  closer relations with China.

One big reason for his shift in rhetoric when it comes to the United States is clear: President Trump is a marked improvement in Mr. Duterte’ eyes over Barack Obama, who urged the Philippine leader to follow the rule of law in tackling the illegal drug trade.

On Saturday, Mr. Trump and Mr. Duterte met for the first time on the sidelines of an economic summit meeting in Vietnam. The two shook hands and spoke warmly about having a longer discussion over the next two days, Philippines officials said.

“hese two are talking as friends,”aid Ramon Casiple, the executive director of the Institute for Political and Electoral Reform, a nonprofit promoting democracy in the Philippines. “ don’ see any reasons when they meet face-to-face that there will be any big problems.”

But the longer-term game for Mr. Duterte has been his determination to court China. Since his election, he has backed down from contentious territorial disputes with Beijing —ast week, he halted a construction project in the South China Sea that brought Chinese complaints —espite an international ruling early in his presidency that backed the Philippines.

Harry Roque, a spokesman for Mr. Duterte, described his policy as a deliberate turn toward closer relationships with countries in Asia, and with China in particular.

Mr. Duterte hopes his strategy will bring billions of dollars in Chinese investment, though the money has been slow in coming, said Richard Javad Heydarian, an assistant professor of political science at De La Salle University in Manila.

Still, the United States and its former colony are treaty allies with a long history of cooperation. And it is clear that Mr. Duterte’ and Mr. Trump’ styles seem to mesh more than clash.

Mr. Trump set the stage for improved relations when he called Mr. Duterte in April and congratulated him for doing an “nbelievable job on the drug problem.”he United States also provided valuable military assistance —ncluding drones and intelligence —hat proved instrumental in defeating Islamic extremists during a five-month siege of Marawi City, which ended last month.

Last year, Mr. Duterte called for a “eparation”rom the United States, threatened to expel American troops and accused the Central Intelligence Agency of plotting to kill him. When asked how he would respond if the American president were to criticize his antidrug campaign, Mr. Duterte replied with a vulgar epithet to describe Mr. Obama, who was president at the time.

Mr. Roque, the spokesman, said that Mr. Duterte changed his tune after seeing the value of United States help in Marawi.

“e hasn’ been criticizing the United States lately,”r. Roque said. “e looks forward to closer ties with the United States.”

Mr. Trump landed in the Philippines on Sunday to protests by leftist activists, rights groups and students in the streets. The two presidents were scheduled to hold bilateral talks in Manila on Monday, and Mr. Trump attended a gala dinner hosted by Mr. Duterte on Sunday night.

The two leaders shared a warm handshake, and were seated side by side at the dinner. They were seen leaning in to chat animatedly at the start of the evening.

On Monday, following a meeting with the leaders of Australia and Japan, Mr. Trump did not respond to questions shouted by reporters about whether he planned to press Mr. Duterte on human-rights issues at a face-to-face session with him later in the day.

Mr. Trump has been tied to the Philippines for years through his business dealings, and before this trip, his brand had arrived well ahead of him. Trump Tower at Century City, a $150 million, 57-story residential building, has been under construction since 2012 in metropolitan Manila. It is one of several international business deals that pose potential conflicts of interest for Mr. Trump.

The tower is being built by Jose E.B. Antonio, a Manila developer. Days before Mr. Trump was elected, Mr. Duterte named Mr. Antonio an envoy to the United States for trade, investment and economic affairs.

“’e always loved the Philippines. I think it’ just a special place, and Manila is one of Asia’ most spectacular cities,”r. Trump was quoted as saying on the Trump Tower website last year. The comment has since been removed.

But no words could please Mr. Duterte more than Mr. Trump’ support of the Philippines’ntidrug campaign.

Mr. Duterte won election on a vow to kill drug users, and said the fish in Manila Bay would grow fat feeding on their corpses. In the early months of the antidrug campaign, the police said that thousands of drug users had been killed. But as the extrajudicial killing has continued, they have refused to release the death toll.

Mr. Duterte won election last year with 39 percent of the vote, but his popularity soared after the killings began. While his support rating has declined in recent months, it still stood at 67 percent in September, according to a survey by the nonprofit Social Weather Stations.

While past American presidents have used meetings with foreign leaders to promote human rights, activists have little expectation that Mr. Trump will raise the extrajudicial killings with Mr. Duterte.

“ strongly suspect we will see an alpha-male bromance between the two,”aid Phelim Kine, the Human Rights Watch deputy director for Asia. “ lot of the issues that underpin the U.S.-Philippine relations will go unaddressed, and one of those will be rule of law.”

Mr. Duterte has bristled at any criticism of his drug war. Speaking to Filipino workers in Danang, Vietnam, on Thursday, he lashed out at Agnes Callamard, the United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions.

“his rapporteur, I will slap her in front of you. Why? Because you are insulting me,”e said in a speech sprinkled with expletives.

He also boasted of killing a man, as he often has in the past. Typically, there is little evidence to support his claims.

“t the age of 16, I have already killed,”e said. “ human. I stabbed him because he stared at me.”

Mr. Duterte also offered to host an international summit on human rights and compared himself to Satan. “ am the new toughie here in hell,”e said.

But for a more international audience, Mr. Duterte is likely to talk about how he can take a bigger role in the region’ most important issues. As chairman of Asean, Mr. Duterte wants to be a regional power broker who can help negotiate with North Korea, said Mr. Heydarian, the political scientist.

“e is trying to punch above his weight, but everyone should welcome that,”r. Heydarian said. “sean is one of the last bridges North Korea has to the international community.”

Richard C. Paddock reported from Bangkok, and Felipe Villamor from Manila. Julie Hirschfeld Davis contributed reporting from Manila.

* Philippines Halts Work in South China Sea, in Bid to Appease Beijing

* After a Disciplined Week in Asia, Trump Unloads on Critics

* Philippines’eal With China Pokes a Hole in U.S. Strategy

* Duterte, Philippine President, Boasts He Killed Someone as a Teenager

* Philippines Calls City ‘iberated,’onths After \b ISIS\b0  Allies Seized It

* Unexpected Benefits From a Battle Against \b ISIS\b0 

President Trump with President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines and his partner, Cielito Avenceñ, in Manila on Sunday at a dinner honoring the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. | Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171112edbc000ul



World; Middle East
With Iraqi-Kurdish Talks Stalled, Phone Diplomacy Averts New Clashes

By MARGARET COKER 
1,467 words
12 November 2017
20:28
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

FISH KHABBOUR, Iraq —urn on a television or scroll social media in Iraq over the last three weeks and by almost any measure, more conflict appears imminent between the federal government in Baghdad and the Kurdish region in the north.

Kurdish officials accuse federal forces —ithout corresponding evidence —f committing a slaughter last month when they seized control of 20 percent of territory that had been long under Kurdish domain. Iraqi lawmakers demand prison sentences for Kurds who supported the Sept. 25 independence referendum.

Yet amid the acrimony, leaders in Baghdad and the Kurdish strongholds of Erbil and Sulimaniyah have also been exchanging almost daily phone calls, hoping to hash out solutions to problems exacerbated by that vote —nd to get thousands of federal and Kurdish troops massed within each others’ight lines to stand down.

The back-channel chats have taken on heightened importance since formal de-escalation talks stalled on Oct. 29, after only two face-to-face meetings.

“he channels of dialogue and communication have not been interrupted,”aid Sa’d al-Hadithi, a spokesman for Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi.

Three officials involved in the informal talks say they are discussing temporary arrangements to the most pressing issue for both sides: Control of Iraq’ Fish Khabbour border crossings with Turkey and Syria, where about one-fifth of Iraq’ oil exports pass through. The officials were granted anonymity to discuss a sensitive diplomatic matter.

This stab at conflict resolution illustrates the diffuse nature of Iraqi politics, where key power brokers sometimes have no formal or elected authority. It also highlights a dangerously fractured political spectrum in which elected officials can be eclipsed, sometimes by rival factions from within their party or even family.

While back-channel discussions have helped keep the border trade of oil, food, consumer goods between Turkey and Syria flowing —long with humanitarian aid from Iraq bound for Syria —ver the last two weeks, they are far from any breakthrough.

Diplomats say that Iraq’ tradition of carrying out delicate negotiations in secret, often by people acting well outside their official roles, can be baffling to outsiders.

Riding a wave of victories over the Islamic State, Mr. Abadi ordered his troops in October to re-establish government control throughout the country. The independence referendum prompted him to include many areas long under Kurdish control.

While no official casualty statistics have been released, about 65 men died in clashes sparked by these advances, according to two military commanders familiar with the situation. Beyond the loss of life, the Kurdistan Regional Government lost face over the rapid withdrawals by their pesh merga security forces. It also lost much of its oil fields to federal troops, and with them the economic self-sufficiency that has underpinned the region’ de facto autonomy since 2005.

In late October, after advancing northward amid several short skirmishes, federal forces dug in about 10 miles from the Fish Khabbour oil terminal and the nearby cargo crossing with Turkey, one of the largest trading partners for both Iraq and the Kurdish region.

With tensions boiling, Baghdad on Oct. 28 announced a cease-fire and a round of negotiations between Iraqi and Kurdish military commanders, ostensibly to allow federal forces to take over the border without further bloodshed.

On Oct. 29, however, talks broke down, amid intransigence by the Kurds about the altered balance of power.

“he talks mixed security and politics,”ccording to Sheikh Jafar Moustafa, a veteran pesh merga commander and one of four Kurdish negotiators, who added that his side did not have the political authority to approve any agreement with the Iraqis.

“e had to get political approval for any deal,”e said, “nd no political decision was forthcoming.”

At that point, the phone diplomacy increased among leaders like the Kurdish regional deputy prime minister, Qubad Talabani; Mr. Abadi’ deputy chief of staff; and Iraq’ intelligence chief.

These relationships have helped avert any new clashes near the border, despite a buildup of Iraqi forces, and helped keep the trade corridor open and oil exports flowing, albeit at a reduced rate, according to Turkish and Iraqi officials.

However, not all political factions in Baghdad or Kurdistan support de-escalation or a border deal.

Those include Iraqi Shiite politicians close to the Popular Mobilization Forces, a paramilitary organization made up of dozens of militias recognized by the Iraqi state in 2014 as an auxiliary force to fight the Islamic State.

Although the militias are under the formal command of Mr. Abadi, some of their leaders are his parliamentary rivals and profess close allegiance to Iran’ Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.

On the Kurdish side, it is unclear who, exactly, could enforce any potential border compromise.

Mansour Barzani, the son of the longtime Kurdish leader Masoud Barzani, commands an elite Kurdish security force that is defending a ridge between an Iraqi artillery unit and the Fish Khabbour border. Last week, he said he would fight to the death rather than allow the Iraqi federal troops to control the crossings. But a cousin, the regional prime minister Nerchivan Barzani, supports a negotiated deal.

“aturally when there is tension in the field and military confrontations take place, there are always needs to defuse such tensions,”aid Safin Dizayee, a spokesman for Mr. Barzani. “he prime minister has, through various channels, maintained such contacts with the federal government,”e said, adding that the conversations “ave helped create more understanding and build confidence.”

Meanwhile, in the second largest Kurdish city, Sulimaniyah, relatives of the former Iraqi president Jalal Talabani, who died last month, are immersed in their own feuds over control of Mr. Talabani’ party and the security force loyal to it.

Such divisions have already scuttled one attempt to stave off military conflict between Baghdad and the Kurds.

In the aftermath of the independence referendum, Mr. Talabani’ eldest son, Bafel, began unilateral negotiations with Mr. Abadi. (Qubad Talabani is Bafel’ brother.)

Bafel Talabani, a British-educated Kurdish security commander who holds neither elected office nor a formal political role, said he took the initiative to counter what he saw as a firm determination by Baghdad to clip Iraqi Kurdistan’ autonomy.

He proposed a plan that would have troops from the American-led coalition against the Islamic State take over a large military base near the oil-rich town of Kirkuk, along with federal forces and Kurdish forces loyal to his father’ party. The Kurds had controlled the base since 2014, when Iraq’ army retreated during the Islamic State onslaught.

Bafel Talabani said the base deal would have given Mr. Abadi a political win amid the nationalist fervor in Baghdad, as well as allow Kurds to keep a toehold in what to many leaders is an essential piece to their independence plans. Kirkuk is coveted by both Baghdad and the Kurds because of its strategic oil reserves.

“t was a true compromise that would have saved lives,”r. Talabani said in a recent interview.

An aide to Mr. Abadi, and two Western diplomats, confirmed that such a deal had been proposed. Mr. Abadi gave Mr. Talabani until Oct. 16 to get a green light from the Kurdish leadership to implement the plan, or he would launch the operation to seize the area from Kurdish control.

Mr. Talabani said he could not build consensus among his father’ political party and the region’ ruling party, controlled by the Barzani family.

With the deadline past, Mr. Abadi instead ordered the federal forces to push into Kirkuk, and then farther north toward the Turkish border.

Follow Margaret Coker on Twitter: @nytmargaret.Falih Hassan contributed reporting.

* An Iraqi Town Where Muslims, Jews and Christians Coexist, in Theory

* Iraqi Kurds’ndependence Vote Exposed Risks to Energy Strategy

* As \b ISIS\b0  Is Driven From Iraq, Sunnis Remain Alienated

* Iraqi Forces Overpower Kurds, but Public Relations Battle Rages

Iraqi security forces last month fired a rocket launcher at Kurdish pesh merga positions near the Fish Khabbour border crossings with Turkey and Syria. | Ahmad Al-Rubaye/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi plants the national flag in the city of Qaim, on the Syrian border, on Nov. 5 after it was recaptured from the Islamic State. | Moadh Al-Dulaimi/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Fruits are loaded onto a truck for transport from Syria’ Kurdish area into Iraq’ Kurdish region last week. | Delil Souleiman/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Mansour Barzani, a son of the longtime Kurdish leader Masoud Barzani, has vowed to fight to the death to prevent Iraqi troops from seizing the vital border crossings at Fish Khabbour. | Emrah Yorulmaz/Anadolu Agency, via Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171112edbc002mh



National Desk; SECTA
Recruit Abuse Earns Marine 10-Year Term

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS 
725 words
11 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

RALEIGH, N.C. -- A Marine Corps drill instructor was sentenced on Friday to 10 years in prison for choking, punching or otherwise tormenting recruits, especially three Muslims -- one of whom ultimately killed himself by leaping down a stairwell.

A military jury handed out the punishment to Gunnery Sgt. Joseph Felix one day after convicting him of abusing more than a dozen trainees at the Marine boot camp at Parris Island, S.C.

Among other things, he taunted the Muslims as ''terrorists'' or ''ISIS'' and ordered two of them to climb into an industrial clothes dryer, spinning one of them around in the scorching machine until he renounced his faith, the jury decided.

Sergeant Felix, 34, a veteran of the Iraq War, was also ordered to forfeit all pay, demoted to private and given a dishonorable discharge.

Sergeant Felix was a central figure in what was found to be a group of abusive drill instructors at Parris Island. After the March 2016 suicide at the base, a hazing investigation led to charges against him, five other drill instructors and the training battalion's commanding officer. Eleven others faced lesser discipline.

Abusive drill instructors have long been stock characters in books and movies like ''Full Metal Jacket.'' But that 1987 film was set during the Vietnam War, and the Felix trial shows that since then the Marines have drawn clearer lines between what instructors can and cannot do, said Michael Hanzel, a former Navy lawyer who attended the proceedings at Camp Lejeune, N.C.

''This generation now, there's things that I think that we're much more focused on. In particular, in this trial, it's calling people names based on their religion and targeting people based on their religion,'' said Mr. Hanzel, now a lawyer in private practice specializing in military law. ''I don't think anyone would say that was acceptable ever, but it probably was not prosecuted in the past the way it would be now.''

The charges against Sergeant Felix included commanding recruits to choke one another; ordering them to drink chocolate milk and then training them until they vomited; and punching recruits in the face or kicking them to the ground.

''He wasn't making Marines. He was breaking Marines,'' Lt. Col. John Norman, a prosecutor, told the jury on Wednesday. He called Sergeant Felix a bully who heaped special abuse on three Muslim recruits because of their faith.

One of them, Raheel Siddiqui, 20, a Pakistani-American from Taylor, Mich., hurled himself to his death after what the jury decided was mistreatment by Sergeant Felix that included slapping Mr. Siddiqui and calling him a terrorist. Mr. Siddiqui's family sued the Marine Corps last month for $100 million.

The government did not charge Sergeant Felix with any crime directly related to Mr. Siddiqui's death. The judge, Lt. Col. Michael Libretto, did not allow testimony about whether Sergeant Felix's actions were responsible for the recruit's suicide.

Sergeant Felix also was convicted of ordering Lance Cpl. Ameer Bourmeche into a dryer, which then was turned on as Felix demanded, ''Are you still Muslim?'' Lance Corporal Bourmeche testified that he twice affirmed his faith and that Sergeant Felix and another drill instructor twice sent him for a bruising, scorching tumble inside the machine.

After a third spin, Lance Corporal Bourmeche said, he feared for his life and renounced his religion. The drill instructors then let him out, he said.

Sergeant Felix was found guilty as well of ordering Lance Corporal Bourmeche to simulate chopping off the head of a fellow Marine while reciting ''God is great'' in Arabic.

The jury decided Sergeant Felix also ordered Rekan Hawez, a native of Iraqi Kurdistan, to climb into the dryer. The machine was never turned on.

Sergeant Felix was convicted, too, of rousing nearly two dozen recruits from their sleep, ordering them to lie on the floor, and then walking on them along with two other drill instructors.

In a closing statement on Wednesday, Navy Lt. Cmdr. Daniel Bridges, a defense lawyer, said the government unfairly fashioned contradictory witness accounts into a case against the brawny drill instructor who called all recruits ''terrorist.''

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020171111edbb0006a



ON COMEDY
The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
Kathy Griffin Flows From Defiant to Shaken to Fainting

By JASON ZINOMAN 
1,359 words
11 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

DUBLIN -- Every era gets the Lenny Bruce it deserves. Ours is Kathy Griffin.

On Wednesday night, Ms. Griffin, 57, delivered a wild two-hour-and-15-minute performance that brought to mind Bruce's late period, when that comic's compelling if exhausting shows featured blow-by-blow analysis of his legal battles with the government.

At the start of Ms. Griffin's performance, which included raucous cheers, disarming boos and a premature finale when she fainted, she warned: ''I'm not going to stop talking until I'm arrested.''

A bit dramatic, sure, but not as much as you might think. Ms. Griffin embarked on this international tour, ''Laugh Your Head Off,'' after her American dates were canceled when she was photographed holding a Donald Trump mask smeared in ketchup. TMZ's headline: ''Kathy Griffin Beheads President Trump.''

Even though Mr. Trump has picked fights with everyone from Meryl Streep to the cast of ''Hamilton'' since being elected, he has gone after no artist as hard as Ms. Griffin. He wrote a blistering tweet, his wife released a strongly worded formal statement and his son Donald Jr. harshly criticized her on Fox News.

While Ms. Griffin joked on Wednesday, ''For two hours I had to convince my mom I wasn't in ISIS,'' her stories about the resulting furor were dark and even chilling.

As a result of this tasteless photo, Ms. Griffin didn't just receive death threats, lose gigs and sponsorship money, and get fired as a host of CNN's annual New Year's Eve special. She was also put on the no-fly list and became the subject of a Secret Service investigation for, she says, ''conspiracy to assassinate the president.'' When she asked the federal agent why the government was going to such extremes, the woman pointed upward, indicating, Ms. Griffin interpreted, that this came from the president himself.

Onstage, in front of red block letters spelling out her first name, Ms. Griffin wore the blue dress from the fateful photo, and appeared defiant one moment, shook up the next. She singled out stars who sent their support, fired back at celebrities who criticized the photo (look out, Alyssa Milano and Debra Messing), and got emotional about others, like Anderson Cooper, her co-host on New Year's Eve, who tweeted his disapproval. ''You know what Cher said?'' Ms. Griffin said onstage, shifting into an impression of her friend. ''Well, you wanted to be famous, bitch.''

The entire episode showed her to be the outsider she always said she was, skewering the famous while somehow being obsessed with them at the same time. In this regard, she's a perfect match for Mr. Trump, whom she has known for nearly two decades, dating to an episode of the 1990s sitcom ''Suddenly Susan'' on which both appeared. She remembered the moment on Wednesday: When he greeted her with ''Call me The Donald,'' she responded, ''Call me The Kathy.''

Mr. Trump may come from Queens and Ms. Griffin from suburban Chicago, but for some time now, they have both lived on Planet Celebrity. Though Ms. Griffin spent years making fun of Kim Kardashian, she moved next door to this reality TV star, and when not mocking the Trump family on Wednesday (she called his older sons ''Eddie Munster and Date Rape''), Ms. Griffin spilled secrets about the home life of Kanye West and Ms. Kardashian: They drive around in a Rolls-Royce golf cart and keep the mannequin of Taylor Swift from his ''Famous'' video in their house. ''Sometimes, late at night, I can hear them printing money,'' she quipped.

Ms. Griffin does not write taut jokes; she emerged from the West Coast alt-comedy scene of the 1990s, when comics were reacting against the machine-gun-joke style of comedy clubs and building acts on digressive stories and conversational riffs. Even then, Ms. Griffin relied on highly personal revelations, often shameless and sexual and sprinkled with celebrity dust. If she slept with Jack Black, she talked about it onstage, then wrote about talking about it.

She is famous for frivolity, derided by some peers for her obsession with boldface names. But it's not fair to chalk up Ms. Griffin's success to our culture's lust for scandal and stardom, though that's certainly part of it. ''I will be your guilty pleasure,'' she wrote in her best-selling 2009 memoir, ''Official Book Club Selection.''

Ms. Griffin, who reveres Joan Rivers, belongs to a glorious show-business tradition of hard-working, mouthy survivors with ambition to burn, an instinct for self-promotion and a chip on the shoulder. If she ever cared about alienating someone famous to get a laugh -- whether a network executive, a commander in chief or garden-variety actors doing their best -- she doesn't anymore. ''I have a lot of female hostility,'' she said Wednesday, pivoting from earnest to glib. ''It's very trendy.''

Some of that hostility is directed toward Harvey Levin, the TMZ founder, and Andy Cohen, the host of ''Watch What Happens Live'' and her replacement on the New Year's Eve show. After Mr. Cohen pretended that he didn't know who Ms. Griffin was in a video on TMZ, Ms. Griffin responded with a 17-minute video of her own in which she criticized both men for misogyny. She also revealed Mr. Levin's phone number and claimed that Mr. Cohen offered her cocaine twice (he has denied it).

Onstage she took shots at both of them again, but the variety of insults she leveled, some more thinly supported than others, made it seem as if she were just tossing out the kitchen sink, and not to funny ends. Ms. Griffin often veered off-course, and when she referred to ''being in the United Kingdom,'' she was startled by the angry reaction of the Dublin audience. The packed crowd of die-hard fans turned on her, hissing and booing. She seemed thrown off-balance, and had trouble returning to her story, not for the last time.

Some forceful directorial guidance could hone this wandering series of stories into a more refined show that sticks to a theme and a through-line revolving around Mr. Trump. But this messy, indulgent production instead gives us Ms. Griffin unfiltered, which has the benefit of seeming like a backstage gossip session, albeit one that lost steam as it headed past the 60-minute mark and she dabbed sweat from her forehead.

After more than two hours, Ms. Griffin started telling a story about Mariah Carey when she froze, looked down and slumped, suddenly silent. She leaned into the microphone and said: ''Randy, I'm going down.'' Her boyfriend hurried onstage and grabbed her. Before he escorted her offstage, she said, ''I'll be back.''

The crowd gasped and waited in the dark for minutes, until he helped Ms. Griffin back to the microphone, when she muttered something hard to hear over the cheers. What was clear was that the show was over. She later apologized in a video, saying she fainted.

It was a shockingly anxious end to the evening, revealing perhaps the toll this sprawling tour (or her recent controversies) has taken on her. But counting out a force of nature like Ms. Griffin is a mistake. Just as the condemnation of her Trump photo fueled this new show, her collapse just added more drama to an evening that did not lack for it. As she exited with assistance, she turned to the crowd and scrunched her face into a self-mocking grimace that seemed to say: How ridiculous is this?

Kathy Griffin last month in Los Angeles. In a performance in Dublin on Wednesday, she told her audience, ''I'm not going to stop talking until I'm arrested.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY GREG DOHERTY/GETTY IMAGES) (C1); Anderson Cooper and Kathy Griffin in Times Square during New Year's Eve celebrations in 2015. Ms. Griffin was fired as host off CNN's annual special. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CARLO ALLEGRI/REUTERS) (C4) 

Document NYTF000020171111edbb0004o



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Le Pen Loses Her Immunity Over Photos

By ADAM NOSSITER 
541 words
10 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
12
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

PARIS -- The French Parliament has lifted the immunity of the National Front leader, Marine Le Pen, forcing her to appear in front of judges over graphic photographs of Islamic State executions she posted on Twitter and giving a new slap to her already-humbled far-right party.

Magistrates opened an investigation in December 2015, shortly after Ms. Le Pen, furious over a television interview in which a French journalist compared her party to the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, posted several pictures of the killing of the American journalist James Foley, along with another photograph.

The objective, Ms. Le Pen said, was to protest the ''ignoble parallel'' that had been drawn between the militant group and her party, but the ''dissemination of violent images'' is a crime in France, punishable by up to three years in prison.

Ms. Le Pen has used various parliamentary immunities -- first as a member of the European Parliament, and then as a member of the French Parliament -- to resist a summons from the investigating judges. The European Parliament stripped her of that protection in March, and a committee of the National Assembly in France did so on Wednesday.

A lawmaker's status shouldn't be ''an obstacle to the smooth functioning of justice,'' Françis de Rugy, the president of the French Parliament, told the France Info television channel on Thursday, adding that there is no reason for deputies, as they are known in France, ''to be above the law.''

Ms. Le Pen, who lost badly to Emmanuel Macron in a runoff for the French presidency in May, must now appear before the investigating judges to answer questions about the case.

Ms. Le Pen denounced the decision on Twitter, saying ''You are better off being a jihadist returning from Syria than a deputy denouncing the crimes of ISIS: It's less risky from a judicial standpoint.''

Some National Front leaders complained that the parliamentary action amounted to further persecution of their embattled party, but Ms. Le Pen has other reasons to worry about her future, and that of the National Front.

She and other National Front members had expected to be the principal opposition force to Mr. Macron, but the party took a beating in parliamentary elections in June; only eight members and affiliates were elected.

Her own voice is nearly inaudible in the National Assembly; her position as leader of the party, following a disastrous debate performance against Mr. Macron last spring, has been challenged as never before.

She has lost her trusted deputy, Florian Philippot, once the Front's ideological guide, who left the party to start his own breakaway faction. The French media carries new accounts every week of internal squabbling within the party, with many officials -- usually quoted anonymously -- saying that it is time for new leadership.

The quarrels are largely irrelevant to the broader political situation in France. The party's support in polling has dwindled, with even the mainstream right and left struggling for attention as Mr. Macron's own political movement dominates both Parliament and the national debate.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020171110edba0004l



Lens
Multimedia
Putting a Face to a Comment: The New Online Crusaders

By REMY TUMIN 
806 words
8 November 2017
10:00
NYT Blogs
NYTB
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved 

Nick Haynes didn’ seem so bad.

Sure, online he had promised civil war if Hillary Clinton were elected, but Mr. Haynes was first and foremost a family man. He’ given up his days of motorcycles and drinking to live a sober life in a sleepy Pennsylvania town with his four children, where he had a full-time job as a truck driver.

But his family life contrasted sharply with his other full-time job, that of a prolific online commenter. During the 2016 presidential campaign, he tweeted an average of 57 times a day about a corrupt system, biased media and “illary.”e compared voting for Mrs. Clinton to killing your own children.

It was this disconnect between “ormal life”nd intense online debate that drove Kyrre Lien, a photographer based in Oslo, to look into the lives of the online commenting community. For a project called “The Internet Warriors,”r. Lien combed through tens of thousands of online comments to put together a group of 27 internet debaters from around the world, representing all sides of the political spectrum.

“hey had steady jobs, they had family, they had friends and lived quite a normal life, but at the same time, you saw they had these hateful comments,”e said. “hat was part of what drove me to dig into this.”

In the case of Mr. Haynes, Mr. Lien assumed that he would personify his comments.

“ thought if you’e writing hateful comment towards Hillary or Trump that are really, really angry and horrible, I thought that person is going to be horrible in person as well,”r. Lien said. “ut many of the people were actually quite nice, made me coffee and tea and, until politics came up, it was like flipping the switch on a different personality.”

Still, Mr. Lien is hesitant to categorize them as internet trolls.

“abeling them all as internet trolls would be too harsh. Many of them are trolls, but many of them are just really strongly opinionated people,”r. Lien said. “ll of the people I met are really dedicated in the cause they’e fighting.”

They have full-time jobs and families, they are men and women of all ages, who feel marginalized in some way or another. Take, for example, Ashleigh Jones, 22, a psychology student in Cardiff, Wales. She’ amassed more than 180,000 tweets on various subjects including entertainment, L.G.B.T. issues and “ot guys.”

“ome people have also called me a troll, like when I said that ISIS should kill David Cameron,”Ms. Jones told Mr. Lien, referring to the former British prime minister. “ don’ think I’ a troll. I might have strong opinions, but they are just that —pinions. For me, a troll is someone who is ruining the discussion, and that’ not me.”

The photographs feature portraits of the commenters, many of them in their natural commenting habitat inside their homes. Video interviews accompany the subjects online, as well as a book.

“ust to see their homes, their decorations around them, their computers —ll of those things give quite a lot of personality to the photo,”r. Lien said.

Mr. Lien spent weeks researching and studying commenters. One thread took him down a dark path on Kim Kardashian’ Facebook account. He spent three or four days going through all the comments on her account looking for frequent commenters with a consistent message. But in the end, that was one type of opinion he wasn’ able to capture on camera —isogynists.

Mr. Lien found that the motivation behind commenters depends on their political affiliation. On the right, it’ “ecause they feel threatened and society is letting them down, they’e being left by themselves,”r. Lien said, whereas people on the left “eel that we need to stand up for what we believe in.”

Sofia Srour, 23 and Muslim, defends her religion daily.

“here is so much ignorance and hate directed towards my religion in the comment section that I quickly become irritated. Anger drives me,”he told Mr. Lien. “ have spent more than three hours every day sharing my views on Islam. It’ a bit scary to engage in these discussions, but I feel that it’ important to balance out all the negativity that is posted.”

Mr. Lien may have spent four years trailing the lives of what he calls internet warriors, but the photographer is far from calling himself a troll.

“’ like to be more of an internet peacekeeping force than an internet warrior,”e said.

Follow @Kyrre and @nytimesphoto on Twitter. Kyrre Lien is also on Instagram. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.

Document NYTB000020171108edb800001



World; Asia Pacific
Philippines, Seeking to Appease Beijing, Halts Construction in South China Sea

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
832 words
8 November 2017
12:48
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA —resident Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines has ordered military officials to stop construction work on a sandbar in a disputed area of the South China Sea after Beijing complained, the country’ defense chief said on Wednesday.

Mr. Duterte’ decision to halt work on the project, which was to include a shelter for Philippine fishermen, signals an effort to improve ties with China before a regional summit meeting in Vietnam this weekend.

China complained in August about the work on the sandbar at Sandy Cay, the Philippine defense secretary, Delfin Lorenzana, said. The sandbar is near Thitu Island, which Manila calls Pag-Asa island and claims as its own.

“hey complained that we were occupying a new feature,”r. Lorenzana said, adding that the Philippine Defense Ministry had transported people there “o put structures for our fishermen.”

The resource-rich Spratly Islands are claimed in whole or in part by both nations, as well as by Brunei, Malaysia, Taiwan and Vietnam. Beijing has been creating  artificial islands in the South China Sea, expanding former reefs and outcrops into guarded permanent outposts, increasing tensions with Washington, which has sent warships through the area.

Mr. Lorenzana said that Beijing had invoked an agreement between the Chinese and Philippine foreign ministers to maintain the status quo in the area, and not to occupy any new land features, in an effort to reduce tensions in the area. He said that Mr. Duterte had been informed of the “tandoff”nd had decided to halt construction on the sandbar.

“ agree with the decision because it was indeed a new feature,”r. Lorenzana said.

China claims ownership of a vast majority of the South China Sea, asserting rights even to waters near the shores of other nations.

A third of global maritime traffic passes through the South China Sea, making the disputes a source of contention, with defense strategists and analysts warning that competing ownership claims could lead to armed conflict.

The Philippines has contested many of China’ claims, but since assuming office last year, Mr. Duterte has taken a more conciliatory stance. The president, who is the current chairman of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, hopes to begin negotiations this year for a code of conduct that would govern actions in the region. Mr. Duterte will host Asean leaders in Manila next week.

But some Philippine lawmakers oppose what they see as Mr. Duterte’ acquiescence to China.

Representative Gary Alejano, a former marine captain who had warned of China’ increasing presence near Thitu, accused Mr. Duterte of buckling to Beijing, saying the Philippines could rightfully set up structures on the sandbar.

“here was no new occupation of the sandbars by the Philippines because these sandbars have been traditionally under effective control by Philippine troops,”e said.

Mr. Alejano noted that the sandbars in question, about 2.5 miles from Pag-Asa, were subject to regular patrols and visits by Philippine forces and fishermen.

“hat is part of Duterte’ strategy of silence, inaction and subservience to China’ actions in the South China Sea,”e said.

Harry Roque, a spokesman for Mr. Duterte, said in an interview on Tuesday that the president had relied “n the principle of good faith”n dealing with China’ expansionist ambitions in the region, and he described relations between the two countries as “ery warm.”

“ think we are witnessing a renaissance of sorts as far as China and Philippine relations are concerned, and this bodes well for peaceful resolution of the varying claims”n the South China Sea, Mr. Roque said.

He added that Mr. Duterte had opted to maintain “ery close and cordial”elations with China, noting that his state visit to Beijing last year had resulted in pledges of Chinese investment in the Philippines.

But he warned that the government had also made “ontingency plans”n case relations hit a sour note again.

“e will rely on peaceful means of settling disputes —ecognizing that we also have the right to self-defense,”r. Roque said.

In a speech on Wednesday, Mr. Duterte highlighted his country’ warmer relations with Beijing.

“e are friends of China, we owe them a debt of gratitude,”e said, noting that the Chinese government had helped the Philippines by supplying arms to fight militants  in Marawi, on the southern Philippine island of Mindanao.

* Rodrigo Duterte Gets Closer to China, and the Neighbors Notice

* After Trump’ Phone Call to Philippines Leader, China’ President Calls Him

* \b ISIS\b0 ’ore Helps Fund Militants in Philippines, Report Says

Members of a Philippine survey team in April, around Philippine-held Thitu island, in the Spratlys archipelago. On Wednesday, President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines ordered troops to scrap plans to build a fishermen’ shelter on a sandbar in the area in the disputed South China Sea. | Ted Aljibe/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171108edb8003xp



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
Attention: Saudi Prince In a Hurry

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
1,168 words
8 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
27
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

To understand the upheaval that is taking place in Saudi Arabia today, you have to start with the most important political fact about that country: The dominant shaping political force there for the past four decades has not been Islamism, fundamentalism, liberalism, capitalism or ISISism.

It has been Alzheimer's.

The country's current king is 81 years old. He replaced a king who died at 90, who replaced a king who died at 84. It's not that none of them introduced reforms. It's that at a time when the world has been experiencing so much high-speed change in technology, education and globalization, these successive Saudi monarchs thought that reforming their country at 10 miles an hour was fast enough -- and high oil prices covered for that slow pace.

It doesn't work anymore. Some 70 percent of Saudi Arabia is under age 30, and roughly 25 percent of them are unemployed. In addition, 200,000 more are studying abroad, and about 35,000 of them -- men and women -- are coming home every year with degrees, looking for meaningful work, not to mention something fun to do other than going to the mosque or the mall. The system desperately needs to create more jobs outside the oil sector, where Saudi income is no longer what it once was, and the government can't keep eating its savings to buy stability.

That's the backdrop for this week's daring, but reckless, power play by the 32-year-old son of King Salman -- Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, known by his initials M.B.S. I've interviewed M.B.S. twice. He is a young man in a hurry. I've found his passion for reform authentic, his support from the youth in his country significant and his case for making radical change in Saudi Arabia compelling.

Indeed, there are two things I can say for sure about him: He is much more McKinsey than Wahhabi -- much more a numbers cruncher than a Quran thumper. And if he did not exist, the Saudi system would have had to invent him. Somebody had to shake up the place.

But here is what I don't know for sure: Where does his impulse for rapid reform stop and his autocratic impulse to seize all power begin? After M.B.S. arrested a slew of Saudi princes, media owners and billionaire businessmen on ''corruption'' charges, President Trump tweeted his applause, saying, ''Some of those they are harshly treating have been 'milking' their country for years!''

I could only laugh reading that tweet. Hearing that Saudi princes were arrested for ''corruption'' is like reading that Donald Trump fired seven cabinet secretaries ''for lying.'' You know it has to be something else. Trump obviously missed the story last year that M.B.S. impulsively bought a yacht while on vacation in the south of France -- it just caught his fancy in the harbor -- from its Russian owner for $550 million. Did that money come out of his piggy bank? Savings from his Riyadh lemonade stand? From his Saudi government 401(k)?

I raise this point because when you're making as many radical changes at once, and making as many enemies at once, as M.B.S. is, your robes need to be very clean. People have to believe that you mean what you say and that you have no hidden agendas, because change is going to be painful. Look at what M.B.S. is doing all at once:

To speed up decision-making, he is reshaping the Saudi state -- from a broad family coalition where power is shared and alternated among seven major families and decisions taken by consensus -- to a state governed by a single family line. This is no longer ''Saudi Arabia.'' It is becoming ''Salman Arabia.'' In the latest series of arrests, M.B.S. basically eliminated the ''young old guard'' -- the key sons and his natural rivals from the other main Saudi royal lines. He also arrested the owners of the three main quasi-independent private television networks, MBC, ART and Rotana.

At the same time, M.B.S. is shifting the basis of legitimacy of the regime, ending ''the 1979 era.'' In 1979, in the wake of the takeover of Islam's most holy site in Mecca by an ultra-fundamentalist Saudi preacher who claimed that the al-Saud family was not Islamic enough, the Saudi ruling family -- to shore up its religious legitimacy -- made a sharp religious turn at home and began exporting its puritanical Wahhabi Sunni Islam abroad, building mosques and schools from London to Indonesia.

It has been a disaster for the Arab/Muslim world, spawning offshoots like Al Qaeda and ISIS and retarding Arab education and women's advancement.

M.B.S. has vowed to give birth to a more moderate Saudi Islam, starting by curbing his religious police and permitting women to drive. This is hugely important. He is daring people to judge his government not on piety but on performance, not on Quran but on KPIs -- key performance indicators on unemployment, economic growth, housing and health care.

But he is replacing Wahhabism as a source of solidarity with a more secular Saudi nationalism, one that has a strong anti-Iran/Persian/Shiite tenor. And that is taking him to some dangerous places. To confront Iran, M.B.S. got the Sunni Prime Minister of Lebanon, Saad al-Hariri, to quit his office on Saturday while on a visit to Riyadh, and blamed Iran and its Shiite allies for making Lebanon ungovernable -- and for a missile attack from Yemen. Lebanon, which had forged a relatively stable balance among Sunnis, Christians and Shiites, is now shaking. M.B.S. also led a Gulf effort to isolate Qatar for being too close to Iran and to crush Iran's influence in Yemen -- and crush Yemen in the process. It's overreach, and there seems to be no one around to tell him that.

As a veteran Saudi journalist remarked to me of M.B.S.: ''This guy saved Saudi Arabia from a slow death, but he needs to broaden his base. It is good that he is freeing the house of Saud of the influence of the clergy, but he is also not allowing any second opinion of his political and economic decisions.''

I worry that those urging M.B.S. to be more aggressive in confronting Iran (whose malign regional influence does need counterbalancing) -- like the U.A.E., Trump, Jared Kushner and Bibi Netanyahu -- will push M.B.S. into a war abroad and at home at the same time, and we could see Saudi Arabia and the whole region spin out of control at the same time. As I said, I'm worried.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020171108edb80004d



world
An Iraqi Town Where Muslims, Jews and Christians Coexist, in Theory; Amadiya Journal

By ROD NORDLAND 
1,184 words
7 November 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

AMADIYA, Iraq —his once-pretty picture postcard town, on its own 4,000-foot high mesa nestling between a pair of much higher mountain ranges, is in a bad neighborhood when it comes to tolerance.

So the mystery of the Jewish holy figure Hazana, who is revered here by people of all the local faiths, is even more profound than it might otherwise be.

Amadiya is in the semiautonomous province of Kurdistan, which is the target of a crackdown by Baghdad after aiming to achieve independence from Iraq. This part of northern Iraq has been convulsed by violence since the advance of the Islamic State, which sent Christians fleeing, enslaved Yazidi women and killed Shiites on sight, until finally being wiped out in the area last month.

Today Amadiya’ population of 9,000 is overwhelmingly Kurdish Muslim. But in the early 20th century there were said to be about two-thirds that many people, about evenly divided among Muslims, Christians and Jews —lthough there were 10 mosques compared with two churches and two synagogues. Everyone was packed into a circumference of a mile and a half.

Amadiya’ Jews all left after the creation of Israel in 1948. And so many Christians have left amid successive regional upheavals that the remaining 20 or 30 families can no longer sustain both churches.

All three faiths here are brought together by a longstanding reverence for Hazana, a Jewish religious figure of unknown antiquity —ariously described as a son of David, the grandson of Joseph or just a little-known prophet —hose tomb is in Amadiya.

“ll the religions are going to that grave to pray,”aid Muhammad Abdullah, a local teacher and amateur historian. “or all three religions, it’ a sacred place. Each of them thinks he belongs to them.”

Hazana’ biography is so hazy that he defeats a Google search. Locals don’ have much to add. He was “ really great guy, a pure person,”aid Bzhar Ahmad, 55, a retired government worker who had just emerged from noon prayers at the town’ Amadi Grand Mosque, with a group of other Muslim worshipers nodding agreement.

None of the men found it strange that Muslims and Christians also prayed at Hazana’ tomb. “he Jews were always our friends,”r. Ahmad said. “e never thought about what we were, we were just people living together.”

Directions given by locals to find Hazana’ tomb varied, but all ended up in a crooked lane narrow enough that in Amadiya’ heyday there were footbridges connecting roofs from one side to the other so that residents could use their rooftops to go to the mosque while avoiding the visitors in the overcrowded lanes below. Or so they say.

On the way, opposite a chicken coop with a roof festooned in flowering potted plants, Saran Sabah stood with her 18-year-old daughter, Amal. In the side alley leading to her house was a huge pile of firewood, ready for the coming winter. A Sunni Muslim, Ms. Sabah had prayed to Hazana, and it had worked, she said; there was a daughter to prove it.

The men hadn’ mentioned that Hazana’ popularity rested on his ability to bring fertility to supplicants, but later confirmed it. Borhan Said, a local Muslim resident and retired government worker, said people asked for other things as well. “e was a religious man who was so clear and so devout,”e said.

It almost sounded as if they had met, but it turned out that Mr. Said was not even sure what epoch Hazana came from. “e was before my father’ father, that’ all I know,”e said.

Mr. Said pointed out the nondescript red metal gate of what had been the old synagogue, unlocked and unguarded, and said visitors were welcome. Inside was a garden of fig trees and pomegranates, trumpet creepers and hibiscus, unkempt but well-watered. Purple and blue prayer cloths, used by those who came to ask Hazana’ help, were hanging on some of the bushes.

Here and there were piles of rubble, old stone building blocks and sections of walls —he remains of the synagogue itself. Cut into the earth was a stone staircase leading to an underground tomb.

On the plastered walls inside the tomb was some fairly recent graffiti in Hebrew script, the verses of a religious song, along with an emoji-like smiley face, plus a Star of David sketched over Hazana’ plain rectangular sarcophagus.

Just what accounts for the town’ communal tolerance, people say they’e not sure, except that it has always been so. “e grew up like this,”r. Said said. “y father always taught me to be like this and I teach my son the same.”

Partly the town benefits from its remoteness; even when Kurds engaged in civil war from 1994 to 1997, fighting never arrived here, though both warring factions were present.

[Video: Amadiya | ONCE IN A PLACE | full movie Watch on YouTube.]

Some attribute it to Amadiya’ history. Take the Amadi Grand Mosque, for example, the biggest and oldest of the town’ 10 mosques. Speculation runs that it was originally a temple for the ancient Romans’ithraic cult. Then, say locals, the building became a Jewish synagogue for centuries before becoming a Christian church for more centuries and finally, after the arrival of Islam 800 years ago, a mosque.

How much of that is actually true is debatable; Amadiya is such an out-of-the-way place that it seems not to have been much studied.

It would be easy to say that part of the secret of Amadiya’ harmony is simply that most of the other faiths have now left town, though some Jews have visited recently to help restore Hazana’ tomb and to pray there.

But locals insist that would be unfair. Nafae Paulis is the caretaker of the Chaldean church and a veteran of the Kurdish pesh merga Special Forces who is now retired after years of battling the Islamic State. He talked as if the other faiths were still around in numbers as before.

“hat’ the beauty of Amadiya,”e said. “n this small place you can find Muslims, Jews, Christians.”

Even if not actually true, it is a nice sentiment.

Follow Rod Nordland on Twitter @rodnordland

PHOTOS: The town of Amadiya, viewed from an abandoned hotel, in the Kurdish region of northern Iraq. It has a population of 9,000, which is mostly Kurdish Muslim.; The tomb of Hazana, who is variously described as a son of David, the grandson of Joseph or just a little-known prophet.; Friday noon prayers at the town’ centuries-old Amadi Grand Mosque last week. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MAURICIO LIMA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

* Iraq Claims Victory in \b ISIS\b0 ’ast Urban Stronghold

* \b ISIS\b0  Onslaught Engulfs Assyrian Christians as Militants Destroy Ancient Art

* After Threat of War, Iraq and Kurds Lower the Temperature

Document INHT000020171108edb70000a



Reader Center
The Times’ Digital Highlights From the Last Week

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
398 words
7 November 2017
22:08
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The Reader Center is a newsroom initiative that is helping The Times build deeper ties with our audience.

Two masthead editors at The Times, Steve Duenes and Sam Dolnick, have highlighted some of our best digital journalism from the last week and have provided some insight into how the stories were produced.

A Glimpse Into a Secret Society

As the world tried to understand the motivations of the suspect in the New York truck attack, Rukmini Callimachi, our correspondent who covers Al Qaeda and the Islamic State, put The Times far ahead of the competition.

The federal complaint suggested that the suspect visited secret Islamic State channels on the messaging app Telegram. Rukmini, a frequent Telegram user, figured that many readers may not use the app or know how it works, so she learned how to record her own phone screen and then embedded a video of her phone as she scrolled through Telegram channels. The short clip allowed her to show secret communication channels, rather than just describe them.

A New Gift Guide

The holiday stalwart got an overhaul this year thanks to a collaboration between Smarter Living and Wirecutter. For this year’ Holiday Gift Guide, the team organized more than 300 gifts —rom practical to whimsical —n a range of prices; created a platform that can be used for all gifting occasions through the year; and made it easy for readers to use, allowing them to browse by category and by price. You can also buy directly from the guide.

Visual Styles

Styles has a long tradition of strong visuals in print, and the era of Choire Sicha, our new Styles editor, is showing lots of promise when it comes to digital narratives that smartly integrate photos and short videos. The best recent examples, “s Fall Dead?” and “ild Horses and the Inmates Who ‘entle’hem,” demonstrate a skillful handling of the relationship between images and words.

A note to readers who are not subscribers: This article from the Reader Center does not count toward your monthly free article limit.

* Wildfires, Fighting \b ISIS\b0  and Exotic Animal Hunting: The Times’ Digital Highlights From the Last Month

* Is Fall Dead?

* Wild Horses and the Inmates Who ‘entle’hem

* What New York Attack Suspect’ Words May Say About \b ISIS\b0  Ties

Document NYTFEED020171107edb7007sl



THE CONVERSATION
OpEd; SECT
The Violence That Never Sleeps

By GAIL COLLINS and BRET STEPHENS 
2,153 words
7 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Gail Collins: Bret, we had just started talking over the weekend, trying to make sense of the terror attack in New York, and now this ungodly tragedy in Texas. If there was ever a time we needed a leader who could help us make sense of things ...

Bret Stephens: And this is barely a month after 58 people were murdered in Las Vegas, an outrage that's already fading in memory as the post-Vegas death toll mounts.

Gail: President Trump's first response to the Texas shooting was a sympathetic tweet from overseas. The first response of half the country was to note that when it's a disaster involving guns, he's much more reserved than when it's something involving immigrants or Muslims.

Bret: You can bet that if the alleged shooter had a foreign-sounding name, we'd be getting a presidential lecture on ''extreme vetting'' or the border wall. Instead, he's now talking about how this is all about mental health and has nothing to do with guns. Try talking about the mental health of terrorists and see how far that one gets you with conservatives.

Gail: I was so offended by the way he reacted to the attack in New York -- he didn't even bother to come home, to his own city! And it was never about the victims, only rants about how he's tired of giving terrorists due process.

When the Texas shooting happened, my immediate response was to want to talk about the gun problem. And how gun violence connects to domestic violence.

But my experience last week made me wonder if maybe the victims deserve a little space where we can just think about them, and the loss, before we throw ourselves into the fight.

Bret: I think we can and need to do both. We need to learn about the dead and honor the lives they led -- or, in the case of the murdered children, the lives they might have led. But we shouldn't shy away about talking about gun laws right now, or be cowed into not ''politicizing'' an event that has become so horribly commonplace that there's no way not to politicize it.

How have we become a country in which one person can wipe out 26 people -- 7 percent of the entire community! -- because profoundly disturbed people have easy access to what amounts to a weapon of mass destruction?

Gail: You're right. And when our president said ''it's a little bit soon'' to start talking about guns, I did instinctively feel it was time to start talking about guns.

We're definitely not going to have any disagreements here. Which brings me back to New York last week. Your column about living next to the terror attack was perfect. The one relief after a horrible event like that is the way average people come together. And people who in most circumstances wouldn't be average -- like a lot of your neighbors near the financial district -- lose all their ego for a moment and just find comfort in being part of the group.

Bret: Thanks so much, Gail. That really was the striking thing: In the face of a terrorist and terrible carnage, people behaved with composure, decency and courage. I wanted to write a column that paid tribute to this, to the simple neighborliness and good citizenship of New Yorkers.

Gail: I remember right after 9/11 going down and seeing the hulk of the tower and running into Hillary Clinton, who was then one of our senators. She's always had a not-unsurprising guarded reserve around the media, but that day she seemed to have lost all her barriers. She was just talking away about who was doing what, and what President Bush had said on the plane, and it occurred to me that she presumed that at that moment we were just two people in the community. That our normal roles had dissolved because nobody could possibly care about anything except the tragedy.

Maybe that was part of the reason I was so enraged at President Trump for instantly trying to make the story about how tough he is on ISIS. I can't remember the last time I got so viscerally angry at a politician.

Bret: Among my 10 million or so objections to presidential candidate Trump, one of them was that he would be incapable of fulfilling the moral, emotional and symbolic role of the office. Obama and Bush both did, and I'll never forget Clinton's moving speech after the Oklahoma City bombing. But it's the mark of the narcissist that he won't, or can't, perform the role, because ultimately the only person whose needs and feelings concern him are his own.

Gail: We are now really well aware of the difference between an egotist, which is pretty much all politicians, and a narcissist, which is somebody you just cannot have in the top job.

Bret: Speaking of rage, it also enraged me that he wasted no time turning the tragedy into a talking point about immigration. If he wants to talk immigration, he should spend a day in Stuyvesant High School, the elite magnet public school that was the endpoint of the terror attack, and note how many of the students there are either immigrants or the children of immigrants, many of them Muslim, by the way.

Gail: You're so right. Look, this is making me angry all over again. Let's change the subject for a moment. The Republicans have finally come up with a tax plan. What did you think?

Bret: Must it always be death or taxes?

I basically like it. It does four important things: It gives us an internationally competitive corporate tax rate and should reduce profit-shifting overseas; it simplifies the tax code.

Gail: Immediate prediction: Any simplification will become complicated before these people are through.

Sorry, go on.

Bret: It gets rid of the Alternative Minimum Tax, enacted in 1979 to hit a handful of tax-evading high-earners that now hits about five million taxpayers; and it decreases the subsidy to the real-estate industry with caps on the mortgage-interest deduction. Also, it doesn't mess with our 401(k)'s, as some of us feared it would.

Music to your ears, too, right? I know our readers totally agree with me on this one.

Gail: Well, for starters ...

As Steven Rattner wrote in The Times last week, the bill doesn't do anything about a huge loophole known as ''carried interest'' that drastically reduces the tax rates for folks like hedge fund operators and, um, real estate developers.

Bret: That loophole is no different from paying the capital-gains rate on the sale of a home, but you know I'm antediluvian on this subject. Please continue.

Gail: Also, I do not understand why the party that is constantly at war with family planning changed the family exemption in a way that hurts people with a large number of children.

Bret: Here you make an excellent point. I can't defend everything.

Gail: And the thing about eliminating the deduction for state and local taxes is just a raid on the blue states. One which I am eager to hear more about from Republican House members in places like New York, New Jersey and California.

Let me ask you -- do you think this has a chance of passing?

Bret: Sixty-forty, I'd say, though with this Congress you never know. Tax cuts unite both the traditional and the Trumpian wings of the party, and Republicans know that if they can't cut taxes they may as well not exist. Then again, all politics is local and most politicians care a lot more about their own political future than the party's. It'll also be interesting to see how Bob Corker votes: Don't be surprised if he does to tax reform what McCain did to the Obamacare repeal -- another reminder of the self-defeating nature of Trump's politics of insult.

Gail: Whatever they finally come up with is going to increase the deficit mightily, which is one of Corker's issues. I know your friend Paul Ryan would like to take care of that problem by slicing into Social Security and Medicare, and if that becomes a point of contention, it'll keep the red-state Democrats from straying in the Senate.

Bret: We'll see. Entitlement reform would be a good idea for the long-term health of the federal fisc, but a Republican Congress that can't pass tax reform certainly isn't going to change Medicare and Social Security anytime soon. I think a lot depends on the outcome of the governor's race in Virginia, and what it says about the ideological future of the G.O.P.

Gail: Wow, Virginia. You've got a Republican candidate who was, until about 10 minutes ago, a super-establishment centrist. And now he's yelling about immigrants and gang violence and people plotting to tear ''our statues'' down. This would, I guess, be the new Robert E. Lee wing of the party.

Bret: More like, ''something old; something new,'' but in any event depressing. Gillespie started the race trying to distance himself from Trump, who lost Virginia to Clinton by five points, by running an economics-themed campaign. Then Gillespie nearly lost the primary to a Trumpkin, and it all became about dead Confederate generals and bogus Latin American gang scares.

You know, the real issues.

Gail: Has anybody promised to bomb North Korea? This does sound very familiar.

Bret: If Gillespie wins, the lesson will be that any ''conventional'' Republican is going to have to do a convincing imitation of a Bannonite if he wants to win the primary and the general election. It will just accelerate the capitulation of the G.O.P. to the Bannonites, while Republicans with inner red lines are going to keep walking away from the party. The only silver lining I see here is that it slightly increases the chances of creating a third party.

Gail: So if you were in Virginia, would you be voting for Ralph Northam, the Democratic lieutenant governor? Or writing in ''none of the above''?

Most interesting Republican news of the weekend was the new Bush book that reveals that George H. W. voted for Hillary Clinton while W. took the none-of-the-above dodge.

Can I just mention here that people who refuse to pick between the two major parties in important races are being weenies who just want to demonstrate their vast moral superiority?

Bret: Before last year's election, my Trump-curious conservative friends kept telling me that an election is a choice and a none-of-the-above vote was a cop-out, and that's about the only point on which we agreed. So I voted for Hillary.

I vote in New York City, thank God, so I don't know local Virginia issues too well. But I'd probably vote for Northam. First, because he's a former Army doctor and strikes me as smart and middle of the road. But mainly because I think that if voters don't punish Republican candidates for becoming Bannonites, there's nothing to stop the party from continuing to move in that direction.

Gail: Except for the Virginia saga, this year's round of elections is pretty obscure -- there are some very important state legislative races around the country, but I kinda doubt the whole world will be watching.

The other big governor's race is a contest to see whether the people of New Jersey would like to endorse the career of Chris Christie by electing his lieutenant governor to succeed him. Christie may be the only major elected official in the country with worse public approval ratings than Trump. Not expecting much suspense on that one. Although it will give us a chance to rerun those pictures of him sunbathing on the state beach while it was closed to the public.

Anything else you're following?

Bret: Did I mention that I also thank God that I don't live in New Jersey?

Shalane Flanagan became the first American woman to win the New York City Marathon for 40 years. I was thrilled for her. Most of all, I was thrilled that New Yorkers have lost none of our passion for putting on a great show like the marathon despite what happened last week. The real winners were all the runners and spectators who competed and cheered in safety.

Unbowed = what this city is.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020171107edb70003w



MEDIATOR
Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
A How-To On Terror Is as Close As a Click

By JIM RUTENBERG; Jaclyn Peiser contributed research. 
1,407 words
6 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Did you catch the third issue of Rumiyah magazine? I did -- Googled my way right to it in seconds.

The cover isn't much to look at: a grim picture of a bombed-out high-rise. But the Rumiyah audience reads it mainly for the articles, like the ''exclusive'' transcript on page 4 of an address by Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the reclusive Islamic State leader, in which he ranted against the Muslim Brotherhood.

''The Murtadd Brotherhood has emerged as a poisoned spearhead carried by the Crusaders in their war against the Khilafah,'' he said in a nearly 5,000-word paean to holy war.

What really caught my eye, though, was an article with the headline ''Just Terror Tactics.'' Beneath a photograph of a Hertz rental truck, the piece read, ''Though being an essential part of modern life, very few actually comprehend the deadly and destructive capability of the motor vehicle and its capacity of reaping large numbers of casualties if used in a premeditated manner.''

The article went on to give advice on how to leave the longest ''trail of carnage'' possible.

Why did it catch my eye? Because Sayfullo Saipov seemed to follow its instructions to the letter in the terrorist attack that left eight people dead in Lower Manhattan on Tuesday -- that's why.

New York showed remarkable resilience after the attack, moving unflinchingly into its huge Halloween parade hours later, with Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio among the costumed revelers. But forgive me if I roll back the tape to examine this latest example of how our media ecosystem can be used against us.

I had gone searching for Rumiyah -- ISIS's in-house magazine -- after reading yet again how easy it is for a terrorist to find Islamic State or Al Qaeda ''content'' online.

This comes up again and again in these cases, whether it involves Google or YouTube, Twitter, Facebook or one of the encrypted messaging services, like Telegram and WhatsApp.

As the criminal complaint against Mr. Saipov notes, ''ISIS has disseminated a wide variety of recruiting materials and propaganda through social media.''

The inadvertent role of tech companies in abetting bad actors is especially salient right now, given that Mr. Saipov's rampage occurred just as a congressional panel was grilling Google, Twitter and Facebook over Russia's campaign to influence the 2016 presidential election through social media.

The attack in Manhattan lent fresh urgency to questions arising from the debate over social media's downsides: Is it time to put limits on speech online, sapping the internet's anything-goes ethos? Or should we accept the occasionally lethal consequences as a cost of freedom?

One thing to keep in mind on the to-be-fair side of the ledger: Law enforcement officials give the web platforms some credit for making progress against content that encourages terrorism.

''They've really made great strides in taking these things down,'' a New York Police Department counterterrorism official, who did not have permission to be quoted by name, told me.

Twitter reports that it suspended 300,000 terrorism-related accounts in the first half of the year. A recent study conducted by researchers at Dublin City University found that Twitter caught more than a quarter of the newly created, pro-ISIS accounts within a few days and around two-thirds of them within 70 days.

Facebook has developed new artificial intelligence programs to identify extremist posts -- like videos of beheadings and bomb-making manuals -- and has hired thousands of human beings to look out for that stuff as well.

And YouTube, owned by Google, has instituted a system that responds to search requests for terrorism videos by serving up antiterrorism messages. It has also developed artificial intelligence systems and created new jobs to fight extremist content.

Nonetheless, as Google told me over the weekend in a statement, ''While we've made good progress, we recognize there's more to do.''

Last week, I stopped at the desk of my New York Times colleague Rukmini Callimachi, who covers ISIS and is a leading expert on the relationship between social media and terrorism. She showed me how ISIS-related accounts spring back up under different names quickly after Twitter rubs them out.

One such account -- from a member who goes by Aswarti Media -- taunts Twitter by boasting of the number of times it has regenerated after being shut down, 600 in this case. A recent iteration of the Aswarti account, which Twitter suspended in less than 24 hours, received 700,000 impressions.

Hate, it turns out, travels faster than Silicon Valley justice.

The terrorists behind such accounts are hard to identify because they often sign into the platforms through virtual private networks, or VPNs, that hide their identities and locations.

And the social media giants' new security measures have forced some of the terrorist activity onto encrypted services like WhatsApp and Telegram, and file-sharing platforms like Google Drive, where it is harder to track.

Terrorism has been around far longer than social media and encrypted file sharing. Nonetheless, modern terrorism could not be quite what it is without it.

''The Islamic State has achieved a power of persuasion that we have never seen from any other terrorist group calling for attacks in the United States and elsewhere in the West,'' Michael S. Smith II, a terrorism analyst and fellow at New America, said in an interview last week. ''None of that would have been achieved without access to these social networking technologies.''

If the problem is in full view, solutions remain elusive.

While testifying at the congressional hearings last week, Mr. Smith seemed to receive a positive response from senators, including Republicans like Lindsey Graham, when he suggested the need for a new ''legal framework'' that would compel the tech companies to do more. That is especially hard in the United States, with its still-strong First Amendment.

The United States cannot, for instance, shut down WhatsApp, which is owned by Facebook, or Telegram, which was founded by a Russian tech entrepreneur, the way Afghanistan did last week in what may have been an effort to disrupt the Taliban.

It's hard to see the United States passing a law like the new one in Germany that imposes huge fines on social media platforms that fail to excise hate speech within 24 hours.

Stripping anonymity from social media users in some form appears to be where the legal discussion is going here in the United States. Mr. Smith suggested implementing legislation that would compel tech companies to restrict VPN use on their platforms only to those whose identities they know.

Floyd Abrams, the noted First Amendment lawyer, told me that some legislation raising the bar on anonymity online might pass muster with the Constitution, which was written at a time when, for the most part, ''we knew who the speakers were.'' But Corynne McSherry, the legal director at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, warned that such ''cures'' may prove worse than the disease.

''Historically, the right to speak anonymously is how all sorts of disenfranchised groups were able to speak freely,'' Ms. McSherry said. And, she noted, dissidents throughout the world often use VPNs to gain access to and convey information about government abuse. They will be less inclined to do so if they must disclose their identities, even if only to the tech companies, she said.

It gets thornier from here. I haven't even gotten into whether -- and if so, how -- Google should censor results from its search service, which is, after all, primarily a tool that navigates the internet as it exists.

It could be argued that search engines could block or play down results for terrorist content. But some of this material is posted in the name of academic inquiry, which ''has helped provide a better understanding of the broader jihadi phenomenon,'' said Aaron Y. Zelin, who researches jihadist movements at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

That reminds me -- I've got a magazine to get back to. Where was I? Oh, right, page 13, ''The Excellence of Jihad.''

Heavily armed police standing guard during the Halloween parade in Greenwich Village, just hours after the terror attack in Lower Manhattan last week that killed eight people. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDRES KUDACKI/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (B4) 

Document NYTF000020171106edb60005b



RETRO REPORT
National Desk; SECT
What Doomsday Cults Can Teach Us About  ISIS  Today

By CLYDE HABERMAN 
1,193 words
6 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A disturbing 1981 film from Canada could serve as an enduring learner's manual for any family worried about a son or daughter succumbing to the lure of a religious cult. The movie, ''Ticket to Heaven,'' describes how a young man, adrift and vulnerable, falls prey to a sect closely resembling the Unification Church of the Rev. Sun Myung Moon. Deprogramming -- rescuing him from the zombielike state into which he has fallen -- proves a challenge for his friends and relatives.

More than three decades later, a ticket to heaven is what Abdirizak Warsame thought he had bought when he and other young Minneapolis men of Somali origin came under the spell of recruitment videos posted online by the Islamic State. The power of that propaganda to inspire acts of terror was evident again last week in New York, where the authorities said such videos impelled Sayfullo Saipov, an Uzbek immigrant, to drive a truck along a bicycle path at high speed, killing eight people and injuring 11 others.

In Minneapolis, the aspiring jihadists were like the fellow in the 1981 film: nowhere men. They felt distant from both family traditions and the conventions of their adopted country. In 2015, they set out to join Islamic State fighters in Syria, only to be arrested by federal agents who had them under surveillance.

''My son was brainwashed because he was watching this propaganda video,'' Mr. Warsame's mother, Deqa Hussen, said to Retro Report. ''He thought that if he go to Syria, he's going to go to heaven and all my family is going to go to heaven.''

Retro Report, a series of documentary videos that mine past news events for their continuing relevance, explores the behavioral threads that run through the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, and apocalyptic cults from years ago. ''When you're in a vulnerable situation,'' Leslie Wagner-Wilson said, ''by gaining your trust, slowly, you become indoctrinated into the ideology of the organization.''

That description fit Ms. Wagner-Wilson and her family 40 years ago. They were mesmerized by Jim Jones, a charismatic figure who declared himself God incarnate. He founded the Peoples Temple, a cult that promised a future utopia where poverty, racism, injustice and war were banished. Based first in Indiana and then Northern California, Mr. Jones drew thousands to his side. But he became ever more paranoid, and his behavior ever more erratic and menacing.

In the mid-1970s he moved his flock to a jungle base in Guyana called Jonestown. On Nov. 18, 1978, feeling threatened by deepening scrutiny from American officials and the news media, Mr. Jones organized one of history's most devastating acts of mass suicide and murder. He compelled his followers to drink a fruit punch laced with cyanide.

Ms. Wagner-Wilson managed to escape in time with her young son. Others in her family were not so fortunate. They died, along with more than 900 others, including at least 270 children, their bodies strewn across the jungle floor. The horror shocked the world (and gave rise to a lasting expression for blind adherence to a perilous idea: drinking the Kool-Aid).

Jonestown was not the last cult twisted by visions of apocalypse. Aum Shinrikyo in Japan, the Branch Davidians in Texas, Heaven's Gate in California, the nonreligious Manson Family -- all had faithful disciples. All embraced death.

Now, groups like the brutal Islamic State and the Shabab in East Africa are magnets for several thousand readily duped Westerners, including scores of Americans. Many of them feel isolated from family and community, and long for something to believe in. They're typically young men like the Minneapolis Somalis. ''ISIS tries to instill that there is something greater that you can be doing,'' Mr. Warsame said in an interview last year with the CBS show ''60 Minutes,'' after his arrest and before a federal judge sentenced him to 30 months in prison. ''It kind of takes control of you,'' he said.

Social media and online videos are powerful recruiting tools that the Islamic State has exploited skillfully and aimed at young people like him and his friends. ''If they're living in a context where they feel alienated, they feel like they're not getting a fair deal, they can be open to indoctrination,'' Charles B. Strozier told Retro Report. Mr. Strozier, a psychoanalyst who is the founding director of the Center on Terrorism at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York, added, ''They're susceptible to thinking of these larger messages which come flooding at them through the internet.''

They are not necessarily beyond salvation, though. Almost as if ''Ticket to Heaven'' were a training film, the federal court in Minneapolis has turned to a version of deprogramming as a possible solution. Only the word used in connection with jihadists is deradicalization. The court invited in Daniel Koehler, founder of the German Institute on Radicalization and Deradicalization Studies in Berlin. Mr. Koehler has concluded that extremists of all stripes share a sense that what is wrong with the world and what is wrong in their own lives are intertwined.

Many high school or college students feel woebegone: Parents are annoying or teachers are oppressive. Most young people figure out that there are various ways to cope. But for someone who has been radicalized -- say, a teenager led to believe that his religion is being persecuted -- the perspective can narrow and obvious solutions fade (except maybe violence). Mr. Koehler calls it ''depluralization.'' What he attempts, he told Retro Report, is to ''repluralize the worldview, make it broader again, make them understand that there are no easy answers for single problems.''

That means, in part, reintegrating them back into the larger society and inculcating skills other than how to fire an AK-47 or strap on a suicide vest. He thinks that progress has been made with some of the young Somali men, but not all. The judge in Mr. Warsame's case, Michael J. Davis, said he remained unpersuaded that the defendant had abandoned jihadist aspirations.

While the Islamic State in recent months has lost much of its territory in Syria and Iraq to United States-backed coalition forces, experts say it is not defeated. Thousands of militants remain in those two countries and presumably are still able to tempt gullible Western recruits, who are within reach via laptops and smartphones. And there's always a chance that new death-hugging cults will arise. If the past is a guide, some young people are bound to be seduced into picking up a gun, convinced it's their ticket to heaven.

The video with this article is part of a documentary series presented by The New York Times. The video project was started with a grant from Christopher Buck. Retro Report, led by Kyra Darnton, is a nonprofit video news organization that aims to provide a thoughtful counterweight to today's 24/7 news cycle. Previous episodes are at nytimes.com/retroreport. To suggest ideas for future reports, email retroreport@nytimes.com.

Document NYTF000020171106edb600055



Foreign Desk; SECTA
President Begins Asia Trip With Japan Air Base Rally

By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVIS; Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington, Motoko Rich from Tokyo and Choe Sang-hun from Seoul. 
1,409 words
6 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

TOKYO -- President Trump kicked off an extensive swing through Asia with a campaign-style rally on Sunday with American troops in Japan, as he looked toward a lengthy trip likely to be dominated by talks on confronting the nuclear threat from North Korea.

In a speech after Air Force One landed at Yokota Air Base in Tokyo on a crisp, sunny morning, Mr. Trump never mentioned Pyongyang by name. Sounding a militaristic tone, he sought to project toughness in the face of global challenges, saying the United States armed forces stood ready to defend itself and its allies and ''fight to overpower'' its adversaries.

''No one -- no dictator, no regime and no nation -- should underestimate, ever, American resolve,'' Mr. Trump said, having shed his suit jacket for a leather bomber jacket as he addressed hundreds of fatigues-clad women and men. ''You are the greatest threat to tyrants and dictators who seek to prey on the innocent.''

Breaking with tradition for American presidents on foreign soil, Mr. Trump used his speech to promote his domestic record with a distinct political edge, asserting that the economy and military were far better off since he became president.

''We are back home starting to do, I will tell you -- and you're reading, and you're seeing -- really, really well,'' Mr. Trump told the troops, noting that the stock market has surged and unemployment has been low, with almost two million jobs added ''since a very, very special day -- it's called Election Day.''

''We've dealt ISIS one brutal defeat after another, and it's about time,'' he added, then noting that he had proposed increases in the defense budget. ''That's a lot different than in the past.''

On Monday morning, Mr. Trump spoke to Japanese and American business executives, striking familiar themes about the success of his economic polices and issuing a call for new a trade relationship with Japan.

''We want fair and open trade,'' Mr. Trump declared, ''but right now, our trade with is Japan is not fair and it's not open.'' He predicted the United States and Japan would be able to negotiate a new deal that would greatly expand trade.

On his way to Japan, Mr. Trump told reporters he would probably meet with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia next week to discuss the North Korean threat, part of his 12-day, five-country tour through Asia that is also likely to focus heavily on trade.

White House officials had said that a meeting by Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin -- who last held face-to-face talks in Hamburg, Germany, in July -- was a possibility on the sideline of the upcoming Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Da Nang, Vietnam.

''We want Putin's help on North Korea,'' Mr. Trump said.

The White House also signaled that Mr. Trump could decide on this trip to designate North Korea a state sponsor of terrorism, a largely symbolic move since it is already among the world's most heavily sanctioned countries. Still, the gesture would reinforce the administration's efforts to cast the North as a global pariah.

Rex W. Tillerson, the secretary of state, and other administration officials are looking at the prospect ''very closely,'' a senior White House official told reporters in Tokyo on Sunday, and a decision will come ''very soon.''

The president used his speech on Sunday to call for building a ''free and open Indo-Pacific'' region, a new approach to Asia that is likely to be seen by China as a challenge. The idea, first proposed by the Japanese and adopted in recent days by Mr. Tillerson, envisions the United States strengthening ties with three other democracies in the region -- Japan, Australia and India -- to contain a rising China.

''We will seek new opportunities for cooperation and commerce, and we will partner with friends and allies to pursue a free and open Indo-Pacific region,'' Mr. Trump said. ''We will seek free fair and reciprocal trade.''

Mr. Trump's trip to the continent will be the longest by an American president in more than 25 years, with additional stops in South Korea, China and the Philippines. Ahead of what his advisers called a grueling schedule of meetings and summits, the president got a chance to relax by playing golf on Sunday afternoon with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan at Kasumigaseki Country Club.

The outing was reciprocation for rounds that Mr. Trump hosted in Jupiter, Fla. and nearby West Palm Beach in February for Mr. Abe and Ernie Els, once the world's top golfer. For Sunday's round, Mr. Abe invited Hideki Matsuyama, a Japanese golfer ranked fourth in the world. Before the game, the Japanese prime minister presented Mr. Trump with white caps in the style of the president's trademark red ''Make America Great Again'' trucker hats; Mr. Abe's were emblazoned in gold: ''Donald and Shinzo Make Alliance Even Greater.''

''Prime Minister Abe is called a trainer of wild animals,'' said Fumio Hirai, a commentator on a morning news show on Fuji TV. ''And the world is watching how he does with President Trump.''

The already extensive trip grew longer still on Friday when Mr. Trump abruptly announced to reporters that he would attend the East Asia Summit in Manila on Nov. 14, adding a day to his travels.

''It is grueling, they tell me, but fortunately, historically that has not been a problem for me,'' Mr. Trump said. ''If I don't stay fresh, you'll be the first to tell me. I'll stay fresh.''

White House officials have framed the trip as a chance for Mr. Trump to showcase his warm relationships with world leaders including Mr. Abe and President Xi Jinping of China, as well as to demand trade deals more favorable to the United States after his decision to withdraw from the Trans-Pacific Partnership. But it will also highlight the uncertainty in the region and around the world about what to expect from the Trump administration, and the degree to which major powers are charting their own course in the absence of clear signals from the United States.

Mr. Trump also makes the trip hobbled by new questions about the Russia investigation back in Washington, sharpened in recent days by revelations that his aides sought to arrange meetings between him and Mr. Putin during the campaign. In contrast, Mr. Abe and Mr. Xi are newly empowered, with their countries handing them sweeping mandates.

Mr. Trump denied being at a disadvantage when reporters noted on Sunday that Mr. Xi was in a particularly powerful position.

''Excuse me, so am I,'' Mr. Trump said, citing stock market gains and low unemployment in the United States, and asserting that ''ISIS is virtually defeated in the Middle East.''

''We are coming off some of the strongest numbers we've ever had, and he knows that and he respects that,'' Mr. Trump said of Mr. Xi. ''We're going in with tremendous strength.''

Mr. Trump's ability to stay on message during a lengthy and physically demanding trip will most likely be tested, with many opportunities for gaffes or intemperate language.

On Sunday, North Korea's state media accused Mr. Trump of provoking the country with ''foolish remarks'' and said ''the only and one way for checking his rash act is to tame him with absolute physical power.'' The commentary in North Korea's state-run newspaper Rodong Sinmun added: ''We warn Trump's coteries once again. If they want to avoid ruin, do not make reckless remarks.''

Asked last week whether the president -- who likes to refer to Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, as ''Little Rocket Man'' and spoke about raining ''fire and fury'' on his country -- would seek to temper his rhetoric while he traveled through the region, his national security adviser was frank.

''The president will use whatever language he wants to use, obviously,'' Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster told reporters. ''I don't think the president really modulates his language -- have you noticed him do that?''

President Trump on Sunday at Yokota Air Base in Japan at the beginning of a 12-day, five-country trip through Asia. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171106edb600034



opinion
Unexpected Benefits From a Battle Against  ISIS ; Op-Ed Contributor

By MALCOLM COOK 
1,231 words
5 November 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

SINGAPORE —n Oct. 23, the defense secretary of the Philippines, Delfin Lorenzana, announced the end of combat operations in the southern city of Marawi, after the armed forces spent 154 days fighting local and regional Islamist terrorists. At last, victory —f a sort.

Marawi, which declared itself an “Islamic city”n 1980, is the capital of Lanao del Sur province, on the island of Mindanao, and the religious center of the Maranao, a tight-knit indigenous Muslim community. Marawi and the Maranao have been at the forefront of a decades-long insurgency against the central government in Manila. In recent years, however, disgruntled factions have splintered off, some embracing gangsterism or Islamist terrorism.

Last December, President Rodrigo Duterte dared one of those offshoots, the Maute group, to come to Marawi. On May 23, it did, with reinforcements.

That a coalition of local terrorists backed by the Islamic State could then hold off the Philippine military for five months was a propaganda victory for the terrorists. The prolonged battle also became a threat to democratic freedoms after Mr. Duterte, with congressional support, promptly imposed martial law (and suspended the writ of habeas corpus) across Mindanao, home to more than one-fifth of the country’ total population and the vast majority of its Muslim minority.

Martial law is still in force, and the physical damage caused by the fighting has been colossal. The siege has destroyed vast sections of Marawi, the largest city in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, a specially designated area that was granted some measure of autonomy from Manila three decades ago. The head of Palafox Associates, a leading Philippine architecture and urban-planning firm, says it could take up to seven decades to rehabilitate the city. The Philippine government estimates that more than 350,000 people have been displaced by fighting in and around Marawi.

And yet the crisis has also created unexpected opportunities, notably for cooperation on counterterrorism, both in the Philippines and regionally, and for finally resolving long-festering insurgencies in Muslim areas of the country.

The battle for Marawi prompted unprecedented, if limited, cooperation between the Philippine armed forces and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the country’ largest insurgent group, which for years has fought for independence or self-governance for Muslim Mindanao, routinely clashing with government forces. In January 2016, long before the Maute group seized Marawi, the MILF announced that it had created a task force to fend off local recruitment efforts by the Islamic State. In September, it waged combat operations against Islamic State-affiliated terrorist groups in central Mindanao, with assistance from the army, its old enemy.

In August, all 41 mayors in the province of Lanao del Sur signed a manifesto declaring the Maute group “enemies of the Maranao people,”laming it for the siege of Marawi. Local Muslim clerics issued a fatwa condemning local terrorists. The government, longtime insurgents and local authorities have found common ground in pushing back against Islamist terrorism, and that should now yield broader political gains.

The task of reconstructing Marawi, for example, presents a major opportunity to help dispel local distrust of the central government, or “imperial Manila.”ocal Maranao should be given the leading voice in what to rebuild and how —ay, the main mosque, which sustained considerable damage. Instead of housing the displaced in temporary shelters, as the government has done elsewhere after natural disasters, it could, as has been proposed, offer financial assistance for residents so they can immediately rebuild their homes.

Now would also be a good time to revive the peace process for Mindanao, already some two-decades old. It has stalled in recent years —ausing, some MILF leaders have warned, younger Muslims to turn to terrorism.

In March 2014, the MILF and the Philippine government, then led by President Benigno Aquino III, signed a comprehensive agreement granting Muslim Mindanao much more regional and fiscal autonomy. But the legislation needed to make the deal effective has been languishing in Congress, held back by some legislators’nduring distrust of the MILF and others’oncerns that the proposed bill would require amending the Constitution.

To kick-start the law, the Duterte government could capitalize on the good will that seems to have emerged recently among the various parties who rallied against the Islamist terrorists in Marawi. Mr. Duterte, who is from Mindanao, has supermajorities in both the Senate and the House of Representatives, and the leaders of both houses are from Mindanao as well.

This is an opportune moment also because the military’ image has been burnished, boosting trust in the government generally, including among its usual skeptics.

The reputation of the armed forces took a hit as the siege of Marawi dragged on and they repeatedly failed to meet the government’ deadlines for ending the face-off. But it got a lift, paradoxically, from Mr. Duterte’ much-dreaded declaration of martial law.

That announcement sparked fears that the Philippines might slide back toward authoritarianism, as happened during martial rule under Ferdinand Marcos in the 1970s and ’0s. Mr. Duterte didn’ help matters by professing his admiration for Mr. Marcos, calling him the “rightest”resident the Philippines has ever known. Yet under the command of the defense secretary, Mr. Lorenzana, also formally the “administrator of martial law,”he Philippine armed forces seem to have exercised those special powers with great restraint.

In fact, during his recent visit to the Philippines, the U.S. Defense Secretary James Mattis said, “ think the most important thing is, here’ an army that had to go in a fight like that, and they had not one human rights allegation against them with any credibility —ot one.”

Military cooperation with the United States, the Philippines’ most important security partner, certainly has benefited, after being shaken by a series of intemperate, sometimes profane, statements by Mr. Duterte deriding the alliance. U.S. forces provided intelligence and surveillance during the fight to liberate Marawi, and the Philippine military chief said that assistance “tilted the balance”gainst the Islamist fighters.

The crisis in Marawi has also given a welcome boost to the Philippines’ relations with some of its Muslim neighbors, with their shared concern about Islamist terrorism bridging over their differences about other issues. After fighters from Malaysia and Indonesia joined the Islamic State-backed coalition that seized Marawi, those two countries joined the Philippines for the first time to conduct trilateral maritime and air patrols in the Sulu Sea —espite a dispute between the Philippines and Malaysia over Sabah, a Malaysian state that borders that sea.

The siege of Marawi, in other words, could restart the stalled peace process in Mindanao and bolster some of the Philippines’ delicate foreign relations. The city’ destruction may have given new urgency to the fight against Islamist terrorism in the Philippines, but it has also revealed the ways of tackling that task.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Malcolm Cook is a senior fellow at the ISEAS–usof Ishak Institute, in Singapore.

A mosque in Marawi on Oct. 25, after the Philippine military declared the end of fighting against militants backed by the Islamic State. TED ALJIBE/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE —GETTY IMAGES

Document INHT000020171105edb50000h



WORDPLAY
Games; SECT
Variety: Puns and Anagrams

By DEB AMLEN 
251 words
5 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

VARIETY PUZZLE -- Sam Ezersky is quickly growing on me as a puzzle maker, and I'm not saying this just because he sits next to me at work and allows me free access to his candy stash. Every constructor leaves a stylistic fingerprint on their puzzles, and I like Mr. Ezersky's playful way with a clue.

This is evident in today's Puns and Anagrams, which is Mr. Ezersky's second to be published (his debut PandA is here.) Not only does Mr. Ezersky use a variety of cluing types, which one would expect in a PandA, but the topics he covers are fun: solvers will encounter board games (L SEVEN for ''Battleship''), animals at the zoo (OCELOTS), Egyptian goddesses (ISIS) and even made-up campaign slogans for rock stars (ELECTRIC).

I also like the fact that he is not afraid to get corny. At 52A, the clue ''Break __ (get d'party going)'' for DICE (or ''D ICE'') will elicit a grin.

And I admire some of his catches: If you move the ''S'' to the front of EXCHANGES (15D), you get SEX CHANGE. A ''Treatment in which beauticians dampen eyes'' is MANI PEDI because that word contains two eyes (I's) and an anagram of DAMPEN. That's very cool.

That will get you started, and I hope you'll give this one a try, if you haven't already. It's a fun diversion for your weekend.

Your thoughts?

Document NYTF000020171105edb5000a5



Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
Across Twitter, Nary a Trump; Inside Twitter, Prompt Panic

By MIKE ISAAC and DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI 
933 words
4 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

For 11 minutes on Thursday night, when President Trump's Twitter account was unexpectedly disabled, Twitter went into panic mode.

At the company, customer service representatives, public relations managers and executives -- including Twitter's chief executive, Jack Dorsey -- were bombarded by people asking what had happened to the president's account, which Mr. Trump regularly uses as a megaphone for all manner of matters. No one had answers, according to current and former Twitter employees who were involved or briefed on the situation, and who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the details were private.

Mr. Trump's Twitter account was quickly restored, but the internal scramble continued. Initially, Twitter executives believed the action had been an accident by an employee. Mr. Dorsey pushed for transparency, said one of the people with knowledge of the matter, and the company put out a statement to that effect.

Only after further review did executives discover that it was a contractor who was leaving Twitter that day who had disabled Mr. Trump's account, said the people involved in the matter.

The incident immediately made the unnamed contractor a hero to some and a villain to others for muting, even temporarily, Mr. Trump. Yet the outcome for Twitter was black and white: It was another fiasco that the social media company had to clean up.

The temporary deletion of Mr. Trump's account capped an already rough week for Twitter, which has been under scrutiny for online abuse and how its service can be misused. On Tuesday and Wednesday, Twitter had appeared at congressional hearings in Washington, where lawmakers grilled the company -- along with Google and Facebook -- for their roles in spreading divisive messages ahead of the 2016 election. At the time, Twitter had pledged that it would take on more security measures.

Yet Mr. Trump's deleted account showed how empty some of those promises seemed. Late Thursday, Twitter employees gathered in private Slack channels and used Twitter to send direct messages to one another to remark on how insecure Mr. Trump's account had been, according to people involved in the conversations. Hundreds of employees can access the accounts of so-called Very Important Tweeters and can take actions like disabling the accounts, according to the current and former employees.

A Twitter spokeswoman referred to the company's earlier remarks, noting it was conducting an internal investigation into the matter. On Friday, the company tweeted that it had added new safeguards to prevent a repeat of the incident, and said it would not be able to share all the details of its investigation.

Mr. Trump, for his part, remarked that the incident reflected the impact his Twitter messages have had. He tweeted with gusto on Friday, firing off more than a dozen messages over the course of the day on issues including ISIS and Hillary Clinton.

The discovery that it was a contractor who deleted Mr. Trump's account is difficult for Twitter, as well as other technology companies. Nearly every major technology company including Google, Facebook and Apple relies on contract employees to fill positions. In general, the jobs tend to be nontechnical roles such as customer support or administrative and operational positions.

Many of these workers are brought on by staffing companies like Accenture, Adecco and Cognizant and work on renewable one-year contracts. Facebook, Twitter and other companies also outsource content review to third-party services like ProUnlimited and Cognizant, which are essentially internet call centers staffed with hundreds of workers who deal with customer service issues.

Many of these people work side by side with full-time employees, but they are often paid significantly less, are identified with different color employee badges, and are not afforded the same perks and amenities that full-time workers have. Many complain of being treated like second-class citizens.

At the congressional hearings this week, Facebook and Twitter had discussed how they planned to hire more people to help prohibit the misuse of their platforms. Facebook said it was hiring an additional 10,000 workers to review flagged content, bringing the total to 20,000 by the end of 2018.

But in a conference call with investors on Wednesday, Facebook said many of the new workers are not likely to be full-time employees; the company will largely rely on third-party contractors.

At Twitter, employees have long expressed concern about the widely available nature of internal tools for handling customer accounts. Disabling an account is typically an easy two- or three-step process, according to current and former Twitter employees. Certain teams at the company -- including trust and safety, and operations -- have access to all accounts including the highest levels.

Twitter customer support cannot, however, access customers' private direct messages, nor can it tweet on behalf of other users, these people said.

In the past, Twitter has discussed adding additional layers of security that would prohibit wide internal access to V.I.T. accounts, according to these people. That included a kind of ''dual layer'' of security, requiring assurances from multiple employees to make significant changes to accounts.

In the end, the company did not follow through with the plans, these people said.

On Friday, Mr. Dorsey tweeted that Twitter was clarifying its rules around what was or was not acceptable on the service. The chief executive sidestepped putting up his own post about President Trump's missing-then-found account.

Follow Mike Isaac on Twitter @MikeIsaac and Daisuke Wakabayashi @daiwaka

Document NYTF000020171104edb400066

