 


U.S.; Politics
Some Top Republicans in Congress Criticize Trump’ Refugee Policy

By NICHOLAS FANDOS 
1,238 words
29 January 2017
17:55
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —ome top Republicans stepped up their criticism of President Trump’ newly enacted refugee policy on Sunday even as party leaders in Congress continued to show restraint.

Mr. Trump’ executive order, which targets Syrian refugees and all travelers from several predominantly Muslim nations, had drawn little dissent from Republicans initially even as Democrats denounced it and protests erupted around the country and the world.

But on Sunday, several members of Mr. Trump’ party said that the process, while initiated with the right intention, had been too hastily enacted and could backfire against U.S. interests.

Republican Senators John McCain of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina issued a statement that said Mr. Trump’ order was not properly vetted and could be seen as the United States turning its back on Muslims who had risked their lives to serve as interpreters for United States military and diplomats.

“ltimately, we fear this executive order will become a self-inflicted wound in the fight against terrorism,”hey said, adding “hat is why we fear this executive order may do more to help terrorist recruitment than improve our security.”

Mr. McCain also said the plan was carried out without proper consultation of American allies and that mistakenly lumped together the country’ adversaries, like Iran, with allies, like Iraq.

Republicans have largely supported Mr. Trump’ aggressive agenda on other matters, but in his first major decision on national security, he is finding uncharacteristic opposition from his party in the blush of his early days in office.

Senator Rob Portman, Republican of Ohio, likewise questioned the hastiness of the order’ rollout and called for a re-evaluation of the White House’ unilateral effort.

“ou have an extreme vetting proposal that did not get the vetting it should have had,”e said on CNN’ “tate of the Union,”dding that Congress should be part of finding a solution.

“n my view, we ought to all take a deep breath and come up with something that makes sense for our national security and again for this notion that America has always been a welcoming home for refugees and immigrants,”e said.

A handful of Republicans, including Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah, Senator Ben Sasse of Nebraska, and Senator Susan Collins of Maine, had offered similarly cautious criticism of the measure on Saturday.

But if further frustration was felt, it was not widely publicized. The Republican leadership has been more circumspect about the order, which resembles a bill passed by the House last year with widespread Republican support.

Speaker Paul D. Ryan released a statement on Friday praising the order by Mr. Trump, even as he signaled support for the United States refugee resettlement program. The president, he wrote, “s right to make sure we are doing everything possible to know exactly who is entering our country.”e did not comment further.

Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, did not criticize the order itself but said the country needed to “e careful”ith how it is carried out when he weighed in for the first time on Sunday.

“ don’ want to criticize them for improving vetting,”r. McConnell said on ABC’ “his Week.”“ think we need to be careful. We don’ have religious tests in this country.”

He added, “t’ hopefully going to be decided in the courts as to whether or not this has gone too far.”

Still, Mr. Trump’ actions are also likely to be the topic of debate on Capitol Hill this week. And the measure could add pressure to Mr. Trump’ nominees to lead the Justice and State Departments, who will probably be asked to offer their positions on the ban.

Mr. Trump’ order, which was enacted on Friday, halted the entry into the United States of all refugees for 120 days, barred the entry of Syrian refugees indefinitely and suspended for 90 days the entry of citizens of Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen —ll predominantly Muslim countries.

It prompted chaos across the globe as the United States’orders were sealed off to the affected groups and Department of Homeland Security rushed to apply an uneven enforcement. By Saturday night, judges in at least two states had issued stays preventing the government from deporting certain arrivals caught in the rollout of the order.

Democrats were nearly united in their condemnation of Mr. Trump’ policy, with several of them rushing to airports to speak out in defense of people who had been detained and even those representing states Mr. Trump won voicing dissent.

Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, called on Mr. Trump to immediately reverse the action on Sunday, saying it made the country “ess humanitarian, less safe, less American.”

“t must be reversed immediately, and Democrats are going to introduce legislation to overturn it,”r. Schumer told reporters gathered for a news conference in New York.

Republicans who spoke out were far more measured, directing their criticism at the planning for the policy and its carrying out, though their disagreement with Mr. Trump was still clear.

Senator Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona and a frequent critic of Mr. Trump, wrote on the website Medium that the president “nd his administration are right to be concerned about national security, but it’ unacceptable when even legal permanent residents are being detained or turned away at airports and ports of entry.”

Mr. Sasse said that Mr. Trump was right to focus on border security but disagreed with how he was carrying out the policy.

“here are two ways to lose our generational battle against jihadism by losing touch with reality,”r. Sasse said in a statement. “he first is to keep pretending that jihadi terrorism has no connection to Islam or to certain countries. That’ been a disaster.

“nd here’ the second way to fail: If we send a signal to the Middle East that the U.S. sees all Muslims as jihadis, the terrorist recruiters win by telling kids that America is banning Muslims and that this is America versus one religion. Both approaches are wrong, and both will make us less safe. Our generational fight against jihadism requires wisdom.”

And Representative Barbara Comstock, a Republican whose Northern Virginia district includes a large Muslim population, said that Mr. Trump’ action had gone “eyond the increased vetting actions the Congress has supported”nd called for the White House to quickly exempt holders of green cards from the order.

Mr. Trump and his aides on Sunday dismissed criticism as out of proportion with the effects of the ban and that the impact on families of those affected was a small price to pay for increased safety.

Matt Flegenheimer contributed reporting.

* White House Official, in Reversal, Says Green Card Holders Won’ Be Barred

* Rulings on Trump’ Immigration Order Are First Step on Long Legal Path

* Trump’ Executive Order on Immigration: What We Know and What We Don’

* Christian Leaders Denounce Trump’ Plan to Favor Christian Immigrants

Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, on Jan. 5. On Sunday, he said of President Trump’ refugee order, “ think the effect in some areas will give ISIS some more propaganda,” Al Drago/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170129ed1t0025t



N.Y. / Region
Worry and Disbelief in Yemeni-American Community in Brooklyn

By LIZ ROBBINS 
1,027 words
29 January 2017
18:11
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Women in hijabs and men in jeans strolled along Fifth Avenue in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn,on Saturday night beneath the signs of stores and restaurants written in Arabic. It would have seemed a typical Saturday night in one of New York’ largest Yemeni-American neighborhoods.

Except that inside those storefronts and cafes, there was worry, disbelief and emergency meetings, prompted by President Donald J. Trump’ executive orders that temporarily banned visa-holders and green cardholders from seven predominantly Muslim countries. Among those countries was Yemen.

At the Al-Noor Social Center, 20 Yemeni-American business and community leaders from across the city met to share information in Arabic and English about friends and relatives detained at airports across the United States. Everyone knew someone, or was on social media with someone affected. They decried the president’ executive orders.

“rump grew up in Queens, Yemenis were his neighbors,”aled Alamarie, 44, said. “hat’ his New York.”

Mr. Alamarie came to the United States when he was 10. He is a New York Giants season ticket holder and works for the city’ Department of Environmental Protection. His brother, Amrr, 24, was born in New York and is a director of the John Adams High School STEM Academy in Ozone Park, teaching math, science and technology.

“hat drew me out today is that I have an immigration case pending for my wife,”mrr Alamarie said. His wife, from Yemen, has been unable to get a visa to the United States for two years and now does not know when that will happen. They have a 3-month old daughter. “t’ hard not seeing myself living that American life,”e said.

Yemen is embroiled in a war between rebels aligned with Iran known as Houthi and Saudi Arabia-backed fighters that forced the closure of the U.S. embassy in Sana in 2015. For Yemenis seeking American visas, most have had to go to Malaysia or Djibouti to wait. Under President Obama, some Yemenis had their U.S. passports confiscated in Sana.

“verybody’ afraid,”aid Zaid Nagi, 38, who came straight from the protest at John F. Kennedy Airport to the emergency meeting. “hat kind of guarantee do we have if they don’ honor a visa they issue themselves? Or a birth certificate? Where do they draw the line?”

Anas Alhajj, 26, said he was involved in student uprisings in Sana. He received asylum, and now works for a Yemeni newspaper based in Bay Ridge, but he is worried, he said, that his status could be revoked.

“ou have to understand where we came from, there’ a lot of hardship, dictatorships,”aled Alamarie explained. “n their mind, they’e thinking that they’e going to disappear, just like they disappear in Egypt, in Yemen. They just don’ believe it.”

The meeting was organized by Debbie Almontaser,the president of the board of directors for the Muslim Community Network and a national board member of the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee.

“f you know people who are at the airports, let them know to refuse to go back on the plane and not to sign any documents. Ask for a lawyer,”he said to the group of men around the table.

“ear,”he said earlier in the day, “s reverberating through our community.”

But there was also pride. Ibrahim Qatabi, a legal assistant at a nonprofit, said that his great-grandfather came by boat to the United States from Yemen. His grandfather worked in Buffalo for the railroad. His father was a merchant marine.

“nd now to be treated as a second-class citizen?”r. Qatabi, 37, who works for the Center for Constitutional Rights, said.

“e’e not refugees,”e said. “he people who were rejected today are relatives of U.S. citizens.”

Mr. Qatabi worried about the psychological impact this order, which has been described as a Muslim ban, could have. “hat we worry about more than ever is that Trump’ executive orders will embolden and encourage people to be racist, to openly discriminate against people of color, against people who come from the Middle East and especially these seven countries.”

But one neighborhood activist within the Arab-American community in Bay Ridge was conspicuously absent. She thought the temporary ban was good policy. Kathy Khatari, an Irish-American who married into a Yemeni-American family and is a proud Muslim, said that she fully supports Mr. Trump. Cheers him, in fact.

“t’ about God-damn time,”s. Khatari said. “ho cares, as long as we know who we are letting in. Do you know an ordinary Yemeni from someone from ISIS? No —ecause we don’. I’l take inconvenience for safety.”

Yemen was the site of the first counterterrorism raid Mr. Trump authorized, an attack of Al Qaeda headquarters that had killed an estimated 14 Qaeda fighters and one U.S. commando, the Pentagon said on Sunday morning.

For those in Bay Ridge, the fighting seemed so distant. The manager of the popular Yemen Cafén Fifth Avenue, Nasser Alsubai, 28, disagreed about the imminent danger, or implication that people seeking to come to the United States from these seven countries were terrorists. He is a U.S. citizen, naturalized after he came to New York at age 6.

“ny Yemeni family that you find here in America are all working hard to support family in Yemen,”r. Alsubai said.

“ow is going to make things better towards his agenda?”e added of Mr. Trump. “e’ going to make us go back in time. Like the camps with the Japanese. We’e fighting all over the world for every single country to have democracy, but we’e not doing it here.”

* Trump’ Executive Order on Immigration: What We Know and What We Don’

* Protest Grows ‘ut of Nowhere’t Kennedy Airport After Iraqis Are Detained

* White House Official, in Reversal, Says Green Card Holders Won’ Be Barred

* Christian Leaders Denounce Trump’ Plan to Favor Christian Immigrants

Document NYTFEED020170129ed1t002bd



National Desk; SECTA
Executive Order Toughens Some Facets of Lobbying Ban and Weakens Others

By MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT and ERIC LIPTON; Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting. 
847 words
29 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
16
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Trump on Saturday signed an executive order that strengthens certain restrictions on lobbying that had been adopted under President Obama, while weakening others.

Executive branch employees, including those in the White House, will now be barred for five years after they leave government from lobbying the federal agency where they worked. Under Mr. Obama, they had to wait until the end of the administration, meaning a shorter ban for some departing officials. Former executive branch officials will now also be permanently banned from serving as foreign lobbyists.

''Most of the people standing behind me will not be able to go to work,'' Mr. Trump joked about their prospects after serving in the White House during a short signing ceremony in the Oval Office as advisers -- including his chief strategist, Stephen K. Bannon, and counselor, Kellyanne Conway -- stood behind him.

Mr. Trump also signed two other memos. One outlined a reorganization of the National Security Council that appeared to include a significant change from the Obama administration, one that would expand Mr. Bannon's power in the administration.

It said that Mr. Bannon, the former head of Breitbart News, would be among the ''regular attendees'' at ''principals committee'' meetings -- the interagency forum for cabinet-level officials to discuss national security policy. But the director of national intelligence and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ''shall attend where issues pertaining to their responsibilities and expertise are to be discussed.'' Under Mr. Obama, the officials in those two positions were invited to all meetings.

The other memo directed the Pentagon to come up with a ''comprehensive plan'' in the next 30 days to defeat the Islamic State.

In a subtle change, the Trump administration also apparently did away with the acronym used by the Obama administration to refer to the terrorist group -- ISIL, which stands for the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

The documents that Mr. Trump signed on Saturday referred to the group as ISIS, shorthand for the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. The Levant denotes an area larger than Syria.

Mr. Trump's ethics policy also has provisions that will affect officials while they are working in the government. As part of the order he signed, executive branch employees will be barred for two years from working on any ''particular matter'' that they had been involved in while in the private sector. That is the same amount of time that Mr. Obama imposed on officials who worked for him.

Mr. Trump's measure would prohibit Rex W. Tillerson, who has been nominated to serve as secretary of state, from playing any role in matters related to Exxon Mobil, where until recently he had served as chief executive.

The provision may also limit matters that Scott Pruitt, who has been nominated to lead the Environmental Protection Agency, can take up. Mr. Pruitt, who served as Oklahoma's attorney general, has repeatedly sued the agency.

Norman L. Eisen, the ethics lawyer when Mr. Obama arrived in the White House and the chief author of the rules that Mr. Trump is now replacing, commended much of Mr. Trump's order.

But Mr. Eisen and other ethics experts noted that rules banning lobbyists from taking any job with an agency they had tried to influence in the past two years had been removed. Also, the new rules allow departing executive branch employees to take private sector jobs and then informally lobby the administration, as long as they are not registered as a lobbyist, a type of activity previously prohibited for two years. Registration is required once a person does a certain amount of work for a client.

''There is much to like,'' Mr. Eisen said of the new executive order. ''But it gives nonlobbyists too much leeway when they leave. That is where the biggest problem in the system is: unregistered, shadow lobbyists. They should be getting more regulation, not less.''

He also said, ''Trump kept the Obama limits on the revolving door coming into government, but eliminated Obama's revolving door protections for nonlobbyists leaving government.''

The Islamic State directive calls on Defense Secretary Jim Mattis to devise a more aggressive plan to destroy the group. During the campaign, Mr. Trump widely criticized the handling of the operations by the Obama administration and the military. At one point, he said that he knew ''more about ISIS than the generals do.''

Mr. Trump said during the campaign that he would ask for the 30-day review. He claimed that he had a secret plan to defeat ISIS.

Because Mr. Trump had been explicit about his intention to ask for the review, military planners have been drafting classified options to provide to Mr. Trump.

Among the measures that Mr. Mattis may ultimately recommend are using American artillery on the ground in Syria and using Army attack helicopters to help with the invasion of the group's de facto capital, Raqqa.

Document NYTF000020170129ed1t0008b



National Desk; SECTA
'Dreams Die' for Refugees on Verge of U.S. Travel as Door Closes

By ROD NORDLAND, JOE COCHRANE and PATRICK KINGSLEY; Rod Nordland reported from Beirut, Joe Cochrane from Jakarta, and Patrick Kingsley from New York. Reporting was contributed by Tim Arango and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul; Zahra Nader from Kabul, Afghanistan; Rana F. Sweis from Amman, Jordan; Falih Hassan and Omar Jawoshy from Baghdad; and Sima Ghaddar from Beirut, Lebanon. 
1,697 words
29 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
19
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- Sardar Hussain refused to believe it. He had been orphaned in Afghanistan by a Taliban bomb at age 13. After waiting in limbo for two years, he said he was only days away from getting on a plane to the United States when he heard that President Trump would be barring entry to refugees.

Mustafa did believe it. He teared up, saying his life was over at age 28. An Iraqi refugee in Lebanon, he thought he was so close to getting to the United States that he had gone out and bought a new shirt for his trip.

When she read on Facebook about the temporary ban, Alwia Abdullah, 43, who fled from Darfur in Sudan to Jordan with her husband and six children, got a sudden, stabbing pain in her gut, and couldn't sleep.

''We left because we were discriminated against in Darfur,'' she said. ''So to be discriminated against by a U.S. president, by a nation we see our future in, is so disheartening. How do you live with that?''

They were among an estimated 110,000 people in line to be processed for resettlement in the United States during this fiscal year. In fact, they thought they had already made it through the rigorous vetting procedure and, after years of waiting, were on the verge of having their hopes realized.

Now, all are suddenly, indefinitely waiting again, barred from entry to the United States for at least four months, according to an executive order signed by Mr. Trump on Friday, with no assurances of what could happen to them next.

The order, Mr. Trump said, is a way to ''keep radical Islamic terrorists out of the United States of America.''

''We don't want them here,'' he said at the Pentagon. ''We want to ensure that we are not admitting into our country the very threats our soldiers are fighting overseas.''

The executive order calls for the United States' annual refugee quota to be cut to a maximum of 50,000, compared with 85,000 allowed in during the fiscal year ending in September 2016.

Even last year's figure was dwarfed by the historically high number of displaced people in the world, 65 million, or by the more than 1.5 million migrants and refugees arriving in European countries since 2014.

Mr. Trump's order also suspends the entry of all Syrian refugees indefinitely, calling their arrival ''detrimental to the interests of the United States.'' Beyond that, it suspends visas to people from Iraq, Syria, Iran, Sudan, Libya, Somalia and Yemen for 90 days.

Asked about Mr. Trump's refugee ban, Stéhane Dujarric, the United Nations spokesman, said he hoped ''it's a temporary one.'' He noted that more people were displaced around the world than ever before.

''The U.S. resettlement program is one of the most important resettlement programs the U.N. works with,'' he said.

Mr. Trump's action was the latest closed door in a world that has become increasingly unwelcome to refugees, amid rising concerns and hostility in many resettlement countries in Europe, and in countries of first refuge like Turkey and Lebanon.

For those refugees, in particular, who thought that their asylum process was over and that they would be accepted in the United States, the dismay was overwhelming this past week.

Faten Diab, 34, a former charity worker from Syria, said she had been told that she and her family would be among a relatively small number of Syrians allowed into the United States. Last year, only 10,000 had been granted that privilege, compared with 40,000 in Canada.

Ms. Diab and her husband said she fled to Turkey and applied for asylum in the United States in summer 2015, along with close friends who applied at the same time. They said the friends had received a final decision just over a week ago and had flown to America. The Diabs had reason to hope that their own number would come up any day.

Now, that may never happen. Reached by telephone in their tiny apartment in Turkey, Ms. Diab sounded distraught, as the couple's 2-year-old daughter could be heard playing in the background.

''We are so, so, so sad,'' Ms. Diab said, complaining that Mr. Trump's claim that terrorists were slipping in as refugees was overblown. ''The process of resettlement is long and difficult. You can say he is wrong. Because he didn't live the application steps in all its difficulties.''

Strictly speaking, America does not actually owe anything to the Diabs from Syria or the Abdullahs from Darfur; they are just reacting to its historical promise to take the world's ''huddled masses yearning to breathe free.''

But in other countries, like Iraq, citizens who worked for the American military, government and companies were promised preferential treatment for resettlement. Many thought that the risks they took on behalf of the United States would be repaid one day with a safe haven when they needed it. Now Iraqis are also on Mr. Trump's proscribed list.

Laith al-Samari, 37, was one of many who could not believe it. A former interpreter for the United States military, he was wounded twice in battle, in the leg and stomach, and now lives in fear of retaliation from anti-American militants in his Baghdad community. He was not ashamed to beg.

''Please Mr. President, you are the president of one of the biggest states in the world,'' he said. ''Don't be hasty in taking this decision. Be fair with us.''

Mustafa, the 28-year-old Iraqi, is a Shiite Muslim who worked on construction crews on American bases, mostly on fortifications. As he put it: ''I made homes for them that kept them safe. I felt I was doing something good for humanity.''

But anti-Shiite militias in his neighborhood discovered what his job had been and accused him of treason. ''I was beaten and shot and knifed and eventually came to Lebanon two years ago,'' he said, during an interview arranged in Beirut by the International Refugee Assistance Project, a New York-based legal aid group.

After years of interviews and investigation, Mustafa said he was finally told to take his medical examination and now only needed to be given the date for his flight, to California. To get ready, Mustafa splurged at a high-end Beirut store to buy the clothes he would wear into his new life: dark green pants, a vest, a checked shirt in four colors. ''I would wear the best clothes I have, and I wouldn't take anything else with me, not even my memories,'' he said.

Mustafa still has some hope that somehow exceptions will be made, which is why -- like most of the refugees interviewed for this article -- he did not want his full name published.

''If I do get rejected,'' he said, ''I'd regret ever having shaken hands with an American.'' He struggled not to weep.

Sardar Hussain, 16, an ethnic Hazara boy from central Afghanistan, was rocked by disbelief.

He said that when he was 13, his father, mother and younger sister were killed when a bomb blew up a taxi that was taking his mother to a hospital. After paying a smuggling network $7,000 to get him to Australia, he was marooned en route, on the Indonesian island of Java, when Australia cracked down on boats bringing refugees there. For seven weeks, he slept on the sidewalk behind the United Nations offices in Jakarta, Indonesia. Now, after more than two years, he said, his flight to America was scheduled for Monday.

''We were given a commitment to go there,'' he said, speaking softly in English at a coffee house in Jakarta, just after completing his final medical exam.

Firas al-Swiha, 23, a Syrian refugee in Turkey, went out with friends on Wednesday night to drink away his disappointment. He was a university student and opposition activist in Syria before fleeing his hometown, Raqqa, now the Islamic State's de facto capital.

He was still looking for answers.

''Is Trump trying to fight the terrorists by giving up on the victims of the very same terrorists?'' he asked. ''ISIS wants to destroy our lives, and now Trump declined to give us one.''

Sara, 31, a former television presenter who fled to Indonesia from Afghanistan after death threats -- the Taliban and other cultural conservatives despise seeing Afghan women in public at all, let alone on television -- was trying to arrive at answers of her own.

''You just wait,'' she said. ''You see how the years pass. You get older, you cannot make any plans. You watch your dreams die with every second you spend waiting.''

After three years and four months, she thought that the waiting was finally over, and that she would soon have a date when she was allowed to fly.

Now her life has been suspended for at least four more months, with no guarantee that she will still be included in the Trump administration's much-reduced refugee quota once the visa moratorium is lifted.

''The bitter truth,'' she said, ''is that your whole life is dependent on a single decision of someone who doesn't have even the slightest idea what it's like to live as a refugee.''

Sardar Hussain, 16, who was orphaned at age 13 by a Taliban bomb in Afghanistan, was days away from boarding a plane to the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KEMAL JUFRI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Mustafa, an Iraqi refugee in Lebanon, said that the entry bar meant his life was over at age 28. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DIEGO IBARRA SANCHEZ FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170129ed1t0007h



TALK
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
Joy Reid Has Never Heard a Good Argument for Trump

Interview by ANA MARIE COX 
771 words
29 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
54
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A few weeks ago, you said the media should stop covering Donald Trump's tweets in order to force him into giving a press conference. Now that we've seen one, did you find it useful? It wasn't a press conference, and it wasn't useful. It was a weird third-world pep rally. Trump could make a very fine African or Middle Eastern dictator -- it's the same combination of machismo, charisma and lack of any concern for morals, ethics or standards of behavior that we saw in Hosni Mubarak or Mobutu Sese Seko.

I do think that the media, both left and right, is fascinated by Trump, but our fascination detracts from our ability to cover him. The media needs to start ignoring him until we can make him talk to us in a normal way: not on Twitter and not at a show, which is what a press conference is. He can't take not having our attention.

Your show fills the time slot left by Melissa Harris-Perry, who left MSNBC after she felt the network was ''silencing'' her because of her politics. Do you think her claims had any merit? I wish they had been able to figure out a way for her to do her show in the context of an election. Not every executive could understand the importance of a show like hers in a political year. In the business of television, there's an emphasis on providing politics to viewers -- but for black women, the Melissa Harris-Perry show was political.

Right, and if you're a person of color, you're more sensitive to the lived experience of racism and how it manifests itself in the real world, which might've been useful for anticipating the rise of Trump. Do you think that there was a difference in how black journalists were able to understand why Trump appealed to people? I think the way that black people, particularly, experience Donald Trump is interesting. If all you knew was the Trump from ''The Apprentice,'' from the ''Home Alone'' movie, from hip-hop songs, and if all he's doing is saying: ''I'm a business guy, I'm going to get you jobs, I'm going to eliminate these terrible trade deals that we hate'' and being a celebrity, he could've actually been a pretty effective crossover Republican candidate! The problem is, from the moment he became a ''birther,'' he exposed the inner Trump -- the racist Trump, the Trump that New Yorkers know -- to the whole world.

During the campaign, you interviewed dozens of Trump supporters and surrogates -- was there anyone who presented a sound argument for why they supported him? No. We had one Hispanic woman say that she was for Trump because she needed her taxes to be cut. She was the only person who ever made that argument -- for other people, it was always immigration or ISIS or some other thing.

''Make America Great Again'' seems to be nostalgia for a time when white supremacy was a more effective institution. White male supremacy. One of my most incorrect assumptions was that white women, particularly white women with college degrees, would have voted in much higher numbers for Hillary Clinton, just because of the sheer outrage over Trump, but the outrage was a lot less in the end than a lot of us thought.

I read a precampaign-season interview with you, and you were apprehensive about Hillary's appeal to black voters. I firmly believe that she and Bill did real damage to their reputations among African-Americans in 2008, and we saw that play out in the lack of enthusiasm about her.

What did you think about her efforts to capture the African-American vote? At the end of the day, you have to go to those cities and be on the ground. Clinton believed the data that black people were just going to show up just because we're Democrats. But black people know how to live in a terrible system; we've been living in a terrible system most of the time we've been in America. You're not going to scare us by saying: ''If you don't vote, a racist is going to be the president.'' Black people are just like: ''Really? Again?''

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Interview has been condensed and edited.

(PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN VOSS) 

Document NYTF000020170129ed1t0006k



National Desk; SECT
Trump's Signing of Immigrant Ban Puts Pentagon in Uncomfortable Light

By HELENE COOPER 
999 words
29 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Six months ago, Jim Mattis stood at a lectern at the Hoover Institution, a conservative think tank at Stanford University, and sharply criticized Donald J. Trump's campaign proposal for a ban on Muslim immigration, saying that such a move would distress American allies around the world.

''This kind of thing is causing us great damage right now, and it's sending shock waves through the international system,'' Mr. Mattis said.

On Friday, in a Pentagon room dedicated to men and women who have received the country's highest military decoration, the Medal of Honor, Mr. Mattis, now the country's defense secretary, stood behind his new commander in chief, President Trump, as he signed an executive order on immigration. The order suspended entry of all refugees to the United States for 120 days, barred Syrian refugees indefinitely and blocked entry for 90 days for citizens of seven predominantly Muslim countries. It also allows Christians to be granted priority over Muslims.

For Mr. Mattis, it was an uncomfortable end to a tumultuous first week as defense secretary that found him choosing which battles to fight and which to step away from.

He won a huge one on Friday, when Mr. Trump, in a remarkable show of deference, said that he would let Mr. Mattis ''override'' his view that torture could be effective in interrogations. Mr. Mattis is a strong opponent of such techniques.

But Mr. Mattis was also outflanked by the White House, which chose the Pentagon to unveil Mr. Trump's executive order on immigration, a sharply divisive move in front of military leaders who view themselves as apolitical.

In a building where uniformed men and women work alongside civilian officials, several rank-and-file workers expressed outrage that Mr. Trump would use the Defense Department, home to a military that includes people of many faiths, including Islam, to announce that he was blocking visa applicants from Iraq, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan and Yemen.

''Using the military as a backdrop for politically charged activities is bad for the military,'' said Kori Schake, a Hoover Institution fellow who edited the new book ''Warriors and Citizens: American Views of Our Military'' with Mr. Mattis. She added that associating the military with ''unconstitutional policies is especially damaging, since our military take their oath to the Constitution, not to the president.''

The president cited the Sept. 11 attacks in his decision to issue the immigration restrictions, which he cast in national security terms. ''We will never forget the lessons of 9/11,'' he said, nor the people ''who lost their lives at the Pentagon.''

But none of the 19 terrorists who were on the planes that crashed into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon and in Shanksville, Pa., were from any of the countries on Mr. Trump's visa ban list.

Instead, Iraq, where the American military is fighting with Iraqi security forces against the Islamic State, is among the countries on the list. Military officials have repeatedly called the nation an American ally.

''After all the money and lives spent in Iraq and Afghanistan, the Pentagon knows better than anyone that terrorism is a problem of a small number of enemies embedded in a population of people you need to win over,'' said Jon B. Alterman, director of the Middle East Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. ''I don't see the part of this that's meant to win over anyone.''

Two people close to Mr. Mattis, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they said they were wary of undercutting him, said he was still sharply opposed to the Muslim ban. But he spent this week battling the White House on other issues, including the establishment of ''safe zones'' in Syria, something the Pentagon has long opposed because it would deepen American involvement in the war there, out of the executive order.

Military officials sought to distance the Pentagon from the immigration ban, and focused instead on the second executive order that Mr. Trump signed at the Pentagon, which called for plans to improve military readiness. Mr. Mattis, standing behind Mr. Trump, took only the ceremonial pen that Mr. Trump used to sign the military readiness order. Mr. Trump gave the other one to Vice President Mike Pence.

Afterward, the Defense Department put out a statement about Mr. Trump's visit to the Pentagon that pointedly made no mention of the Muslim ban. ''The secretary shares the president's goal of ensuring our military leaders have the support they need to accelerate the campaign against ISIS, and to build combat readiness now and for the future,'' Capt. Jeff Davis, the Pentagon spokesman, said in the statement.

Last week, the Defense Department posted a message on Twitter about a former refugee who became a Marine. ''From refugee to #Marine. @USMC Cpl Ali J. Mohammed takes the fight to the doorstep of those who cast his family out,'' it read.

From refugee to #Marine. @USMC Cpl Ali J. Mohammed takes the fight to the doorstep of those who cast his family out.https://t.co/oSXWGrzsL7 pic.twitter.com/UVlWsaESic -- U.S. Dept of Defense (@DeptofDefense) January 25, 2017

A military official noted on Saturday that the American military, which uses translators and fixers in Iraq and Syria, two of the countries on the banned list, would find it harder to recruit, since the Pentagon has long offered the promise of refuge in America.

''It's very difficult for people to cooperate with the United States military when they feel humiliated by the United States,'' said Vali Nasr, dean of the School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University.

''The Iraqi situation is the most grievous,'' Mr. Nasr added. ''We are fighting a war with the Iraqis, against ISIS. How can we fight with them when the message from the White House is discriminatory?''

Document NYTF000020170129ed1t0006v



National Desk; SECTA
How an American Ended Up Accused of Aiding  ISIS  With $245 in Gift Cards

By ERIC LICHTBLAU 
1,757 words
29 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
15
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The F.B.I. had a job offer for Nick Young, a veteran Washington transit officer: Become an undercover informant for the bureau and gather information at local mosques on fellow Muslims who might pose a terrorism threat.

The clandestine work would be ''a lot sexier'' than his current job, Mr. Young remembered an agent named Ryan telling him. And it could pay him a lot of money if the intelligence was good.

Mr. Young turned him down. But it would not be the last time he would see the F.B.I. agent.

Last August, five years later, Mr. Young was summoned to the headquarters of the transit agency, Metro, where Ryan and other agents were waiting for him. ''You probably don't recognize me, do you?'' Ryan, whose beard was now thicker, asked him. ''Oh, I recognize you,'' Mr. Young said. This time, the agent handcuffed Mr. Young on a charge of supporting the Islamic State -- a case built, in a twist, by an informant who posed as a would-be terrorist fighter.

The prosecution of Mr. Young, the only law enforcement officer among more than 100 Americans who have been accused of helping the Islamic State, offers a revealing look at the F.B.I.'s shadowy cat-and-mouse efforts to identify possible Islamic extremists. President Trump has vowed to intensify the effort as part of a campaign to ''annihilate'' the militant group.

Mr. Young's case also poses a challenge to the F.B.I.'s expanding use of undercover operations to identify Islamic State sympathizers inside the United States who might travel overseas to help the terrorist group or commit ''lone wolf'' attacks at home. His lawyer claims that the F.B.I. entrapped him, with undercover operatives popping in and out of his life for at least six years.

To law enforcement officials, however, Mr. Young represents one of their worst fears: a longtime officer, with access to sensitive facilities, who they suspect was ''radicalized'' to support Islamic extremism.

He is charged with providing ''material support'' to the Islamic State, in the form of $245 worth of Google Play gift cards. The authorities say he gave the gift cards to a Muslim friend named Mo -- in reality, an undercover informant -- to support recruitment for the terrorist group.

Before now, very few American suspects linked to the Islamic State have spoken out. But in three and a half hours of interviews from jail, Mr. Young, a convert to Islam, portrayed himself and many other American Muslims under investigation as victims of religious persecution. He accused an ''overzealous'' F.B.I. of ''manufacturing'' the case.

''I know for sure I wouldn't have been targeted if I was an evangelic Christian or a Sikh or a Hindu or something,'' said Mr. Young, 37.

''I'm not a terrorist,'' he added. ''Seeing these horrible allegations and the way they're trying to paint me, it's just a nightmare.''

Officials at the F.B.I. and the Justice Department declined to comment on the case. In general, the F.B.I. said in a statement, the investigative techniques used in such national security cases ''are subject to vigorous oversight and require us to use the least intrusive means possible.''

The F.B.I. has moved aggressively since the rise of the Islamic State in 2014 to identify suspected extremist supporters inside the United States, opening hundreds of investigations and generating convictions from Brooklyn to Southern California, often against young Muslim men.

Mr. Trump has declared that the country must do more to confront what he calls ''radical Islamic terrorism,'' including the possibility of expanding surveillance and intelligence operations, creating a ''registry'' of American Muslims, and reviving torture as an interrogation technique.

While Mr. Trump has sent mixed signals on some of those proposals, they have worried some civil liberties advocates, who say they are eager to see whether the Justice Department and the F.B.I. seek to expand their investigative powers still further in domestic terrorism cases.

Mr. Young sees himself as a pawn in that broader fight.

He acknowledges holding passionate views about the Middle East and the ''slaughter'' of Syrians by the government of President Bashar al-Assad. On breaks from the transit agency, Mr. Young traveled to Libya twice in 2011 with body armor to join rebels fighting the Qaddafi regime.

''I didn't kill anyone while I was there,'' he said, laughing, but ''I got shot at a lot.''

He insisted that he had never supported terrorists. He plans to take the witness stand at his trial, an unusual tactic for a terrorism suspect. ''Nick doesn't have anything to hide,'' said Nicholas D. Smith, one of his lawyers.

As he waits for his trial date, he sits in a rural jail in Warsaw, Va., reading science fiction occasionally, with ''The Jerry Springer Show'' sometimes playing on a television in the background. ''My brain's turning to mush,'' he said.

He said the jail had denied him access to Muslim prayer sessions. But the conditions are far better, he added, than the solitary confinement he was placed in for 23 hours a day for months after his arrest. That ordeal, he said, has caused lingering panic attacks and other problems.

Unlike the bulk of the Americans charged with supporting the Islamic State, Mr. Young is not accused of plotting violence or trying to travel to the Middle East to fight with the group.

He said he was under investigation for so long, it was almost inevitable that the authorities would find a way to charge him. ''At the end of the day, the crime I'm being accused of -- a crime of sending gift cards -- it would be laughable if it wasn't really happening,'' Mr. Young said.

He declined to explain the gift cards, citing a pretrial order that restricts what he can say about documents in the case. But he said his explanation would come out at his trial.

Since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, dozens of terrorism defendants caught in undercover stings have claimed in court that they were illegally entrapped into saying or doing incriminating things. None have succeeded.

Judges have given the Justice Department wide latitude in using undercover stings in terrorism cases. ''You almost need a perfect case'' to prove entrapment, said Seamus Hughes, a terrorism expert at George Washington University's Program on Extremism, ''and that's difficult to find.''

Still, several legal analysts said Mr. Young might have a legitimate shot, because of the unusual elements of the F.B.I.'s yearslong undercover investigation. They point out that even an obstruction-of-justice charge that Mr. Young faces is based on his statements to agents about a fictional F.B.I. investigation into the whereabouts of a would-be Islamic State fighter who never existed.

Mr. Young apparently first came onto the F.B.I.'s radar around 2010 because he knew a fellow student at George Mason University, Zachary A. Chesser, who, like him, was a white convert to Islam from Northern Virginia and attended the same mosque.

The F.B.I. interviewed Mr. Young that year as part of an investigation into Mr. Chesser, who ultimately pleaded guilty to terrorism-related charges after he was accused of threatening the creators of ''South Park'' over the show's depiction of the Prophet Muhammad.

Mr. Young does not appear to have been an F.B.I. target at the time, even as undercover informants began giving the bureau reports about the activities of him and some of his associates.

He continued working as an armed officer patrolling Washington-area subways and bus lines. He said F.B.I. agents -- Ryan and a second agent -- had met with him twice in 2011 to recruit him as an informant.

Mr. Young said he found the idea of becoming an informant distasteful. The F.B.I. said in a court affidavit that he had used stronger language in a conversation with one of the bureau's undercover informants, saying that if he were ever betrayed by one, ''that person's head would be in a cinder block'' at the bottom of a lake.

Based on wiretaps and statements from informants, the F.B.I. reported that Mr. Young had made a number of other incendiary and perhaps even threatening comments over the years about Muslim informants, F.B.I. investigators and ''kaffirs'' -- or nonbelievers.

Mr. Young acknowledged that he could have used ''a little self-editing'' in some of his private remarks. But he said he had never meant them to be taken literally. ''Everyone's capable of saying stupid, blustery things,'' said Mr. Smith, his lawyer.

Some F.B.I. officials pressed to bring criminal charges against Mr. Young years ago, but the Justice Department rebuffed them because of an apparent lack of evidence that he was involved in supporting terrorism, according to law enforcement officials.

It was not until 2014 that Mr. Young crossed the line into supporting terrorism, the Justice Department now alleges. That was when he first met Mo, a Middle Easterner who said he was a military reservist, at a mosque where he prayed. Mr. Young said he had suspected early on that Mo might be an informant because of his strange mannerisms.

But his concerns eased, and the two became friends, meeting at a Starbucks or elsewhere. Mo later told Mr. Young that he was thinking of traveling to Syria to join the Islamic State, prosecutors said.

While Mr. Young sometimes appeared to offer Mo advice on how best to avoid government scrutiny if he went to the Middle East, he also told him at times that he did not need to join the terrorist group -- at least not then, according to the F.B.I.'s account.

''There is no one with a gun to your head that is counting down,'' he told Mo in a conversation recorded in October 2014.

Such statements, said Mr. Smith, his lawyer, show that ''the government is really grasping at straws here.'' Prosecutors are acting on ''really more of a hunch that he might commit crimes in the future,'' he said, ''and they can't prove it.''

A law enforcement officer outside the home of Mr. Young in Fairfax, Va., in August. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PABLO MARTINEZ MONSIVAIS/ASSOCIATED PRESS); Nick Young, in a photo provided by his family. 

Document NYTF000020170129ed1t0005y



National Desk; SECT
Trump's Plan to Fight  ISIS  Includes Calling It by That Name

By MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT 
609 words
29 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Donald J. Trump said during the campaign that he had a secret plan for the fight against the Islamic State. Eight days into his presidency, he seems to have revealed a small part of it.

ISIL is out. ISIS is in.

An executive memorandum that Mr. Trump signed on Saturday afternoon in the Oval Office repeatedly referred to the Islamic State as ISIS -- not ISIL, as President Barack Obama and the rest of the federal government had called the terrorist group since 2014.

''This is the plan to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, in other words, ISIS,'' Mr. Trump said as he signed the memorandum, which called on the Pentagon to devise a ''comprehensive plan'' within 30 days.

The White House also used the name ISIS in summaries of the calls Mr. Trump had on Saturday with the Russian and French presidents.

As the terrorist group rose to prominence during Mr. Obama's second term, American intelligence agencies began referring to it as ISIL -- for the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, a translation from Arabic -- and Mr. Obama began using the term.

Like Mr. Obama, most senior officials pronounced it Eye-sul. Some just said the letters. And occasionally, a government official would refer to it as Iss-ull.

The Levant denotes an area larger than Syria, including Lebanon, Jordan and Israel. Although the news media has widely used the term ISIS -- with its sinister sibilance -- the federal government stayed with ISIL.

Conspiracy theories have been floated in the conservative media about why Mr. Obama used the term. Rush Limbaugh said in 2015 that Mr. Obama had employed the acronym as a way of delegitimizing Israel.

''Oh, and, by the way, just to reiterate something: ISIS versus ISIL,'' he said. ''The Levant includes Israel, includes much of the eastern Mediterranean shoreline. By using the term ISIL, it is meant to delegitimize Israel. It is meant to include Israel in the Levant, which would make it Palestine. I'm telling you, there's a reason Obama does this, and his audience is not us.''

A day before Mr. Limbaugh's comments, Mr. Trump complained about Mr. Obama's use of ISIL as he attacked Mr. Obama's efforts to defeat the group. As Mr. Trump offered a running commentary on Twitter of Mr. Obama's address after the attacks in San Bernardino, Calif., Mr. Trump harped on Mr. Obama's use of the term.

Wish Obama would say ISIS, like almost everyone else, rather than ISIL. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) December 7, 2015

As recently as last May, Mr. Trump again brought up the issue, saying in an interview with Bloomberg Politics: ''The president of the United States always says 'ISIL.' Everyone else says 'ISIS.' And I actually think he does it to bother people.''

Mr. Trump's Pentagon and State Department apparently have not gotten the memo that there is a new acronym in town.

In a statement released on Friday by the State Department that included a travel warning about Libya, the department said that ''ISIL claimed responsibility for two vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices in Tripoli in September 2016.''

And in a statement released on Thursday by the Pentagon spokesman, Capt. Jeff Davis, that summarized a call between Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and the French defense minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, Captain Davis said that ''the secretary discussed the importance of the NATO alliance and counter-ISIL operations, and thanked Minister Le Drian for his country's continued commitment to both.''

Document NYTF000020170129ed1t0005x



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Editors' Choice | Recent Books of Particular Interest

628 words
29 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
22
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Looking for an escape into the jungle? A revisit with Huck Finn? A deep dive into the origins of ISIS or a rousing defense of the Obama administration? Then this is your week, reader. Some seriously great storytelling below.

Pamela Paul

Editor of The New York Times Book Review

TRANSIT, by Rachel Cusk. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $26.) In the second novel of a planned trilogy, Cusk continues the story of Faye, a writer and teacher who is recently divorced and semi-broke. Our critic Dwight Garner wrote that the books are ''already a serious achievement: dense, aphoristic, philosophically acute novels that read like Iris Murdoch thrice distilled.''

TRUE SOUTH: Henry Hampton and 'Eyes on the Prize,' the Landmark Television Series That Reframed the Civil Rights Movement, by Jon Else. (Viking, $30.) This history of ''Eyes on the Prize'' is written by a producer and cinematographer on the project. Our critic Dwight Garner called it a ''warm and intelligent'' book that is several things at once: a biography of the filmmaker Henry Hampton; a lucid recap of the civil rights movement; and a book about how a long and complicated documentary was made.

AUDACITY: How Barack Obama Defied His Critics and Created a Legacy That Will Prevail, by Jonathan Chait. (Custom House, $27.99.) According to this book, yes, he did -- a very good job of it, too. Jonathan Chait, a veteran political columnist now at New York magazine, cogently argues that Obama has been a transformational figure who changed America for the better.

THE LOST CITY OF THE MONKEY GOD: A True Story, by Douglas Preston. (Grand Central, $28.) The novelist joins a rugged expedition in search of pre-Columbian ruins in the Honduran rain forest. There's a surprise twist in here that rivets the reader and takes the book to a whole new level. I won't spoil it here.

HUCK OUT WEST, by Robert Coover. (Norton, $26.95.) Who doesn't wonder whatever happened to Huck Finn? This sardonic novel imagines an innocent Huck and a murderous Tom Sawyer as adults in a savage post-Civil War West.

THE BOOK THAT CHANGED AMERICA: How Darwin's Theory of Evolution Ignited a Nation, by Randall Fuller. (Viking, $27.) This lively and informative history looks at how Americans responded to the publication of Darwin's great work in 1859. It starts off with a New Year's Day dinner party that included Henry David Thoreau and Louisa May Alcott's father, and takes the story from there.

THE AFTERLIFE OF STARS, by Joseph Kertes. (Little, Brown, $26.) A Jewish family flees Hungary's 1956 revolution in Kertes's inspired and deeply affecting novel. Our reviewer called it ''devastating yet unnervingly funny.'' Count us in.

THE WAY OF THE STRANGERS: Encounters With the Islamic State, by Graeme Wood. (Random House, $28.) Graeme Wood's cover story for The Atlantic, ''What ISIS Really Wants,'' attracted an extensive readership when it appeared in March 2015. This book expands on that piece, with Wood's interviews of ISIS supporters in an effort to understand the roots of their beliefs a major part of his research.

HOMESICK FOR ANOTHER WORLD, by Ottessa Moshfegh. (Penguin Press, $26.) Watch for this name: Ottessa Moshfegh, author of the novel ''Eileen'' and one of the literary world's rising stars. The insightful stories in her dark debut collection, winning rave reviews everywhere, are about ''loneliness, desire, hope and self-awareness.''

ENIGMA VARIATIONS, by Andréciman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $26.) According to our reviewer, Aciman writes ''with the ferocity of a writer who's finally getting his vision down.'' The result, ''a magnificent living thing,'' is a sensitive and sensuous novel about love, desire and betrayal.

Document NYTF000020170129ed1t00056



U.S.; Politics
Trump’ Plan to Fight  ISIS  Includes Calling It a New Name

By MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT 
609 words
29 January 2017
07:14
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —Donald J. Trump said during the campaign that he had a secret plan for the fight against the Islamic State. Eight days into his presidency, he seems to have revealed a small part of it.

ISIL is out. ISIS is in.

An executive memorandum that Mr. Trump signed on Saturday afternoon in the Oval Office repeatedly referred to the Islamic State as ISIS —ot ISIL, as President Barack Obama and the rest of the federal government had called the terrorist group since 2014.

“his is the plan to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, in other words, ISIS,”r. Trump said as he signed the memorandum, which called on the Pentagon to devise a “omprehensive plan”ithin 30 days.

The White House also used the name ISIS in summaries of the calls Mr. Trump had on Saturday with the Russian and French presidents.

As the terrorist group rose to prominence during Mr. Obama’ second term, American intelligence agencies began referring to it as ISIL —or the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, a translation from Arabic —nd Mr. Obama began using the term.

Like Mr. Obama, most senior officials pronounced it Eye-sul. Some just said the letters. And occasionally, a government official would refer to it as Iss-ull.

The Levant denotes an area larger than Syria, including Lebanon, Jordan and Israel. Although the news media has widely used the term ISIS —ith its sinister sibilance —he federal government stayed with ISIL.

Conspiracy theories have been floated in the conservative media about why Mr. Obama used the term. Rush Limbaugh said in 2015 that Mr. Obama had employed the acronym as a way of delegitimizing Israel.

“h, and, by the way, just to reiterate something: ISIS versus ISIL,”e said. “he Levant includes Israel, includes much of the eastern Mediterranean shoreline. By using the term ISIL, it is meant to delegitimize Israel. It is meant to include Israel in the Levant, which would make it Palestine. I’ telling you, there’ a reason Obama does this, and his audience is not us.”

A day before Mr. Limbaugh’ comments, Mr. Trump complained about Mr. Obama’ use of ISIL as he attacked Mr. Obama’ efforts to defeat the group. As Mr. Trump offered a running commentary on Twitter of Mr. Obama’ address after the attacks in San Bernardino, Calif., Mr. Trump harped on Mr. Obama’ use of the term.

Wish Obama would say ISIS, like almost everyone else, rather than ISIL. —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) December 7, 2015

As recently as last May, Mr. Trump again brought up the issue, saying in an interview with Bloomberg Politics: “he president of the United States always says ‘SIL.’veryone else says ‘ISIS.’nd I actually think he does it to bother people.”

Mr. Trump’ Pentagon and State Department apparently have not gotten the memo that there is a new acronym in town.

In a statement released on Friday by the State Department that included a travel warning about Libya, the department said that “SIL claimed responsibility for two vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices in Tripoli in September 2016.”

And in a statement released on Thursday by the Pentagon spokesman, Capt. Jeff Davis, that summarized a call between Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and the French defense minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, Captain Davis said that “he secretary discussed the importance of the NATO alliance and counter-ISIL operations, and thanked Minister Le Drian for his country’ continued commitment to both.”

Document NYTFEED020170129ed1t000um



us
Immigration Ban Is Unlikely to Reduce Terrorist Threat, Experts Say; News Analysis

By SCOTT SHANE 
1,233 words
28 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Rarely does an executive order announce a more straightforward and laudable purpose than the one President Trump signed on Friday: “rotecting the Nation From Foreign Terrorist Entry Into the United States.”ut the president’ directive is unlikely to significantly reduce the terrorist threat in the United States, which has been a minuscule part of the overall toll of violence since 2001.

Many experts believe the order’ unintended consequences will make the threat worse.

While the order requires the Department of Homeland Security to issue a report within 180 days providing detailed statistics on foreign nationals who commit acts of violence, terrorism researchers have already produced rich and revealing data. For instance, since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, no one has been killed in the United States in a terrorist attack by anyone who emigrated from or whose parents emigrated from Syria, Iraq, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan and Yemen, the seven countries targeted in the order’ 120-day visa ban, according to Charles Kurzman, a sociology professor at the University of North Carolina.

Of Muslim Americans involved in violent extremism of any kind —or instance, charged with plotting terrorism or supporting a terrorist group —nly 23 percent had family backgrounds in those countries, said Mr. Kurzman, who just published the latest of his annual studies of Muslim Americans and terrorism.

The larger point of experts is that jihadist attacks garner news attention that far outstrips their prevalence in the United States, and the president’ order appears to address not a rational calculation of risks but the visceral fears that terrorists set out to inflame.

There was a random quality to the list of countries: It excluded Saudi Arabia and Egypt, where the founders of Al Qaeda and many other jihadist groups have originated. Also excluded are Pakistan and Afghanistan, where persistent extremism and decades of war have produced militants who have occasionally reached the United States. Notably, perhaps, the list avoided Muslim countries where Mr. Trump has major business ventures.

Nor did the list include the European countries where disenfranchised Muslim communities have become hotbeds of militancy, leading to major attacks in Paris and Brussels in the name of the Islamic State. Because no visas are required for travel by most European citizens to the United States, and because of the volume of tourism and business, restricting travel from Europe would have been far more difficult and consequential than banning it from only the seven countries named.

By Mr. Kurzman’ count, 123 people have been killed in the United States by Muslim terrorists since the 2001 attacks —ut of a total of more than 230,000 killings, by gang members, drug dealers, angry spouses, white supremacists, psychopaths, drunks and people of every description. So the order addresses, at most, one-1,870th of the problem of lethal violence in America. If the toll of Sept. 11 is included, jihadists still account for just over 1 percent of killings.

“y advice to the new administration would be to declare victory,”r. Kurzman said. For the average American, he added, “our odds of being victimized by a terrorist attack are infinitesimal.”

But terrorists —he root of the word means “o cause to tremble”—o not operate in the realm of dry facts and statistics. Their purpose is to terrify, and they use random and spectacular violence to do it, with an invaluable assist from the saturation coverage on cable television and news websites that such outrages inevitably draw.

To the rational calculations of Mr. Kurzman, one might simply reply with the list of American cities where horrific jihadist attacks have occurred in recent years: Boston; San Bernardino, Calif.; and Orlando, Fla. —lace names that conjure up images of ghastly wounds, bullet-ridden bodies and frightened people running for cover. In Gallup polls, the number of Americans “ery worried”r “omewhat worried”bout such attacks generally hovers between 30 and 50 percent, with understandable spikes after new attacks.

In the political realm, where emotions and symbols hold sway, Mr. Trump’ order may reassure some Americans that they are safer from terrorism, and more generally, from concerns that Muslim immigrants may bring an alien culture. (While ostensibly addressing terrorism, it also says that the United States should be protected against those with “ostile attitudes toward it and its founding principles”r those “ho do not support the Constitution.”)

The trouble with such reassurance, even if it is effective, is that it comes at a high cost, in the view of many experts on terrorism. That cost will be counted not just domestically but also abroad, where the United States relies on allies, including Muslim countries, for intelligence and other help against terrorism.

“n my opinion, this is just a huge mistake in terms of counterterrorism cooperation,”aid Daniel Benjamin, formerly the State Department’ top counterterrorism official and now a scholar at Dartmouth. “or the life of me, I don’ see why we would want to alienate the Iraqis when they are the ground force against ISIS.”

At home as well, Mr. Benjamin said, the president’ order is likely to prove counterproductive. The jihadist threat in the United States has turned out to be largely homegrown, he said, and the order will encourage precisely the resentments and anxieties on the part of Muslims that fuel, in rare cases, support for the ideology of the Islamic State or Al Qaeda.

“t sends an unmistakable message to the American Muslim community that they are facing discrimination and isolation,”r. Benjamin said. That, he said, will “eed the jihadist narrative”hat the United States is at war with Islam, potentially encouraging a few more Muslims to plot violence.

For an action aimed at terrorism, the order appeared to garner little or no support among experts and former officials of every political stripe with experience in the field. Jonathan Schanzer, the vice president for research at the conservative Foundation for the Defense of Democracies, said that if the temporary visa ban was used to review and improve immigration vetting procedures, it might be justified.

But he added that he knew of no obvious problems with those procedures, and no specific plans to address such issues over the 120-day ban. “he order appears to be based mainly on a campaign promise,”e said.

Mr. Schanzer said he was frustrated that during the Obama administration, there had been inadequate attention to the ultimate driver of refugee flows and jihadist terrorism in the United States and elsewhere. “e have several bloody, complex and interlocking conflicts in the Middle East,”e said. “t’ the job of the new administration to come up with policies that address those conflicts. Admittedly, that is not easy.”

Much easier, clearly, is issuing an executive order with political appeal and a title that seems to smack of common sense. But as the Trump administration is finding out, such pronouncements from an American president have many consequences, not all of them intended, anticipated or desired.

Follow Scott Shane on Twitter@ScottShaneNYT.

* Donald Trump’ Muslim Ban Is Cowardly and Dangerous

* ‘reams Die’or Refugees on Verge of Coming to U.S. as Trump Closes Door

* Banned From U.S.: ‘ou Need to Go Back to Your Country’

* Trump’ Immigration Ban Is Illegal

Document INHT000020170129ed1s00002



world
‘reams Die’or Refugees on Verge of Coming to U.S. as Trump Closes Door

By ROD NORDLAND, JOE COCHRANE and PATRICK KINGSLEY 
1,767 words
28 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon —ardar Hussain refused to believe it. He had been orphaned in Afghanistan by a Taliban bomb at age 13. After waiting in limbo for two years, he said he was only days away from getting on a plane to the United States when he heard that President Trump would be barring entry to refugees.

Mustafa did believe it. He teared up, saying his life was over at age 28. An Iraqi refugee in Lebanon, he thought he was so close to getting to the United States that he had gone out and bought a new shirt for his trip.

When she read on Facebook about the temporary ban, Alwia Abdullah, 43, who fled from Darfur in Sudan to Jordan with her husband and six children, got a sudden, stabbing pain in her gut, and couldn’ sleep.

“e left because we were discriminated against in Darfur,”he said. “o to be discriminated against by a U.S. president, by a nation we see our future in, is so disheartening. How do you live with that?”

They were among an estimated 110,000 people in line to be processed for resettlement in the United States during this fiscal year. In fact, they thought they had already made it through the rigorous vetting procedure and, after years of waiting, were on the verge of having their hopes realized.

Now, all are suddenly, indefinitely waiting again, barred from entry to the United States for at least four months, according to an executive order signed by Mr. Trump on Friday, with no assurances of what could happen to them next.

The order, Mr. Trump said, is a way to “eep radical Islamic terrorists out of the United States of America.”

“e don’ want them here,”e said at the Pentagon. “e want to ensure that we are not admitting into our country the very threats our soldiers are fighting overseas.”

The executive order calls for the United States’nnual refugee quota to be cut to a maximum of 50,000, compared with 85,000 allowed in during the fiscal year ending in September 2016.

Even last year’ figure was dwarfed by the historically high number of displaced people in the world, 65 million, or by the more than 1.5 million migrants and refugees arriving in European countries since 2014.

Mr. Trump’ order also suspends the entry of all Syrian refugees indefinitely, calling their arrival “etrimental to the interests of the United States.”eyond that, it suspends visas to people from Iraq, Syria, Iran, Sudan, Libya, Somalia and Yemen for 90 days.

Asked about Mr. Trump’ refugee ban, Stéhane Dujarric, the United Nations spokesman, said he hoped “t’ a temporary one.”e noted that more people were displaced around the world than ever before.

“he U.S. resettlement program is one of the most important resettlement programs the U.N. works with,”e said.

Mr. Trump’ action was the latest closed door in a world that has become increasingly unwelcome to refugees, amid rising concerns and hostility in many resettlement countries in Europe, and in countries of first refuge like Turkey and Lebanon.

For those refugees, in particular, who thought that their asylum process was over and that they would be accepted in the United States, the dismay was overwhelming this past week.

Faten Diab, 34, a former charity worker from Syria, said she had been told that she and her family would be among a relatively small number of Syrians allowed into the United States. Last year, only 10,000 had been granted that privilege, compared with 40,000 in Canada.

Ms. Diab and her husband said she fled to Turkey and applied for asylum in the United States in summer 2015, along with close friends who applied at the same time. They said the friends had received a final decision just over a week ago and had flown to America. The Diabs had reason to hope that their own number would come up any day.

Now, that may never happen. Reached by telephone in their tiny apartment in Turkey, Ms. Diab sounded distraught, as the couple’ 2-year-old daughter could be heard playing in the background.

“e are so, so, so sad,”s. Diab said, complaining that Mr. Trump’ claim that terrorists were slipping in as refugees was overblown. “he process of resettlement is long and difficult. You can say he is wrong. Because he didn’ live the application steps in all its difficulties.”

Strictly speaking, America does not actually owe anything to the Diabs from Syria or the Abdullahs from Darfur; they are just reacting to its historical promise to take the world’ “huddled masses yearning to breathe free.”

But in other countries, like Iraq, citizens who worked for the American military, government and companies were promised preferential treatment for resettlement. Many thought that the risks they took on behalf of the United States would be repaid one day with a safe haven when they needed it. Now Iraqis are also on Mr. Trump’ proscribed list.

Laith al-Samari, 37, was one of many who could not believe it. A former interpreter for the United States military, he was wounded twice in battle, in the leg and stomach, and now lives in fear of retaliation from anti-American militants in his Baghdad community. He was not ashamed to beg.

“lease Mr. President, you are the president of one of the biggest states in the world,”e said. “on’ be hasty in taking this decision. Be fair with us.”

Mustafa, the 28-year-old Iraqi, is a Shiite Muslim who worked on construction crews on American bases, mostly on fortifications. As he put it: “ made homes for them that kept them safe. I felt I was doing something good for humanity.”

But anti-Shiite militias in his neighborhood discovered what his job had been and accused him of treason. “ was beaten and shot and knifed and eventually came to Lebanon two years ago,”e said, during an interview arranged in Beirut by the International Refugee Assistance Project, a New York-based legal aid group.

After years of interviews and investigation, Mustafa said he was finally told to take his medical examination and now only needed to be given the date for his flight, to California. To get ready, Mustafa splurged at a high-end Beirut store to buy the clothes he would wear into his new life: dark green pants, a vest, a checked shirt in four colors. “ would wear the best clothes I have, and I wouldn’ take anything else with me, not even my memories,”e said.

Mustafa still has some hope that somehow exceptions will be made, which is why —ike most of the refugees interviewed for this article —e did not want his full name published.

“f I do get rejected,”e said, “’ regret ever having shaken hands with an American.”e struggled not to weep.

Sardar Hussain, 16, an ethnic Hazara boy from central Afghanistan, was rocked by disbelief.

He said that when he was 13, his father, mother and younger sister were killed when a bomb blew up a taxi that was taking his mother to a hospital. After paying a smuggling network $7,000 to get him to Australia, he was marooned en route, on the Indonesian island of Java, when Australia cracked down on boats bringing refugees there. For seven weeks, he slept on the sidewalk behind the United Nations offices in Jakarta, Indonesia. Now, after more than two years, he said, his flight to America was scheduled for Monday.

“e were given a commitment to go there,”e said, speaking softly in English at a coffee house in Jakarta, just after completing his final medical exam.

Firas al-Swiha, 23, a Syrian refugee in Turkey, went out with friends on Wednesday night to drink away his disappointment. He was a university student and opposition activist in Syria before fleeing his hometown, Raqqa, now the Islamic State’ de facto capital.

He was still looking for answers.

“s Trump trying to fight the terrorists by giving up on the victims of the very same terrorists?”e asked. “ISIS wants to destroy our lives, and now Trump declined to give us one.”

Sara, 31, a former television presenter who fled to Indonesia from Afghanistan after death threats —he Taliban and other cultural conservatives despise seeing Afghan women in public at all, let alone on television —as trying to arrive at answers of her own.

“ou just wait,”he said. “ou see how the years pass. You get older, you cannot make any plans. You watch your dreams die with every second you spend waiting.”

After three years and four months, she thought that the waiting was finally over, and that she would soon have a date when she was allowed to fly.

Now her life has been suspended for at least four more months, with no guarantee that she will still be included in the Trump administration’ much-reduced refugee quota once the visa moratorium is lifted.

“he bitter truth,”he said, “s that your whole life is dependent on a single decision of someone who doesn’ have even the slightest idea what it’ like to live as a refugee.”

Rod Nordland reported from Beirut, Joe Cochrane from Jakarta, and Patrick Kingsley from New York. Reporting was contributed by Tim Arango and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul; Zahra Nader from Kabul, Afghanistan; Rana F. Sweis from Amman, Jordan; Falih Hassan and Omar Jawoshy from Baghdad; and Sima Ghaddar from Beirut, Lebanon.

PHOTOS: Sardar Hussain, 16, who was orphaned at age 13 by a Taliban bomb in Afghanistan, was days away from boarding a plane to the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KEMAL JUFRI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Mustafa, an Iraqi refugee in Lebanon, said that the entry bar meant his life was over at age 28. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DIEGO IBARRA SANCHEZ FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

* Warm Welcome for Syrians in a Country About to Ban Them

* Trump Orders Mexican Border Wall to Be Built and Plans to Block Syrian Refugees

* \b ISIS\b0  Seems to Tailor Attacks for Different Audiences

* Afghanistan Itself Is Now Taking In the Most Afghan Migrants

* Obama to Push Refugee Aid at U.N., but Critics Say Effort Is Overdue

* Nearly Two-Thirds of Refugee Children Attend No School, U.N. Says

Document INHT000020170129ed1s0000p



U.S.
Anxiety About Muslim Refugees Is Stoked Online by the Far-Right Media

By CAITLIN DICKERSON 
1,178 words
28 January 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

Type the word refugees into Facebook and some alarming “ews”ill appear about a refugee rape crisis, a refugee flesh-eating disease epidemic and a refugee-related risk of female genital mutilation —one of it true.

For the months leading up to the presidential election, and in the days since President Trump took office, ultraconservative websites like Breitbart News and Infowars have published a cycle of eye-popping stories with misleading claims about refugees. And it is beginning to influence public perception, experts say.

That shift was evident on Friday, as many Americans heralded the news that the Trump administration intended to temporarily curb all refugee resettlement and increase the vetting of Syrians.

“here really is a kind of cultural battle going on,”aid Cecillia Wang, the deputy legal director for the American Civil Liberties Union. “here’ no question that kind of xenophobic or anti-Muslim bias is infecting our political discourse about refugees.”

Breitbart, May 31, 2016: Syrian Refugees Spreading Flesh-Eating Disease, Polio, Measles, Tuberculosis, Hepatitis

In speaking to pollsters about refugee resettlement, Americans tend to cite concerns about the country’ national security and economic health as their biggest worries, but they have also begun to point to disease or rape, experts say.

“his is something where the fear outruns the fact by a factor of 100 to 1 or even 1,000 to 1,”aid William Galston, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution who has tracked American sentiment about refugee resettlement over years.

Infowars, July 6, 2016: Muslim Refugees Causing Rape Epidemic in the U.S.

Mr. Galston said the reaction to misleading coverage of refugees was reminiscent of the wave of measures introduced in state legislatures in recent years to stop the spread of Islamic law, despite scant evidence that it has been promoted anywhere. And while he doubted that alarmist stories about refugees were powerful enough to change people’ minds, he said the coverage played to existing fears and pushed mere differences of opinion into hyperpartisan outrage.

“ think their opinions are being intensified because the intensification of contrary sentiments is increasing polarization,”r. Galston said.

Breitbart, Aug. 2, 2015: Muslim Immigration Puts Half a Million U.S. Girls at Risk of Genital Mutilation

Outside his job as a police officer in Kansas, Okla., Mike Eason begins and ends his day with the television news —irst CBS, then Fox, but never CNN, which he hates. Then, he scrolls through Facebook, where he’ read stories about refugees who commit violent crimes against women.

“t’ one of them Facebook things where you see Muslim men are attacking women, and stuff like that, and having no respect for them at all. I’e got a real issue with that,”e said. “ see story after story after story, and I don’ know how true it is.”

Mr. Eason said he was skeptical of stories by unfamiliar websites like American News, but he reads them anyway. He commented on one that was posted to Facebook:

Freedom’ Final Stand, Oct. 3, 2016: Muslim Refugee Beats and Rapes Woman in North Dakota While Yelling ‘llahu Akbar’

The post, which was shared 14,000 times, linked to a story about a case in which the authorities have not described the immigration status of the suspect, or said that he was a noncitizen. They have also discredited the claim that the man yelled “llahu akbar”uring the episode.

Nevertheless, the comment that Mr. Eason posted on the site, which he later said he could not remember making, garnered 87 likes. “f Muslims are taught hate by their religion,”e wrote, “hen all Muslims are potential terrorists and should be treated accordingly. TRUMP will stop this kind of stuff.”

Sgt. Timothy Briggeman of the Cass County Sheriff’ Office in North Dakota, which is investigating the case, said such stories and responses often appeared on social media when a person in his jurisdiction with an Arabic-sounding name is charged with a crime.

“o be honest,”e said, “t’ embarrassing and it’ disheartening when anyone with a name of such ends up in the news —he comments that get thrown around. That seems to be the No. 1 remark: ‘end them back and get rid of them,’nd, ‘e don’ need them.’”

Worries that refugees might be radicalized have also been amplified on the internet. This story was shared at least 1,400 times:

American News, Jan. 11, 2016: Al Qaeda Terrorists That Killed Soldiers Have Entered the U.S. Disguised as Refugees

And this one, posted by The Daily Caller, was shared more than 3,000 times, despite linking to a story with no evidence of a cover-up:

The Daily Caller, Dec. 7, 2015: Homeland Security Chair: Obama Covering Up Evidence ISIS Is Targeting Refugee Plan

The actual number of refugees who have become extremists in the United States has been estimated at between three and 12 —ut of the more than 800,000 who have resettled here since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

The online stories about refugees range from outright fake news to those based on a grain of truth and then stretched out of proportion. For example, the Breitbart article about genital mutilation was based on a study that estimated that a half-million women currently living in the United States have had their genitals mutilated. But most of them were immigrants who had fled here because of such treatment in their home countries.

Mr. Eason, the police officer in Oklahoma, said that part of the challenge for him in evaluating stories on the internet is that many are written with headlines that appeal to common sense.

He pointed to the vetting of Syrian refugees, for example, which is currently under review as part of Mr. Trump’ executive order. As The New York Timeshas reported, the process involves dozens of layers of evaluation and can last up to two years.

But Mr. Eason has read stories that suggest the conditions in Syria are so bad that it is impossible to verify refugees’tories, which has made him worry that no level of scrutiny will be sufficient.

“hey were saying with them coming from these areas, it’ hard to vet them,”r. Eason said. “nd it makes sense.”

Follow Caitlin Dickerson on Twitter: @itscaitlinhd. For breaking news and in-depth reporting, follow @NYTNational.

Correction: February 9, 2017, Thursday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Jan. 29 about the anxiety toward Muslim refugees that is being stoked by the far-right media misidentified the source of a widely shared article claiming that members of Al Qaeda had entered the United States disguised as refugees. It was published by American News, not by Conservative Tribune.

Demonstrators on Wednesday at Washington Square Park in New York protested President Trump’ order cracking down on immigration. | Andres Kudacki/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170128ed1s002pc



News Analysis
U.S.; Politics
Immigration Ban Is Unlikely to Reduce Terrorist Threat, Experts Say

By SCOTT SHANE 
1,384 words
28 January 2017
22:07
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

Rarely does an executive order announce a more straightforward and laudable purpose than the one President Trump signed on Friday: “rotecting the Nation From Foreign Terrorist Entry Into the United States.”ut the president’ directive is unlikely to significantly reduce the terrorist threat in the United States, which has been a minuscule part of the overall toll of violence since 2001.

Many experts believe the order’ unintended consequences will make the threat worse.

While the order requires the Department of Homeland Security to issue a report within 180 days providing detailed statistics on foreign nationals who commit acts of violence, terrorism researchers have already produced rich and revealing data. For instance, since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, no one has been killed in the United States in a terrorist attack by anyone who emigrated from or whose parents emigrated from Syria, Iraq, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan and Yemen, the seven countries targeted in the order’ 90-day visa ban, according to Charles Kurzman, a sociology professor at the University of North Carolina.

Of Muslim Americans involved in violent extremism of any kind —or instance, charged with plotting terrorism or supporting a terrorist group —nly 23 percent had family backgrounds in those countries, said Mr. Kurzman, who just published the latest of his annual studies of Muslim Americans and terrorism.

The larger point of experts is that jihadist attacks garner news attention that far outstrips their prevalence in the United States, and the president’ order appears to address not a rational calculation of risks but the visceral fears that terrorists set out to inflame.

There was a random quality to the list of countries: It excluded Saudi Arabia and Egypt, where the founders of Al Qaeda and many other jihadist groups have originated. Also excluded are Pakistan and Afghanistan, where persistent extremism and decades of war have produced militants who have occasionally reached the United States. Notably, perhaps, the list avoided Muslim countries where Mr. Trump has major business ventures.

Nor did the list include the European countries where disenfranchised Muslim communities have become hotbeds of militancy, leading to major attacks in Paris and Brussels in the name of the Islamic State. Because no visas are required for travel by most European citizens to the United States, and because of the volume of tourism and business, restricting travel from Europe would have been far more difficult and consequential than banning it from only the seven countries named.

By Mr. Kurzman’ count, 123 people have been killed in the United States by Muslim terrorists since the 2001 attacks —ut of a total of more than 230,000 killings, by gang members, drug dealers, angry spouses, white supremacists, psychopaths, drunks and people of every description. So the order addresses, at most, one-1,870th of the problem of lethal violence in America. If the toll of Sept. 11 is included, jihadists still account for just over 1 percent of killings.

“y advice to the new administration would be to declare victory,”r. Kurzman said. For the average American, he added, “our odds of being victimized by a terrorist attack are infinitesimal.”

But terrorists —he root of the word means “o cause to tremble”—o not operate in the realm of dry facts and statistics. Their purpose is to terrify, and they use random and spectacular violence to do it, with an invaluable assist from the saturation coverage on cable television and news websites that such outrages inevitably draw.

To the rational calculations of Mr. Kurzman, one might simply reply with the list of American cities where horrific jihadist attacks have occurred in recent years: Boston; San Bernardino, Calif.; and Orlando, Fla. —lace names that conjure up images of ghastly wounds, bullet-ridden bodies and frightened people running for cover. In Gallup polls, the number of Americans “ery worried”r “omewhat worried”bout such attacks generally hovers between 30 and 50 percent, with understandable spikes after new attacks.

In the political realm, where emotions and symbols hold sway, Mr. Trump’ order may reassure some Americans that they are safer from terrorism, and more generally, from concerns that Muslim immigrants may bring an alien culture. (While ostensibly addressing terrorism, it also says that the United States should be protected against those with “ostile attitudes toward it and its founding principles”r those “ho do not support the Constitution.”)

The trouble with such reassurance, even if it is effective, is that it comes at a high cost, in the view of many experts on terrorism. That cost will be counted not just domestically but also abroad, where the United States relies on allies, including Muslim countries, for intelligence and other help against terrorism.

“n my opinion, this is just a huge mistake in terms of counterterrorism cooperation,”aid Daniel Benjamin, formerly the State Department’ top counterterrorism official and now a scholar at Dartmouth. “or the life of me, I don’ see why we would want to alienate the Iraqis when they are the ground force against ISIS.”

At home as well, Mr. Benjamin said, the president’ order is likely to prove counterproductive. The jihadist threat in the United States has turned out to be largely homegrown, he said, and the order will encourage precisely the resentments and anxieties on the part of Muslims that fuel, in rare cases, support for the ideology of the Islamic State or Al Qaeda.

“t sends an unmistakable message to the American Muslim community that they are facing discrimination and isolation,”r. Benjamin said. That, he said, will “eed the jihadist narrative”hat the United States is at war with Islam, potentially encouraging a few more Muslims to plot violence.

For an action aimed at terrorism, the order appeared to garner little or no support among experts and former officials of every political stripe with experience in the field. Jonathan Schanzer, the vice president for research at the conservative Foundation for the Defense of Democracies, said that if the temporary visa ban was used to review and improve immigration vetting procedures, it might be justified.

But he added that he knew of no obvious problems with those procedures, and no specific plans to address such issues during the temporary restrictions on visitors and refugees. “he order appears to be based mainly on a campaign promise,”e said.

Mr. Schanzer said he was frustrated that during the Obama administration, there had been inadequate attention to the ultimate driver of refugee flows and jihadist terrorism in the United States and elsewhere. “e have several bloody, complex and interlocking conflicts in the Middle East,”e said. “t’ the job of the new administration to come up with policies that address those conflicts. Admittedly, that is not easy.”

Much easier, clearly, is issuing an executive order with political appeal and a title that seems to smack of common sense. But as the Trump administration is finding out, such pronouncements from an American president have many consequences, not all of them intended, anticipated or desired.

Follow Scott Shane on Twitter@ScottShaneNYT.

Correction: January 31, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: A news analysis article on Sunday about the unlikelihood that President Trump’ executive order on immigration would reduce the terrorist threat misstated the length of the order’ ban on all visitors from Syria, Iraq, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan and Yemen. It is 90 days, not 120 days. (All refugees —ncluding from those seven countries —re subject to the 120-day ban.)

* Donald Trump’ Muslim Ban Is Cowardly and Dangerous

* ‘reams Die’or Refugees on Verge of Coming to U.S. as Trump Closes Door

* Banned From U.S.: ‘ou Need to Go Back to Your Country’

* Trump’ Immigration Ban Is Illegal

President Trump with Vice President Mike Pence and Jim Mattis, the secretary of defense. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | After signing three more executive orders on Saturday, President Trump told reporters that Friday's order on immigration was "not a Muslim ban" and was "working out very nicely," pointing to airports where travelers and refugees from seven predominantly Muslim countries had been detained. | By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS 

Document NYTFEED020170128ed1s005k1



U.S.; Politics
Experts and Insiders Question Trump’ Use of Pentagon for Immigrant Ban

By HELENE COOPER 
1,047 words
28 January 2017
23:34
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —ix months ago, Jim Mattis stood at a lectern at the Hoover Institution, a conservative think tank at Stanford University, and sharply criticized Donald J. Trump’ campaign proposal for a ban on Muslim immigration, saying that such a move would distress American allies around the world.

“his kind of thing is causing us great damage right now, and it’ sending shock waves through the international system,”r. Mattis said.

On Friday, in a Pentagon room dedicated to men and women who have received the country’ highest military decoration, the Medal of Honor, Mr. Mattis, now the country’ defense secretary, stood behind his new commander in chief, President Trump, as he signed an executive order on immigration. The order suspended entry of all refugees to the United States for 120 days, barred Syrian refugees indefinitely and blocked entry for 90 days for citizens of seven predominantly Muslim countries. It also allows Christians to be granted priority over Muslims.

For Mr. Mattis, it was an uncomfortable end to a tumultuous first week as defense secretary that found him choosing which battles to fight and which to step away from.

He won a huge one on Friday, when Mr. Trump, in a remarkable show of deference, said that he would let Mr. Mattis “verride”is view that torture could be effective in interrogations. Mr. Mattis is a strong opponent of such techniques.

But Mr. Mattis was also outflanked by the White House, which chose the Pentagon to unveil Mr. Trump’ executive order on immigration, a sharply divisive move in front of military leaders who view themselves as apolitical.

In a building where uniformed men and women work alongside civilian officials, several rank-and-file workers expressed outrage that Mr. Trump would use the Defense Department, home to a military that includes people of many faiths, including Islam, to announce that he was blocking visa applicants from Iraq, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan and Yemen.

“sing the military as a backdrop for politically charged activities is bad for the military,”aid Kori Schake, a Hoover Institution fellow who edited the new book “arriors and Citizens: American Views of Our Military”ith Mr. Mattis. She added that associating the military with “nconstitutional policies is especially damaging, since our military take their oath to the Constitution, not to the president.”

The president cited the Sept. 11 attacks in his decision to issue the immigration restrictions, which he cast in national security terms. “e will never forget the lessons of 9/11,”e said, nor the people “ho lost their lives at the Pentagon.”

But none of the 19 terrorists who were on the planes that crashed into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon and in Shanksville, Pa., were from any of the countries on Mr. Trump’ visa ban list.

Instead, Iraq, where the American military is fighting with Iraqi security forces against the Islamic State, is among the countries on the list. Military officials have repeatedly called the nation an American ally.

“fter all the money and lives spent in Iraq and Afghanistan, the Pentagon knows better than anyone that terrorism is a problem of a small number of enemies embedded in a population of people you need to win over,”aid Jon B. Alterman, director of the Middle East Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “ don’ see the part of this that’ meant to win over anyone.”

Two people close to Mr. Mattis, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they said they were wary of undercutting him, said he was still sharply opposed to the Muslim ban. But he spent this week battling the White House on other issues, including the establishment of “afe zones”n Syria, something the Pentagon has long opposed because it would deepen American involvement in the war there, out of the executive order.

Military officials sought to distance the Pentagon from the immigration ban, and focused instead on the second executive order that Mr. Trump signed at the Pentagon, which called for plans to improve military readiness. Mr. Mattis, standing behind Mr. Trump, took only the ceremonial pen that Mr. Trump used to sign the military readiness order. Mr. Trump gave the other one to Vice President Mike Pence.

Afterward, the Defense Department put out a statement about Mr. Trump’ visit to the Pentagon that pointedly made no mention of the Muslim ban. “he secretary shares the president’ goal of ensuring our military leaders have the support they need to accelerate the campaign against ISIS, and to build combat readiness now and for the future,”Capt. Jeff Davis, the Pentagon spokesman, said in the statement.

Last week, the Defense Department posted a message on Twitter about a former refugee who became a Marine. “rom refugee to #Marine. @USMC Cpl Ali J. Mohammed takes the fight to the doorstep of those who cast his family out,”t read.

From refugee to #Marine. @USMC Cpl Ali J. Mohammed takes the fight to the doorstep of those who cast his family out.https://t.co/oSXWGrzsL7pic.twitter.com/UVlWsaESic —.S. Dept of Defense (@DeptofDefense) January 25, 2017

A military official noted on Saturday that the American military, which uses translators and fixers in Iraq and Syria, two of the countries on the banned list, would find it harder to recruit, since the Pentagon has long offered the promise of refuge in America.

“t’ very difficult for people to cooperate with the United States military when they feel humiliated by the United States,”aid Vali Nasr, dean of the School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University.

“he Iraqi situation is the most grievous,”r. Nasr added. “e are fighting a war with the Iraqis, against ISIS. How can we fight with them when the message from the White House is discriminatory?”

* A Sweeping Order Unlikely to Reduce Terrorist Threat

* Banned From U.S.: ‘ou Need to Go Back to Your Country’

* ‘reams Die’or Refugees on Verge of Coming to U.S. as Trump Closes Door

* Anxiety About Muslim Refugees Is Stoked Online by the Far-Right Media

Document NYTFEED020170128ed1s005v5



World; Middle East
‘reams Die’or Refugees on Verge of Coming to U.S. as Trump Closes Door

By ROD NORDLAND, JOE COCHRANE and PATRICK KINGSLEY 
1,764 words
28 January 2017
17:08
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon —ardar Hussain refused to believe it. He had been orphaned in Afghanistan by a Taliban bomb at age 13. After waiting in limbo for two years, he said he was only days away from getting on a plane to the United States when he heard that President Trump would be barring entry to refugees.

Mustafa did believe it. He teared up, saying his life was over at age 28. An Iraqi refugee in Lebanon, he thought he was so close to getting to the United States that he had gone out and bought a new shirt for his trip.

When she read on Facebook about the temporary ban, Alwia Abdullah, 43, who fled from Darfur in Sudan to Jordan with her husband and six children, got a sudden, stabbing pain in her gut, and couldn’ sleep.

“e left because we were discriminated against in Darfur,”he said. “o to be discriminated against by a U.S. president, by a nation we see our future in, is so disheartening. How do you live with that?”

They were among an estimated 110,000 people in line to be processed for resettlement in the United States during this fiscal year. In fact, they thought they had already made it through the rigorous vetting procedure and, after years of waiting, were on the verge of having their hopes realized.

Now, all are suddenly, indefinitely waiting again, barred from entry to the United States for at least four months, according to an executive order signed by Mr. Trump on Friday, with no assurances of what could happen to them next.

The order, Mr. Trump said, was a way to “eep radical Islamic terrorists out of the United States of America.”

“e don’ want them here,”e said at the Pentagon. “e want to ensure that we are not admitting into our country the very threats our soldiers are fighting overseas.”

The executive order calls for the United States’nnual refugee quota to be cut to a maximum of 50,000, compared with 85,000 allowed in during the fiscal year ending in September 2016.

Even last year’ figure was dwarfed by the historically high number of displaced people in the world, 65 million, or by the more than 1.5 million migrants and refugees arriving in European countries since 2014.

Mr. Trump’ order also suspends the entry of all Syrian refugees indefinitely, calling their arrival “etrimental to the interests of the United States.”eyond that, it suspends visas to people from Iraq, Syria, Iran, Sudan, Libya, Somalia and Yemen for 90 days.

Asked about Mr. Trump’ refugee ban, Stéhane Dujarric, the United Nations spokesman, said he hoped “t’ a temporary one.”e noted that more people were displaced around the world than ever before.

“he U.S. resettlement program is one of the most important resettlement programs the U.N. works with,”e said.

Mr. Trump’ action was the latest closed door in a world that has become increasingly unwelcome to refugees, amid rising concerns and hostility in many resettlement countries in Europe, and in countries of first refuge like Turkey and Lebanon.

For those refugees, in particular, who thought their asylum process was over and that they would be accepted in the United States, the dismay was overwhelming this week.

Faten Diab, 34, a former charity worker from Syria, said she had been told that she and her family would be among a relatively small number of Syrians allowed into the United States. Last year, only 10,000 had been granted that privilege, compared with 40,000 in Canada.

Ms. Diab and her husband said she fled to Turkey and applied for asylum in the United States in summer 2015, along with close friends who applied at the same time. They said the friends had received a final decision just over a week ago and had flown to America. The Diabs had reason to hope that their own number would come up any day.

Now, that may never happen. Reached by telephone in their tiny apartment in Turkey, Ms. Diab sounded distraught, as the couple’ 2-year-old daughter could be heard playing in the background.

“e are so, so, so sad,”s. Diab said, complaining that Mr. Trump’ claim that terrorists were slipping in as refugees was overblown. “he process of resettlement is long and difficult. You can say he is wrong. Because he didn’ live the application steps in all its difficulties.”

Strictly speaking, America does not actually owe anything to the Diabs from Syria or the Abdullahs from Darfur; they are just reacting to its historical promise to take the world’ “huddled masses yearning to breathe free.”

But in other countries, like Iraq, citizens who worked for the American military, government and companies were promised preferential treatment for resettlement. Many thought that the risks they took on behalf of the United States would be repaid one day with a safe haven when they needed it. Now Iraqi citizens are also on Mr. Trump’ proscribed list.

Laith al-Samari, 37, was one of many who could not believe it. A former interpreter for the United States military, he was wounded twice in battle, in the leg and stomach, and now lived in fear of retaliation from anti-American militants in his Baghdad community. He was not ashamed to beg.

“lease Mr. President, you are the president of one of the biggest states in the world,”e said. “on’ be hasty in taking this decision, be fair with us.”

Mustafa, the 28-year-old Iraqi, is a Shiite Muslim who worked on construction crews on American bases, mostly on fortifications. As he put it: “ made homes for them that kept them safe. I felt I was doing something good for humanity.”

But anti-Shiite militias in his neighborhood discovered what his job had been and accused him of treason. “ was beaten and shot and knifed and eventually came to Lebanon two years ago,”e said, during an interview arranged in Beirut by the International Refugee Assistance Project, a New York-based legal aid group.

After years of interviews and investigation, Mustafa said he was finally told to take his medical examination and now only needed to be given the date for his flight, to California. To get ready, Mustafa splurged at a high-end Beirut store to buy the clothes he would wear into his new life: dark green pants, a vest, a checked shirt in four colors. “ would wear the best clothes I have, and I wouldn’ take anything else with me, not even my memories,”e said.

Mustafa still has some hope that somehow exceptions will be made, which is why —ike most of the refugees interviewed for this article —e did not want his full name published.

“f I do get rejected,”e said, “’ regret ever having shaken hands with an American.”e struggled not to weep.

Sardar Hussain, 16, an ethnic Hazara boy from central Afghanistan, was rocked by disbelief.

He said that when he was 13, his father, mother and younger sister were killed when a bomb blew up a taxi that was taking his mother to a hospital. After paying a smuggling network $7,000 to get him to Australia, he was marooned en route, on the Indonesian island of Java, when Australia cracked down on boats bringing refugees there. For seven weeks, he slept on the sidewalk behind the United Nations offices in Jakarta, Indonesia. Now, after more than two years, he said, his flight to America was scheduled for Monday.

“e were given a commitment to go there,”e said, speaking softly in English at a coffee house in Jakarta, just after completing his final medical exam.

Firas al-Swiha, 23, a Syrian refugee in Turkey, went out with friends Wednesday night to drink away his disappointment. He was a university student and opposition activist in Syria before fleeing his hometown, Raqqa, now the Islamic State’ capital.

He was still looking for answers.

“s Trump trying to fight the terrorists by giving up on the victims of the very same terrorists?”e asked. “ISIS wants to destroy our lives, and now Trump declined to give us one.”

Sara, 31, a former television presenter who fled to Indonesia from Afghanistan after death threats —Taliban and other cultural conservatives despise seeing Afghan women in public at all, let alone on television —as trying to arrive at answers of her own.

“ou just wait,”he said. “ou see how the years pass. You get older, you cannot make any plans. You watch your dreams die with every second you spend waiting.”

After three years and four months, she thought the waiting was finally over, and she would soon have a date when she was allowed to fly.

Now her life has been suspended for at least four more months, with no guarantee that she will still be included in the Trump administration’ much reduced refugee quota once the visa moratorium is lifted.

“he bitter truth is that your whole life is dependent on a single decision of someone who doesn’ have even the slightest idea what it’ like to live as a refugee.”

Rod Nordland reported from Beirut, Joe Cochrane from Jakarta, and Patrick Kingsley from New York. Reporting was contributed by Tim Arango and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul; Zahra Nader from Kabul, Afghanistan; Rana F. Sweis from Amman, Jordan; Falih Hassan and Omar Jawoshy from Baghdad; and Sima Ghaddar from Beirut, Lebanon.

* Trump Orders Mexican Border Wall to Be Built and Plans to Block Syrian Refugees

* \b ISIS\b0  Seems to Tailor Attacks for Different Audiences

* Afghanistan Itself Is Now Taking In the Most Afghan Migrants

* Obama to Push Refugee Aid at U.N., but Critics Say Effort Is Overdue

* Nearly Two-Thirds of Refugee Children Attend No School, U.N. Says

Sardar Hussain, 16, in front of the United Nations office for refugees in Jakarta, Indonesia. The Afghan boy, who was orphaned by a Taliban bomb, was days away from boarding a plane to the United States. | Kemal Jufri for The New York Times | Mustafa, an Iraqi refugee living in Beirut, Lebanon. He worked on construction crews on American bases. He teared up as he said his life was over at age 28. | Diego Ibarra Sanchez for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170128ed1s003e9



National Desk; SECTA
Travelers Express Shock and Bewilderment Over U.S. Visa Crackdown

By THOMAS ERDBRINK and JEFFREY GETTLEMAN; Thomas Erdbrink reported from Tehran, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Mogadishu, Somalia. Rick Gladstone contributed reporting from New York. 
1,281 words
28 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
17
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

TEHRAN -- Families, businesspeople, athletes and tourists from seven countries in the Middle East and Africa found their travel plans -- and even their futures -- in a state of suspension on Friday after President Trump signed an executive order temporarily barring thousands from obtaining visas to travel to the United States.

The order is expected to freeze almost all travel to the United States by citizens from the Muslim-majority countries of Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen for at least 90 days. Three of those countries are considered sponsors of terrorism (Iran, Sudan and Syria), and three are designated countries of concern (Libya, Somalia and Yemen).

Passport-holders from those countries, who have American visas but are outside the United States, will not be permitted to return.

''We only want to admit those who will support our country and love deeply our people,'' Mr. Trump said on Friday before signing the order at the Pentagon. ''We will never forget the lessons of 9/11, nor the heroes who lost their lives at the Pentagon.''

(The 19 hijackers implicated in the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attack came from Egypt, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. None of those countries will be subject to what Mr. Trump described as ''new vetting measures.'')

During the 90-day period, the Trump administration will assess if the foreign governments on the list are providing enough information about citizens seeking visas to enable the United States to assess whether they pose a terrorism risk. If the governments do not comply, they will be given 60 days to do so; failing that, their citizens will be barred from entering the United States.

Government reaction to the order has been cautious. But there is little doubt that the demand for information will be a challenge for Iran, which sends far more people to the United States each year, around 35,000, than any other country on the list.

While Iran willingly allows its citizens to travel to the United States, it is ideologically opposed to sharing information with Washington. But if it does not, many of its citizens will be cut off from visiting relatives who are among the estimated one million Iranian-Americans living in America.

The visa ban will provide an early indication of where relations between Tehran and the Trump administration are headed, one analyst said.

''Trump will regard the Iranian reaction as a test,'' said Farshad Ghorbanpour, who is close to the government of President Hassan Rouhani. ''If Iran doesn't comply, they won't do so either on other issues. We will see in 30 days.''

Another analyst doubted the government would comply with the order.

''We are not obliged to give information about our citizens to the Trump administration,'' said Hamidreza Taraghi, considered a hard-liner. ''Such a move would be unjustifiable.''

In the United States, Americans of Iranian descent expressed shock and dismay at news of Mr. Trump's impending policy change, and were particularly concerned about their relatives and friends in Iran.

Trita Parsi, president of the National Iranian American Council, a Washington-based advocacy group, said many Iranian citizens with valid green cards and American visas were distraught. Those outside the United States are fretting they will not be allowed in, and those already in the country fear they will not be able to leave, even temporarily, because they will be barred from returning.

''There is a sense of bewilderment, as well as a sense of injustice,'' over why Iran was even included on the list of targeted countries, Mr. Parsi said. No Iranian has been accused of an attack on the American homeland. By contrast, he said, the Sept. 11 attackers included citizens from countries which are not on the list -- and ''the United States has produced more ISIS fighters than Iran has.''

Iran's most popular actress, Taraneh Alidoosti, announced on Twitter that she was canceling her trip to the Academy Awards ceremony in Los Angeles on Feb. 26, after reports that Mr. Trump was about to sign the sweeping executive order.

Ms. Alidoosti plays a leading role in ''The Salesman,'' directed by the acclaimed Iranian director Asghar Farhadi and nominated for best foreign film. She almost certainly could have obtained a visa as a ''culturally unique artist,'' but said she no longer felt like making the trip.

''This is not about me or the Academy Awards, it's about having a discussion about this decision,'' Ms. Alidoosti said. ''This is such a bizarre ban, it is uprooting people's lives in ways not imaginable.''

In 2015, according to the Department of Homeland Security, a total of 35,266 nonimmigrant visas were granted to Iranians to enter the United States, compared with 21,381 for Iraq; 16,010 for Syria; 5,549 for Yemen; 4,792 for Sudan; 2,879 for Libya and 359 for Somalia.

As there is no American embassy or consulate in Iran, Iranians must travel to Ankara, Turkey, Dushanbe in Tajikistan or to Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, to apply for a visa. The State Department says that more than 40 percent of all applications are rejected. There are numerous agencies in Iran and other countries that mediate and assist Iranians seeking appointments.

''Let's hope this is fake news,'' said Ali Reza Falahati, who runs a mediation agency in Ankara. ''People are constantly calling to ask us if their appointments are canceled. They paid visa fees, $160, and booked tickets and hotels. I just hope this will be all right.''

One woman in Tehran, a 28-year-old restaurant manager, nearly broke down in tears when hearing news of the ban.

She said she had been waiting for a green card and that she and her husband had been planning for years to move to Orlando, Fla., where her mother, father and brother live. They even postponed having a baby, she said, and now regretted having waited for so long.

The effects of the measure were felt in Africa, too.

Many people in Mogadishu, Somalia, used the same word to describe Mr. Trump. ''He's a dabaal,'' said Guled Hassan, a Somali university student. ''Dabaal'' is the Somali word for a fool.

On Thursday, Mr. Hussan and his friends, who were hanging out in a park near Mogadishu's crumbling seashore, slurping mango shakes, were paying extra close attention to the news streaming into their phones. Just about all of them had heard that Mr. Trump might ban visas for Somalis.

Just about all of them said they wanted to go to the United States, and they mostly agreed the visa ban was ''stupid'' and "unfair.''

No Somalis doubt that their country has a terrorism problem. Just the day before, more than a dozen people were killed in a double bombing at a Mogadishu hotel. The Shabab, a Somali militant group, took credit for the attack and remains one of the world's most bloodthirsty and dangerous terrorist organizations, having killed thousands across several countries in eastern Africa.

But the consensus was that Mr. Trump was punishing all Somalis for the potential misdeeds of a few. ''He won the election by saying he would chase away black people,'' said Bilal Guled Mohamed, a college student.

Another young man, Abdul Karim Hilowle, asked, ''What's the difference between Somalis already in the U.S. and those who want to go now?''

Follow Thomas Erdbrink @ThomasErdbrink and Jeffrey Gettleman @gettleman on Twitter.

Document NYTF000020170128ed1s0005r



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
The Closing of Trump's America

By ROGER COHEN 
908 words
28 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
21
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Donald Trump is an ahistorical man. He knows nothing of European history and cares less, as his cavalier trashing of the alliance and union that ushered the Continent from its darkest hours demonstrates.

He knows little enough of American history to have chosen as his rallying cry ''America First,'' a slogan with a past clouded by allies-be-damned isolationism at the start of World War II. (Or perhaps that's why he embraced it.)

The president does not even know the history of the C.I.A., as his self-regarding speech before the hallowed Memorial Wall showed. This was desecration of patriotic sacrifice through advanced narcissistic disorder.

He called the speech a ''home run.''

Great. Terrific. Phenomenal. Tremendous. Fabulous. Beautiful. How Trump has hollowed out these words. How arid, even nauseating, he has made them. They mean nothing. They are space-fillers issuing with a thudding regularity from his uncurious mind, and in the end of course they are all about him. Emptying words of meaning is an essential step on the road to autocratic rule. People need to lose their bearings before they prostrate themselves.

From Trump's White House there now seeps a kind of ignorance mixed with vulgarity and topped with meanness that I find impossible to wash from my skin. I wake up to its oleaginous texture.

This is worse than had seemed possible: Trump's inexhaustible obsession with the crowd size at the inauguration; his constant untruths; his perverse inability to accept that he won the election, to the point that he wants to investigate the popular vote that he lost; his startling lust for torture, walls, banishment and carnage.

''The world is a total mess,'' he told David Muir of ABC. Funny, I travel the world and that was not my impression a week ago.

The president does not like Muslims. That, too, is clear. It was obvious when he called during the campaign for a temporary ban on Muslims entering the United States. It was obvious when he showed contempt for the parents of a fallen Muslim American soldier killed in Iraq. It is obvious now as he attempts to justify a planned suspension of visas for Syrians, Iranians, Iraqis and citizens of four other majority Muslim Middle Eastern and African countries, as well as a temporary ban on almost all refugees.

A rough translation of ''America First'' is Muslims last. ''It's not the Muslim ban,'' Trump insisted to Muir. No. It's just a ban on lots of Muslims.

Trump said, in the ABC interview, that the people to be barred ''are going to come in and cause us tremendous problems.'' He declared: ''They're ISIS.''

There is no credible evidence for this wild claim, a smear on entire populations. (Saudi Arabia, the source of most 9/11 terrorists, is unsurprisingly not on the list.)

In their overwhelming majority refugees are fleeing violence in their homelands, not plotting it against the United States. They do not put their little children in dinghies on the high seas because they have a choice but because they have no choice.

Screening to get into the United States is already rigorous, one reason only a tiny fraction of some 5 million Syrian refugees have come here.

A Cato Institute study of refugees admitted to the United States between 1975 and 2015 found that the chance of an American being killed in a terrorist attack committed by a refugee is 1 in 3.64 billion.

This is policy fed by anger and prejudice, not reason. The wall announcement has already provoked a damaging clash with Mexico. The proposed visa and refugee measures are not about keeping America safe. They are conceived to nurture an atmosphere of nationalist xenophobia.

Trump has been right to call jihadi Islamist terrorism by its name. But conflating a religion of 1.6 billion people with it is no way to fight it. As for his promise of safe areas within Syria, we will see.

I am lucky enough to live in Brooklyn Heights with a view out over the East River to lower Manhattan and the Statue of Liberty. So while watching President Donald Trump's dark inaugural speech a week ago I was able at the same time to glance out at the torch that symbolizes American openness and generosity of spirit.

As Trump's ''AMERICA FIRST,'' ''AMERICA FIRST'' echoed across my living room I thought of Emma Lazarus' words inscribed on the pedestal of the statue:

''Give me your tired, your poor,

Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,

The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.''

Friedrich Trump, a penniless German immigrant, was one of those ''huddled masses'' back in 1885. Lucky he did not attempt to enter the America taking shape under his grandson.

Over time, but not without struggle, I believe the ideals represented by the torch will prove stronger than Trump's fear-filled jingoistic darkness. America cannot be itself without these ideals, and Americans will fight to preserve them. It is, after all, how they became who they are.

You can follow me on Twitter (@NYTimesCohen) or join me on Facebook.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020170128ed1s0003n



News Analysis
World; Middle East
Fears That Trump’ Visa Ban Betrays Friends and Bolsters Enemies

By DECLAN WALSH 
1,565 words
28 January 2017
03:07
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

CAIRO —cross the Muslim world, the refrain was resounding: President Trump’ freeze on refugee arrivals and visa requests from seven predominantly Muslim countries will have major diplomatic repercussions, worsen perceptions of Americans and offer a propaganda boost to the terrorist groups Mr. Trump says he is targeting.

Mr. Trump’ stance has been evident since the early days of his campaign, when he advocated a “complete and total shutdown”f all Muslims entering the United States.

President Trump has since softened his language, casting his order on Friday as a way to keep terrorists, not Muslims, out of the United States.

“e don’ want them here,”r. Trump said Friday, as he signed the order at the Pentagon. “e want to ensure that we are not admitting into our country the very threats our soldiers are fighting overseas.”

But in interviews with dozens of officials, analysts and ordinary citizens across Muslim-majority countries, there was overwhelming agreement that the order issued Friday signaled a provocation: a sign that the American president sees Islam itself as the problem.

“ think this is going to alienate the whole Muslim world,”aid Mouwafak al-Rubaie, a lawmaker and former Iraqi national security adviser in Iraq.

“errorists can say, ‘ee, their aim is not terror but Muslims,’”aid Ilter Turan, a professor of international relations at Bilgi University in Istanbul.

For years, American policy in much of the Muslim world has been an exercise in pragmatism, framed by a transactional ethos and the bloodshed of several wars.

Yet even as President George W. Bush and then President Barack Obama launched military action or covert strikes, they publicly stressed their commitment to religious tolerance, and that there was no American war on Islam.

Now, according to some of America’ most experienced veterans of Arab diplomacy, that important distinction has been compromised —nd along with it America’ relationship with the very people it is seeking to befriend.

“he Islamic State says it is leading the war against the U.S.,”aid Ryan C. Crocker, who served as the United States ambassador to five Muslim countries, including Afghanistan, Iraq and Lebanon, between 1990 and 2012. “ow it only has to pump out our press releases to prove that.”

Mr. Trump’ executive order will alienate the pro-Western elites that Americans turn to for help in Muslim countries, Mr. Crocker said. And it broke promises to people who have risked their lives to help American soldiers or diplomats.

“ou know, we can be cynical about these things, but values count,”r. Crocker said. “his is a core identity of ours that we are repudiating in a very callous fashion. What do we do —et a new inscription on the Statue of Liberty?”

The ban on entry to the United States is expected to affect citizens of Syria, Iran, Iraq, Somalia, Sudan, Libya and Yemen, who will be prohibited from entering the country for 90 days until the Trump administration tightens up visa controls that many feel are already excessively stringent.

But even in countries not directly affected by the ban, it sent a dispiriting signal.

“t gives the impression that America is no longer the country it used to be,”aid Ammar Ali Hassan, a prominent Egyptian novelist. “t is no longer open to skilled people from across the world. It is no longer the land of dreams.”

Muslims in many Western countries have felt the brunt of paranoia and racial discrimination as Islamic State attacks have continued in the past year and the public furor over immigration has grown.

In France, armed policemen confronted a Muslim woman on a beach and forced her to remove her clothing as part of a ban on burka-like swimsuits. Hate speech against Muslims soared in Britain after the vote in June to leave the European Union. There have been numerous reports of Muslims being harassed in the United States since Mr. Trump’ election.

Now Muslims from abroad face the prospect of “xtreme vetting”o enter the country —f they can secure a visa at all.

On Wednesday, Mr. Trump, in his first television interview as president, framed his policy in the tones of a wider religious conflict when he referred to the Islamic State as a product of the Middle Ages that singles out Christians for execution, though the group has killed countless Muslims around the world.

On Friday, Mr. Trump said that once the United States resumed the intake of refugees, Christians would receive priority. Until recently, “f you were a Muslim you could come in, but if you were a Christian, it was almost impossible,”e told Christian Broadcasting News.

In fact, the United States accepts tens of thousands of Christian refugees. According to the Pew Research Center, almost as many Christian refugees (37,521) were admitted as Muslim refugees (38,901) in the 2016 fiscal year.

Many Muslims have long viewed America’ vision of itself as hypocritical and its idealism as degraded. After years of grinding war in countries like Afghanistan and Iraq, there is a growing belief that even many Americans do not truly believe talk about America being a “hining city on the hill”hat seeks to do good in the world.

“rump has dispensed with the politeness, but that wasn’ fooling people before,”aid Karl Sharro, a Lebanese-Iraqi architect and commentator who is based in London. “n being honest about these draconian measures, a lot of people will say that at least we know where we stand now.”

In a recent article for Politico, Mr. Sharro drew on the growing similarities between the United States’olitical scene and that of many Arab countries, with allegations of vote rigging, feuds involving the security services, accusations of foreign meddling and vicious arguments between the country’ leader and the media.

“ just collected what everyone is saying in Arab countries,”e said. “t’ a kind of schadenfreude.”

Mr. Sharro said he was insulted by suggestions that the visa ban might help create a new cadre of radicalized Muslims.

“he assumption that these people are going to flip into terrorists and start attacking the United States is driven by some very condescending liberal assumptions,”e said.

Visiting the United States can already be a demeaning process for many Muslims. Refugees have to go through an exhaustive 18-month security clearance program, while visitors on tourist or business visas have complained of being sometimes singled out at American airports.

“nly Americans suffer from the delusion that Muslims are not already being extensively racially profiled at immigration counters when they enter the United States,”aid Ali Dayan Hasan, a human rights consultant from Pakistan who has regularly visited the United States since 2001.

Notably, even though Mr. Trump’ ban is ostensibly based on security concerns, it is expected to exclude countries like Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Pakistan, whose citizens have been responsible for some of the most serious terrorist plots against the United States since 2001. Those countries are harder to push around. Pakistan has nuclear weapons, Saudi Arabia is a major source of oil, and the United Arab Emirates is a major source of investment. Mr. Trump’ company has a golf club in Dubai and holdings related to a possible hotel venture in Saudi Arabia.

Arab leaders in countries that appeared unaffected by the visa ban may not respond with outright criticism of the United States, possibly waiting to see what active steps Mr. Trump takes in the region’ many crises.

There is also a question of moral debt. Many Iraqis and Afghans who have worked for the United States since 2001, often as interpreters, say they were promised resettlement in the United States to save them from attack at home. During the Obama administration, a program to grant special visas to interpreters was continued, even as the process was delayed by resistance in Congress and ever stricter security screening procedures.

The new measures announced by Mr. Trump could now place those promises in jeopardy, said Mr. Crocker, who since retiring from the foreign service has helped several interpreters get resettled in the United States. The measures, he said, also send an ominous message to anyone who might consider working for the American government in the future.

“e are effectively saying to past, current and potential future interpreters,”e said, “hat we want them to work with us and risk their lives in the field —onfident in the knowledge that they will be hung out to dry.”

Follow Declan Walsh @declanwalsh on Twitter.

Reporting was contributed by Tim Arango and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul; Omar Al-Jawoshy from Baghdad; Mujib Mashal and Jawad Sukhanyar from Kabul, Afghanistan; and Nour Youssef from Cairo.

* Full Executive Order Text: Trump’ Action Limiting Refugees Into the U.S.

* In Iran, Shock and Bewilderment Over Trump Visa Crackdown

* Turkey’ Islamic Fashion Revolution

* Qandeel Baloch, Pakistani Social Media Celebrity, Dead in Apparent Honor Killing

* \b ISIS\b0  Seems to Tailor Attacks for Different Audiences

* From Indonesia, a Muslim Challenge to the Ideology of the Islamic State

Syrian refugees arriving in Detroit in 2015. The Muslim world is watching closely as the Trump administration clamps down on immigration. | Salwan Georges for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170128ed1s00106



World; Middle East
In Iran, Shock and Bewilderment Over Trump Visa Crackdown

By THOMAS ERDBRINK and JEFFREY GETTLEMAN 
1,368 words
28 January 2017
02:26
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

TEHRAN —amilies, businesspeople, athletes and tourists from seven countries in the Middle East and Africa found their travel plans —nd even their futures —n a state of suspension on Friday after President Trump signed an executive order temporarily barring thousands from obtaining visas to travel to the United States.

The order is expected to freeze almost all travel to the United States by citizens from the Muslim-majority countries of Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen for at least 90 days. Three of those countries are considered sponsors of terrorism (Iran, Sudan and Syria), and three are designated countries of concern (Libya, Somalia and Yemen).

Passport-holders from those countries, who have American visas but are outside the United States, will not be permitted to return.

“e only want to admit those who will support our country and love deeply our people,”r. Trump said on Friday before signing the order at the Pentagon. “e will never forget the lessons of 9/11, nor the heroes who lost their lives at the Pentagon.”

(The 19 hijackers implicated in the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attack came from Egypt, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. None of those countries will be subject to what Mr. Trump described as “ew vetting measures.”

During the 90-day period, the Trump administration will assess if the foreign governments on the list are providing enough information about citizens seeking visas to enable the United States to assess whether they pose a terrorism risk. If the governments do not comply, they will be given 60 days to do so; failing that, their citizens will be barred from entering the United States.

Government reaction to the order has been cautious. But there is little doubt that the demand for information will be a challenge for Iran, which sends far more people to the United States each year, around 35,000, than any other country on the list.

While Iran willingly allows its citizens to travel to the United States, it is ideologically opposed to sharing information with Washington. But if it does not, many of its citizens will be cut off from visiting relatives who are among the estimated one million Iranian-Americans living in America.

The visa ban will provide an early indication of where relations between Tehran and the Trump administration are headed, one analyst said.

“rump will regard the Iranian reaction as a test,”aid Farshad Ghorbanpour, who is close to the government of President Hassan Rouhani. “f Iran doesn’ comply, they won’ do so either on other issues. We will see in 30 days.”

Another analyst doubted the government would comply with the order.

“e are not obliged to give information about our citizens to the Trump administration,”aid Hamidreza Taraghi, considered a hard-liner. “uch a move would be unjustifiable.”

In the United States, Americans of Iranian descent expressed shock and dismay at news of Mr. Trump’ impending policy change, and were particularly concerned about their relatives and friends in Iran.

Trita Parsi, president of the National Iranian American Council, a Washington-based advocacy group, said many Iranian citizens with valid green cards and American visas were distraught. Those outside the United States are fretting they will not be allowed in, and those already in the country fear they will not be able to leave, even temporarily, because they will be barred from returning.

“here is a sense of bewilderment, as well as a sense of injustice,”ver why Iran was even included on the list of targeted countries, Mr. Parsi said. No Iranian has been accused of an attack on the American homeland. By contrast, he said, the Sept. 11 attackers included citizens from countries which are not on the list —nd “he United States has produced more ISIS fighters than Iran has.”

Iran’ most popular actress, Taraneh Alidoosti, announced on Twitter that she was canceling her trip to the Academy Awards ceremony in Los Angeles on Feb. 26, after reports that Mr. Trump was about to sign the sweeping executive order.

Ms. Alidoosti plays a leading role in ‘‘he Salesman,’’ directed by the acclaimed Iranian director Asghar Farhadi and nominated for best foreign film. She almost certainly could have obtained a visa as a ‘‘ulturally unique artist,’’ut said she no longer felt like making the trip.

“his is not about me or the Academy Awards, it’ about having a discussion about this decision,”s. Alidoosti said. “his is such a bizarre ban, it is uprooting people’ lives in ways not imaginable.”

In 2015, according to the Department of Homeland Security, a total of 35,266 nonimmigrant visas were granted to Iranians to enter the United States, compared with 21,381 for Iraq; 16,010 for Syria; 5,549 for Yemen; 4,792 for Sudan; 2,879 for Libya and 359 for Somalia.

As there is no American embassy or consulate in Iran, Iranians must travel to Ankara, Turkey, Dushanbe in Tajikistan or to Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, to apply for a visa. The State Department says that more than 40 percent of all applications are rejected. There are numerous agencies in Iran and other countries that mediate and assist Iranians seeking appointments.

“et’ hope this is fake news,”aid Ali Reza Falahati, who runs a mediation agency in Ankara. “eople are constantly calling to ask us if their appointments are canceled. They paid visa fees, $160, and booked tickets and hotels. I just hope this will be all right.”

One woman in Tehran, a 28-year-old restaurant manager, nearly broke down in tears when hearing news of the ban.

She said she had been waiting for a green card and that she and her husband had been planning for years to move to Orlando, Fla., where her mother, father and brother live. They even postponed having a baby, she said, and now regretted having waited for so long.

The effects of the measure were felt in Africa, too.

Many people in Mogadishu, Somalia, used the same word to describe Mr. Trump. “e’ a dabaal,”aid Guled Hassan, a Somali university student. “abaal”s the Somali word for a fool.

On Thursday, Mr. Guled and his friends, who were hanging out in a park near Mogadishu’ crumbling seashore, slurping mango shakes, were paying extra close attention to the news streaming into their phones. Just about all of them had heard that Mr. Trump might ban visas for Somalis.

Just about all of them said they wanted to go to the United States, and they mostly agreed the visa ban was “tupid”nd "unfair.”

No Somalis doubt that their country has a terrorism problem. Just the day before, more than a dozen people were killed in a double-bombing at a Mogadishu hotel. The Shabab, a Somali militant group, took credit for the attack and remains one of the world’ most bloodthirsty and dangerous terrorist organizations, having killed thousands across several countries in eastern Africa.

But the consensus was that Mr. Trump was punishing all Somalis for the potential misdeeds of a few. “e won the election by saying he would chase away black people,”aid Bilal Guled Mohamed, a college student.

Another young man, Abdul Karim Hilowle, asked, “hat’ the difference between Somalis already in the U.S. and those who want to go now?”

Follow Thomas Erdbrink @ThomasErdbrink and Jeffrey Gettleman @gettleman on Twitter.

Thomas Erdbrink reported from Tehran, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Mogadishu, Somalia. Rick Gladstone contributed reporting from New York.

* Full Executive Order Text: Trump’ Action Limiting Refugees Into the U.S.

* Bana al-Abed Writes Trump: ‘lease Save the Children and People of Syria’

* Texas Muslims Voice Concerns After Inflammatory Survey and Forum

A customs checkpoint for foreign travelers arriving at Miami International Airport. | Joe Raedle/Getty Images | The Iranian actress Taraneh Alidoosti in “he Salesman.”he canceled her trip to the Academy Awards on Feb. 26 on news of President Trump’ visa crackdown. | Habib Majidi/Cohen Media Group, via Amazon Studios, via Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170128ed1s000jh



opinion
The Closing of Trump’ America; Op-Ed Columnist

By ROGER COHEN 
893 words
27 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Donald Trump is an ahistorical man. He knows nothing of European history and cares less, as his cavalier trashing of the alliance and union that ushered the Continent from its darkest hours demonstrates.

He knows little enough of American history to have chosen as his rallying cry “merica First,” slogan with a past clouded by allies-be-damned isolationism at the start of World War II. (Or perhaps that’ why he embraced it.)

The president does not even know the history of the C.I.A., as his self-regarding speech before the hallowed Memorial Wall showed. This was desecration of patriotic sacrifice through advanced narcissistic disorder.

He called the speech a “ome run.”

Great. Terrific. Phenomenal. Tremendous. Fabulous. Beautiful. How Trump has hollowed out these words. How arid, even nauseating, he has made them. They mean nothing. They are space-fillers issuing with a thudding regularity from his uncurious mind, and in the end of course they are all about him. Emptying words of meaning is an essential step on the road to autocratic rule. People need to lose their bearings before they prostrate themselves.

From Trump’ White House there now seeps a kind of ignorance mixed with vulgarity and topped with meanness that I find impossible to wash from my skin. I wake up to its oleaginous texture.

This is worse than had seemed possible: Trump’ inexhaustible obsession with the crowd size at the inauguration; his constant untruths; his perverse inability to accept that he won the election, to the point that he wants to investigate the popular vote that he lost; his startling lust for torture, walls, banishment and carnage.

“he world is a total mess,”e told David Muir of ABC. Funny, I travel the world and that was not my impression a week ago.

The president does not like Muslims. That, too, is clear. It was obvious when he called during the campaign for a temporary ban on Muslims entering the United States. It was obvious when he showed contempt for the parents of a fallen Muslim American soldier killed in Iraq. It is obvious now as he attempts to justify a planned suspension of visas for Syrians, Iranians, Iraqis and citizens of four other majority Muslim Middle Eastern and African countries, as well as a temporary ban on almost all refugees.

A rough translation of “merica First”s Muslims last. “t’ not the Muslim ban,”rump insisted to Muir. No. It’ just a ban on lots of Muslims.

Trump said, in the ABC interview, that the people to be barred “re going to come in and cause us tremendous problems.”e declared: “hey’e ISIS.”

There is no credible evidence for this wild claim, a smear on entire populations. (Saudi Arabia, the source of most 9/11 terrorists, is unsurprisingly not on the list.)

In their overwhelming majority refugees are fleeing violence in their homelands, not plotting it against the United States. They do not put their little children in dinghies on the high seas because they have a choice but because they have no choice.

Screening to get into the United States is already rigorous, one reason only a tiny fraction of some 5 million Syrian refugees have come here.

A Cato Institutestudy of refugees admitted to the United States between 1975 and 2015 found that the chance of an American being killed in a terrorist attack committed by a refugee is 1 in 3.64 billion.

This is policy fed by anger and prejudice, not reason. The wall announcement has already provoked a damaging clash with Mexico. The proposed visa and refugee measures are not about keeping America safe. They are conceived to nurture an atmosphere of nationalist xenophobia.

Trump has been right to call jihadi Islamist terrorism by its name. But conflating a religion of 1.6 billion people with it is no way to fight it. As for his promise of safe areas within Syria, we will see.

I am lucky enough to live in Brooklyn Heights with a view out over the East River to lower Manhattan and the Statue of Liberty. So while watching President Donald Trump’ dark inaugural speech a week ago I was able at the same time to glance out at the torch that symbolizes American openness and generosity of spirit.

As Trump’ “MERICA FIRST,”“MERICA FIRST”choed across my living room I thought of Emma Lazarus’ords inscribed on the pedestal of the statue:

“ive me your tired, your poor,

Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,

The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.”

Friedrich Trump, a penniless German immigrant, was one of those “uddled masses”ack in 1885. Lucky he did not attempt to enter the America taking shape under his grandson.

Over time, but not without struggle, I believe the ideals represented by the torch will prove stronger than Trump’ fear-filled jingoistic darkness. America cannot be itself without these ideals, and Americans will fight to preserve them. It is, after all, how they became who they are.

You can follow me on Twitter (@NYTimesCohen) or join me on Facebook.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document INHT000020170127ed1r0000y



Op-Ed Columnist
Opinion
The Closing of Trump’ America

By ROGER COHEN 
926 words
27 January 2017
12:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Donald Trump is an ahistorical man. He knows nothing of European history and cares less, as his cavalier trashing of the alliance and union that ushered the Continent from its darkest hours demonstrates.

He knows little enough of American history to have chosen as his rallying cry “merica First,” slogan with a past clouded by allies-be-damned isolationism at the start of World War II. (Or perhaps that’ why he embraced it.)

The president does not even know the history of the C.I.A., as his self-regarding speech before the hallowed Memorial Wall showed. This was desecration of patriotic sacrifice through advanced narcissistic disorder.

He called the speech a “ome run.”

Great. Terrific. Phenomenal. Tremendous. Fabulous. Beautiful. How Trump has hollowed out these words. How arid, even nauseating, he has made them. They mean nothing. They are space-fillers issuing with a thudding regularity from his uncurious mind, and in the end of course they are all about him. Emptying words of meaning is an essential step on the road to autocratic rule. People need to lose their bearings before they prostrate themselves.

From Trump’ White House there now seeps a kind of ignorance mixed with vulgarity and topped with meanness that I find impossible to wash from my skin. I wake up to its oleaginous texture.

This is worse than had seemed possible: Trump’ inexhaustible obsession with the crowd size at the inauguration; his constant untruths; his perverse inability to accept that he won the election, to the point that he wants to investigate the popular vote that he lost; his startling lust for torture, walls, banishment and carnage.

“he world is a total mess,”e told David Muir of ABC. Funny, I travel the world and that was not my impression a week ago.

The president does not like Muslims. That, too, is clear. It was obvious when he called during the campaign for a temporary ban on Muslims entering the United States. It was obvious when he showed contempt for the parents of a fallen Muslim American soldier killed in Iraq. It is obvious now as he attempts to justify a planned suspension of visas for Syrians, Iranians, Iraqis and citizens of four other majority Muslim Middle Eastern and African countries, as well as a temporary ban on almost all refugees.

A rough translation of “merica First”s Muslims last. “t’ not the Muslim ban,”rump insisted to Muir. No. It’ just a ban on lots of Muslims.

Trump said, in the ABC interview, that the people to be barred “re going to come in and cause us tremendous problems.”e declared: “hey’e ISIS.”

There is no credible evidence for this wild claim, a smear on entire populations. (Saudi Arabia, the source of most 9/11 terrorists, is unsurprisingly not on the list.)

In their overwhelming majority refugees are fleeing violence in their homelands, not plotting it against the United States. They do not put their little children in dinghies on the high seas because they have a choice but because they have no choice.

Screening to get into the United States is already rigorous, one reason only a tiny fraction of some 5 million Syrian refugees have come here.

A Cato Institutestudy of refugees admitted to the United States between 1975 and 2015 found that the chance of an American being killed in a terrorist attack committed by a refugee is 1 in 3.64 billion.

This is policy fed by anger and prejudice, not reason. The wall announcement has already provoked a damaging clash with Mexico. The proposed visa and refugee measures are not about keeping America safe. They are conceived to nurture an atmosphere of nationalist xenophobia.

Trump has been right to call jihadi Islamist terrorism by its name. But conflating a religion of 1.6 billion people with it is no way to fight it. As for his promise of safe areas within Syria, we will see.

I am lucky enough to live in Brooklyn Heights with a view out over the East River to lower Manhattan and the Statue of Liberty. So while watching President Donald Trump’ dark inaugural speech a week ago I was able at the same time to glance out at the torch that symbolizes American openness and generosity of spirit.

As Trump’ “MERICA FIRST,”“MERICA FIRST”choed across my living room I thought of Emma Lazarus’ords inscribed on the pedestal of the statue:

“ive me your tired, your poor,

Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,

The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.”

Friedrich Trump, a penniless German immigrant, was one of those “uddled masses”ack in 1885. Lucky he did not attempt to enter the America taking shape under his grandson.

Over time, but not without struggle, I believe the torch will prove stronger than Trump’ fear-filled jingoistic darkness. With the stranger comes renewal. America cannot be itself without it, and Americans will fight for their idea. It is, after all, how they became who they are.

You can follow me on Twitter (@NYTimesCohen) or join me on Facebook.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

An anti-Trump protester in New York in 2015 wearing a button that reads, “eep our Muslim neighbors SAFE”nd holding a pocket copy of the U.S. Constitution. | Karsten Moran for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170127ed1r003h6



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Airport Worker Wearing Hijab Is Attacked

By CHRISTOPHER MELE; Jack Begg contributed research. 
416 words
27 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
21
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A Massachusetts man was charged with hate crimes after he threatened an airline worker at Kennedy International Airport who was wearing a head scarf, kicked her and told her ''Trump is here now'' and ''he will get rid of all of you,'' officials said on Thursday.

The man, Robin A. Rhodes, 57, of Worcester, Mass., arrived from Aruba on Wednesday night and was awaiting a connecting flight to Massachusetts when he approached the worker, Rabeeya Khan, in the Delta Air Lines Sky Club lounge at Terminal 2 between 7:10 p.m. and 9:45 p.m., the Queens district attorney, Richard A. Brown, said in a statement on Thursday. Ms. Khan wore a head scarf known as a hijab.

Mr. Rhodes went to her office door and asked if she was sleeping and, according to the statement, said: ''Are you praying? What are you doing?'' He then punched the door, which hit the back of her chair. He threatened Ms. Khan and kicked her in the right leg, according to the statement. She moved to a corner of the office but he kicked the door, stepped into the office and blocked her from leaving.

When another person tried to calm him, he moved away from the door and Ms. Khan ran to the front desk of the lounge, according to the statement. Mr. Rhodes followed her, got on his knees and began to bow down in imitation of a Muslim praying and shouted expletives about Islam and ISIS, the prosecutor's office said.

In an apparent reference to Muslims, he said, according to the prosecutor's office: ''You can ask Germany, Belgium and France about these kind of people. You will see what happens.''

Mr. Rhodes was waiting to be arraigned on Thursday night. He did not yet have a lawyer, and he could not be reached. He was charged with assault, unlawful imprisonment, menacing and harassment as hate crimes, and related charges. If convicted, he could face up to four years in prison.

The prosecutor's office said Ms. Khan suffered ''substantial pain'' and redness in her right leg.

The prosecutor's office said that when he was arrested, Mr. Rhodes told the police: ''I guess I am going to jail for disorderly conduct. I couldn't tell if it was a man or woman because their back was to me and they had something covering their head.''

Document NYTF000020170127ed1r0007f



Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; SECTC
Just Picture the Time

By HOLLAND COTTER 
1,834 words
27 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
19
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

In an interview, the singer Nina Simone once said, ''An artist's duty is to reflect the times,'' by which she meant, basically, politics of the day, and in her case, racial politics. ''I think that is true of painters, sculptors, poets, musicians,'' she added. ''As far as I'm concerned, it's their choice, but I choose to reflect the times.''

Institutions can make that choice, too. The International Center of Photography did when it opened its doors in 1974 as a showcase for socially concerned photography, which encompassed photojournalism and so-called street photography. For over 40 years, the center has stayed on mission, even as the technology of picture-making has expanded, and the main street has become the internet.

A new exhibition, ''Perpetual Revolution: The Image and Social Change,'' reflects those shifts. It's as committedly topical as anything the center has done, with sections focused on climate change, immigration, gender issues, racial turmoil, terrorism and the 2016 election. At the same time, it looks different from shows past because digital media -- smartphone videos, Twitter outtakes, Instagram feeds -- outnumber photographic prints.

The embrace of the digital was probably inevitable for the center, an institution that clearly doesn't want to freeze into a yesterday-museum. But it necessitates a rethinking of old ideas. It requires seeing photography as part of a larger, amorphous category, one morally up for grabs, called visual culture. And it requires recognizing that in the digital present, visual culture does more than reflect reality: For better and for worse, it creates it.

For the center, the transition has been bumpy. It started decisively with the 2016 exhibition ''Public, Private, Secret,'' the institution's inaugural venture on the Bowery. Some people loathed the show, finding it a meanspirited mess that mixed too many media to no discernible end. (For me, it captured the random, narcissistic viciousness of internet culture to a T, and gave it a history.) ''Perpetual Revolution'' is an improvement.

It pushes the use of new media even further, but in a directed way, and with nuances attributable, my guess is, to the fact that this is a group effort. The center curators Carol Squiers and Cynthia Young have led a team that includes the assistant curators Susan Carlson and Claartje van Dijk, and the adjunct curators Joanna Lehan and Kalia Brooks, with assistance from Akshay Bhoan and Quito Ziegler. Different curators handled individual sections, but everyone was working with a shared model.

The opening section, on climate change, gives a sense of the governing method. It starts with a familiar photograph: the 1968 NASA shot of the Earth, as seen from the moon, an image that became a kind of logo for a nascent ecology movement, which produced the Environmental Protection Agency two years later. Next comes a bit of digital wizardry in a recent video charting temperature changes across the globe during roughly the past century. Then the apocalypse, or what looks like one, in a clip from the 2012 film ''Chasing Ice,'' in which melting glaciers, filmed by the American photographer James Balog, split apart and collapse in agonized slow motion.

Other works bring cosmically scaled events down to ground level. In a mural-like collage, made from internet-sourced photos and Post-it notes, the artist Rachel Schragis reconstructs the New York People's Climate March of 2014. Instagram pictures by the Native American photographer Camille Seaman document a protest in progress against the laying of a fuel pipeline at the Standing Rock Sioux Reservation in North Dakota.

Here we're in breaking-news territory. The collage, with its miniature banners and countless, tightly packed figures, looks like a flashback, or flash-forward, to the recent Women's March. Ms. Seaman's photographs are whiplash reminders that, in his first week in office as president, Donald J. Trump not only ordered a go-ahead for the pipeline but also imposed a communications blackout on the E.P.A.

You'd be hard-pressed to find any relief to this grim picture, though the show comes up with one in a fanciful video by Mel Chin, shot in Paris during the 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference, when the city was still reeling from terrorist attacks. The film makes the point that all violence -- personal, ideological, environmental -- is connected. And it does so through an apparitional figure: an Inuit visitor who drives a sled pulled by French poodles through Paris parks and insists that the earth's condition, though dire, is reparable if people will lay down their arms and work together.

The show's second section, ''The Flood: Refugees and Representation,'' also blends static and moving images, but makes a strong case for traditional photography as a form of evidence and a vehicle of emotion. There's digital work here, including a video starring -- and that's the right word -- an unfailingly cheerful Syrian refugee named Thair Orfahli, who documented a hazardous Mediterranean crossing and a rescue by the Italian coast guard in emails, tweets, videos and selfies generated by his smartphone, his only possession.

It's a spirit lifter to encounter Mr. Orfahli (and infuriating to think that if he'd arrived on American shores under our newly proposed refugee policies, he might have been turned away). Yet my eye kept returning to conventional photographs hung or projected on the gallery wall: to black-and-white images of people trying to flee war-torn Europe in the 1930s and '40s, by Robert Capa and Ruth Gruber; and 2015 pictures of Middle Eastern refugees arriving, exhausted and shaken, in Greece, by Daniel Etter and Sergey Ponomarev.

Is my partly unconscious preference for the still picture simply the result of long-established habits of looking? Or is there another, resistant factor involved? When I look at moving images, my viewing time and pace is predetermined; I'm on someone else's clock. When I look at a photograph, I'm on my own clock. I see an image, but I also have the option of contemplating it, living in it, savoring its details, thinking it through.

The show picks up on the bottom level of the center's duplex space, with nearly three dozen photographs in a section called ''Black Lives (Have Always) Mattered.'' These pictures are from the center's collection and constitute a capsule tour of African-American history from before the Civil War to the 1960s.

It's a story of heroes (Marian Anderson, Elizabeth Eckford) and horrors (an 1863 shot of a man's whip-scarred back; a 1968 picture of a Black Panthers' office window pierced by police bullets). It's also about everyday African-American life, intrinsically political and captured in images of 19th-century cotton field workers; World War I soldiers; black members of the South Carolina legislature during Reconstruction.

And the chronicle is brought up to date in three strong video pieces connected to the Black Lives Matter movement. One, by the collective HowDoYouSayYaminAfrican?, is a solid wall of images, playing on 32 stacked monitors, related to the killing of Michael Brown by a white police officer in Ferguson, Mo. Another is a set of digital memorials to Philando Castile, who was also killed by a white officer, compiled by the Minnesota website Pollen Midwest. And the third video, by Sheila Pree Bright, layers old and recent documentary material, including Ms. Simone's interview, to make a case for a new black civil rights movement. And that movement overlaps with another, explored in an adjoining section called ''The Fluidity of Gender.''

The fact that two of the founders of Black Lives Matter -- Alicia Garza and Patrisse Khan-Cullors -- are gay women is just one point of intersection; there are many. Although the L.G.B.T.Q. movement has been substantially documented, a visual history of the current transgender revolution is in the start-up stage. The show does its part to expand the record, much of it in digital form.

There are a few vintage items: a video clip of the transgender pioneer Christine Jorgensen, giving a poised, no-nonsense press interview in 1952; and a sassy slide-show paean to 1980s performers by Linda Simpson titled ''The Drag Explosion.'' A lot of what's here, though, is new. From last year comes the music video ''I Am Her,'' by the African-American trans singer Shea Diamond, and one by the self-described multigendered Mykki Blanco (born Michael David Quattlebaum Jr.), delivering a rap version of Zoe Leonard's 1992 election-year anthem about wanting a lesbian for president.

The ethnic variety of this section is wide, as suggested by hashtags like #queerappalachia and #QueerMuslim. And the degree, and kind, of self-invention is dizzying, and contagious.

Unsurprisingly, this sense of openness bumps up hard against the show's penultimate section, ''Propaganda and the Islamic State,'' which consists of ISIS promotional videos. Designed for internet distribution, they're complicated and artful. They, too, play with self-invention and theater, but with the aim of hammering down, rather than loosening up, utopian possibilities.

It's oppressive stuff, installed, as if for maximum discretion, like a traditional photography display: a line of small, harmless-looking framed things -- video screens in this case -- on the wall. Oppressive, too, is the exhibition's coda, ''The Right-Wing Fringe and the 2016 Election.'' With Facebook, Twitter and Instagram as the primary platforms for its racist and misogynistic images, it suggests two things.

One, that with the unedited flow of visual information now streaming through the internet, ''concerned photography'' has both a weaker, and potentially more powerful, presence than ever. And, two, that to an unprecedented degree, images -- call them art or not -- reflect and shape the times.

At the moment, the shaping power is up for grabs by opposing revolutions, one led by the White House, the other by feet in the street. The street needs to take visual culture -- including photography -- and make it its own, right now. This is where artists come in.

Perpetual Revolution: The Image and Social Change

Through May 7 at the International Center of Photography, Manhattan; 212-857-0000, icp.org

A detail from ''Confronting the Climate: A Flowchart of the People's Climate March,'' a collage of internet photos and Post-it notes, by Rachel Schragis, in the show ''Perpetual Revolution.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY RACHEL SCHRAGIS) (C19); An image from Mel Chin's ''The Arctic Is Paris,'' a video that the artist shot during the 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MEL CHIN); Top, an image from the video ''#1960Now: Art + Intersection,'' by Sheila Pree Bright, which looks at black history. Above, glaciers in ''Chasing Ice,'' by James Balog, a film on climate change. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SHEILA PREE BRIGHT; JAMES BALOG, 2016 CHASING INC., LLC); A screen shot from the video ''The Right-Wing Fringe and the 2016 Election.'' (PHOTOGRAPH VIA INTERNATIONAL CENTER OF PHOTOGRAPHY) (C24) 

Document NYTF000020170127ed1r0006e



National Desk; SECTA
President Is Said to Seek Plan for U.S. to Strike  ISIS  Harder

By MICHAEL R. GORDON, HELENE COOPER and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,452 words
27 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The White House is drafting a presidential directive that calls on Defense Secretary James N. Mattis to devise plans to more aggressively strike the Islamic State, which could include American artillery on the ground in Syria and Army attack helicopters to support an assault on the group's capital, Raqqa, officials said.

President Trump, who is to make his first visit to the Pentagon as commander in chief on Friday, will demand that the new options be presented to him within 30 days, the officials said. During the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump repeatedly said that he had a secret plan to defeat the Islamic State, but he also said that he would give his commanders a month to come up with new options.

The White House is also expected to press for a review of the United States nuclear posture -- one that retains all three legs of the nuclear arsenal with weapons aboard bombers and submarines and in underground missile silos -- as well as a review of how to achieve the president's goal of fielding a ''state of the art'' antimissile system.

During the campaign, Mr. Trump pledged to expand the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps, and a draft directive calls for steps to improve the military's readiness to fight on short notice.

The directive to identify new ways to hasten the demise of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS and ISIL, has been widely anticipated by military commanders, who have begun drafting classified options to increase the pressure on the militant group, especially in Raqqa and Mosul, the stronghold in Iraq.

Work on the directive was described by several current and former officials who are close to the White House and who requested anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the administration's internal deliberations. The White House had no comment.

The man charged with overseeing this re-examination of American defense is Mr. Mattis, a retired Marine Corps four-star general who commanded American forces in the Middle East and will be working in partnership with Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The men have known each other for years and Mr. Mattis used to be General Dunford's commanding officer while in the Marines.

Mr. Mattis will face multiple challenges. As an emissary to longstanding allies in Asia and Europe, he has staked out a position as the Trump administration's reassurer-in-chief.

One of Mr. Mattis's first moves as defense secretary was to phone the NATO secretary general to assure him that he strongly supported the alliance that Mr. Trump has criticized as ''obsolete.'' Mr. Mattis will fly to Asia next week on a trip to allay concerns in Japan and South Korea that the United States might abandon longstanding commitments to their security.

A week after that, Mr. Mattis is expected to make another reassurance trip -- this one to Europe -- to meet with counterparts at NATO in Brussels and then at a security conference in Munich.

Lawmakers and even some members of the military are hoping that Mr. Mattis can also serve as a counterweight on some of the new administration's more hard-line positions. In a classified operations center at one Special Operations headquarters, a photo of Mr. Mattis is taped to a board with various captions written underneath. On Thursday morning, the caption read: ''Watch over us.''

During his first visit to the Pentagon, Mr. Trump will conduct a ceremonial swearing-in of Mr. Mattis and is expected to sign the new directives and have a short meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Mr. Trump and Mr. Mattis appear to have some positive chemistry. They were seen chatting warmly on the reviewing stand during the inaugural parade. The new commander-in-chief relishes referring to ''Mad Dog'' Mattis at every opportunity, even though the retired general does not like that nickname and insists it is no more than a media invention.

And while they agree on the need for more military spending, some of the defense secretary's views are at odds with his new boss, including his skepticism of Russia's intentions, his traditional support for allies and flat opposition to the use of torture in interrogating terrorists.

The day before Mr. Mattis came to work at the Defense Department, he issued a statement to the Pentagon work force that cast the United States as a bulwark of the international order and the guardian of important alliances. In contrast to the ''America First'' oratory emanating from the White House, Mr. Mattis vowed that the Pentagon would work ''for an America that remains a steady beacon of hope for all mankind.''

''General Mattis is prepared to give the president the best advice he can as secretary of defense even if it's not something the president wants to hear,'' said Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island, the senior Democrat on the Armed Services Committee, who spoke to Mr. Mattis on Tuesday. ''The question is, how long can he do that if he's not being responded to.''

Crafting a plan to step up the fight against the Islamic State is the most urgent task facing Mr. Mattis. When President Barack Obama left office, half of Mosul remained in the hands of the militants. Tens of thousands of American-backed Syrian Kurdish and Arab fighters were closing in on Raqqa, but there was no agreement on which force should seize the capital itself.

The potential options include expanding the use of American Special Operations forces, raising the troop ceilings on United States forces in Iraq and Syria and having the White House delegate more authorities to the Pentagon and its commanders in the field, to speed up decision-making.

A difficult decision also confronts the Pentagon on whether to risk alienating Turkey by arming the Syrian Kurds for the Raqqa battle, or whether to cobble together a more diverse force that could include Turkish troops, Turkish backed opposition groups and perhaps even elements of the Army's 82nd Airborne Division, as well as Apache helicopters and artillery. Turkey considers the Syrian Kurds terrorists and has been trying to forge closer ties with the Trump administration.

Expanding the American military will also pose challenges because of the soaring cost of some key weapons programs and the ambitious scope of the buildup Mr. Trump is seeking. As the steward of the Pentagon's nearly $600 billion annual budget, Mr. Mattis will face tough choices, as it seems unlikely that the additional spending Mr. Trump plans for the armed forces can pay for all of the ambitious programs he has promised.

During the campaign, Mr. Trump called for a Navy of 350 ships, up from the current fleet of 272, and to expand the Army to 540,000 troops, an increase of about 65,000. The Air Force and Marines would also grow.

Funding such a military building would be costly. While the Pentagon has yet to outline its spending under the new administration, a paper by Senator John McCain, who heads the Armed Services Committee and is advocating a similar buildup, calls for spending $430 billion more than is currently planned, for the next five years.

Other directives in the works could affect the military. Mr. Trump told ABC News on Wednesday that he would ''absolutely do safe zones'' in Syria for refugees fleeing the violence there. A draft executive order obtained by The New York Times calls for Mr. Mattis, along with Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, to produce a plan within 90 days for safe zones in Syria.

In the past, American military officials have warned that such a move would escalate the American involvement in the war in Syria, something the Obama administration staunchly opposed.

Military experts are looking to see who will join Mr. Mattis's team at the Pentagon -- and how many are picked by the new defense secretary himself. Mr. Mattis's chief of staff will be Kevin M. Sweeney, a retired rear admiral whom Mr. Mattis has known for years. His senior military assistant will be Rear Adm. Craig S. Faller, who previously served as the top operations officer at Central Command when Mr. Mattis was in charge there.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, left, greeted Defense Secretary James N. Mattis on Saturday at the Pentagon in Arlington, Va. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEX WONG/GETTY IMAGES) (A17) 

Document NYTF000020170127ed1r0005v



Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; SECTC
The Age of Consequences

By GLENN KENNY 
345 words
27 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Last year, Jared P. Scott tackled financial inequality in ''Requiem for the American Dream,'' a film about Noam Chomsky, of which he was a director. In ''The Age of Consequences,'' Mr. Scott looks at climate change from the perspective of military experts rather than that of scientists.

Michael Breen, a former Army officer, considers the role of climate change in human conflicts. ''Think about relationships we don't often look at,'' he says. ''The civil war in Syria, now going on for years, hundreds of thousands dead -- the entire region is in chaos as a result.'' The movie details how a three-year drought helped precipitate that war.

Talking about one of the strategies of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, the retired Brig. Gen. Stephen Cheney states, ''You control the water, you control the livelihood of the people.'' Climate change affects the amount of water, and so terrorist organizations move to where the water is. The connection between environmental disaster and terrorism is drawn, persuasively. (The ''Mad Max: Fury Road'' scenario in which a despot clings to power by holding on to a water supply starts to look mildly plausible.)

The information here is compelling and frightening, but the movie is ham-handed. Malcolm Francis's almost nonstop score is emphatic to a fault; interviewees extrapolate a ''perfect storm'' of concurrent catastrophes that could cripple the United States; there's no bright side, and scant hope, just 70 minutes of unrelenting bad news served with dollops of implicit audience-blaming. A tacked-on eight-minute ''call to action'' coda feels halfhearted.

At one point, a historian observes that ''advanced societies were very vulnerable to confusing lifestyle with life itself.'' This may be true, but delivered in this tricksy, overdetermined way, it's likely to elicit a pot-calling-the-kettle-black response from overwhelmed viewers.

Not rated. Running time: 1 hour 20 minutes.

Arab Spring unrest in this documentary, directed by Jared P. Scott. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ENCOMPASS FILMS/FLASHPOINT FILMS) 

Document NYTF000020170127ed1r0003a



U.S.; Politics
Trump Will Call for a Pentagon Plan to Hit  ISIS  Harder, Officials Say

By MICHAEL R. GORDON, HELENE COOPER and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,490 words
27 January 2017
03:11
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —he White House is drafting a presidential directive that calls on Defense Secretary James N. Mattis to devise plans to more aggressively strike the Islamic State, which could include American artillery on the ground in Syria and Army attack helicopters to support an assault on the group’ capital, Raqqa, officials said.

President Trump, who is to make his first visit to the Pentagon as commander in chief on Friday, will demand that the new options be presented to him within 30 days, the officials said. During the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump repeatedly said that he had a secret plan to defeat the Islamic State, but he also said that he would give his commanders a month to come up with new options.

The White House is also expected to press for a review of the United States nuclear posture —ne that retains all three legs of the nuclear arsenal with weapons aboard bombers and submarines and in underground missile silos —s well as a review of how to achieve the president’ goal of fielding a “tate of the art”ntimissile system.

During the campaign, Mr. Trump pledged to expand the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps, and a draft directive calls for steps to improve the military’ readiness to fight on short notice.

The directive to identify new ways to hasten the demise of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS and ISIL, has been widely anticipated by military commanders, who have begun drafting classified options to increase the pressure on the militant group, especially in Raqqa and Mosul, the stronghold in Iraq.

Work on the directive was described by several current and former officials who are close to the White House and who requested anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the administration’ internal deliberations. The White House had no comment.

The man charged with overseeing this re-examination of American defense is Mr. Mattis, a retired Marine Corps four-star general who commanded American forces in the Middle East and will be working in partnership with Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The men have known each other for years and Mr. Mattis used to be General Dunford’ commanding officer while in the Marines.

Mr. Mattis will face multiple challenges. As an emissary to longstanding allies in Asia and Europe, he has staked out a position as the Trump administration’ reassurer-in-chief.

One of Mr. Mattis’ first moves as defense secretary was to phone the NATO secretary general to assure him that he strongly supported the alliance that Mr. Trump has criticized as “bsolete.”r. Mattis will fly to Asia next week on a trip to allay concerns in Japan and South Korea that the United States might abandon longstanding commitments to their security.

A week after that, Mr. Mattis is expected to make another reassurance trip —his one to Europe —o meet with counterparts at NATO in Brussels and then at a security conference in Munich.

Lawmakers and even some members of the military are hoping that Mr. Mattis can also serve as a counterweight on some of the new administration’ more hard-line positions. In a classified operations center at one Special Operations headquarters, a photo of Mr. Mattis is taped to a board with various captions written underneath. On Thursday morning, the caption read: “atch over us.”

During his first visit to the Pentagon, Mr. Trump will conduct a ceremonial swearing-in of Mr. Mattis and is expected to sign the new directives and have a short meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Mr. Trump and Mr. Mattis appear to have some positive chemistry. They were seen chatting warmly on the reviewing stand during the inaugural parade. The new commander-in-chief relishes referring to “ad Dog”attis at every opportunity, even though the retired general does not like that nickname and insists it is no more than a media invention.

And while they agree on the need for more military spending, some of the defense secretary’ views are at odds with his new boss, including his skepticism of Russia’ intentions, his traditional support for allies and flat opposition to the use of torture in interrogating terrorists.

The day before Mr. Mattis came to work at the Defense Department, he issued a statement to the Pentagon work force that cast the United States as a bulwark of the international order and the guardian of important alliances. In contrast to the “merica First”ratory emanating from the White House, Mr. Mattis vowed that the Pentagon would work “or an America that remains a steady beacon of hope for all mankind.”

“eneral Mattis is prepared to give the president the best advice he can as secretary of defense even if it’ not something the president wants to hear,”aid Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island, the senior Democrat on the Armed Services Committee, who spoke to Mr. Mattis on Tuesday. “he question is, how long can he do that if he’ not being responded to.”

Crafting a plan to step up the fight against the Islamic State is the most urgent task facing Mr. Mattis. When President Barack Obama left office, half of Mosul remained in the hands of the militants. Tens of thousands of American-backed Syrian Kurdish and Arab fighters were closing in on Raqqa, but there was no agreement on which force should seize the capital itself.

The potential options include expanding the use of American Special Operations forces, raising the troop ceilings on United States forces in Iraq and Syria and having the White House delegate more authorities to the Pentagon and its commanders in the field, to speed up decision-making.

A difficult decision also confronts the Pentagon on whether to risk alienating Turkey by arming the Syrian Kurds for the Raqqa battle, or whether to cobble together a more diverse force that could include Turkish troops, Turkish backed opposition groups and perhaps even elements of the Army’ 82nd Airborne Division, as well as Apache helicopters and artillery. Turkey considers the Syrian Kurds terrorists and has been trying to forge closer ties with the Trump administration.

Expanding the American military will also pose challenges because of the soaring cost of some key weapons programs and the ambitious scope of the buildup Mr. Trump is seeking. As the steward of the Pentagon’ nearly $600 billion annual budget, Mr. Mattis will face tough choices, as it seems unlikely that the additional spending Mr. Trump plans for the armed forces can pay for all of the ambitious programs he has promised.

During the campaign, Mr. Trump called for a Navy of 350 ships, up from the current fleet of 272, and to expand the Army to 540,000 troops, an increase of about 65,000. The Air Force and Marines would also grow.

Funding such a military building would be costly. While the Pentagon has yet to outline its spending under the new administration, a paper by Senator John McCain, who heads the Armed Services Committee and is advocating a similar buildup, calls for spending $430 billion more than is currently planned, for the next five years.

Other directives in the works could affect the military. Mr. Trump told ABC News on Wednesday that he would “bsolutely do safe zones”n Syria for refugees fleeing the violence there. A draft executive order obtained by The New York Times calls for Mr. Mattis, along with Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, to produce a plan within 90 days for safe zones in Syria.

In the past, American military officials have warned that such a move would escalate the American involvement in the war in Syria, something the Obama administration staunchly opposed.

Military experts are looking to see who will join Mr. Mattis’ team at the Pentagon —nd how many are picked by the new defense secretary himself. Mr. Mattis’ chief of staff will be Kevin M. Sweeney, a retired rear admiral whom Mr. Mattis has known for years. His senior military assistant will be Rear Adm. Craig S. Faller, who previously served as the top operations officer at Central Command when Mr. Mattis was in charge there.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* James Mattis Strikes Far Harsher Tone Than Trump on Russia

Defense Secretary James N. Mattis greeted President Trump at the reviewing stand during the inaugural parade on Friday. | Sam Hodgson for The New York Times | James Mattis, left, arrived for his first day of work at the Pentagon with Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, on Saturday. | Paul J. Richards/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170127ed1r001bb



N.Y. / Region
Man Kicked J.F.K. Airport Worker Wearing Hijab, Prosecutor Says

By CHRISTOPHER MELE 
436 words
27 January 2017
02:52
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

A Massachusetts man was charged with hate crimes after he threatened an airline worker at Kennedy International Airport who was wearing a head scarf, kicked her and told her “rump is here now”nd “e will get rid of all of you,”fficials said on Thursday.

The man, Robin A. Rhodes, 57, of Worcester, Mass., arrived from Aruba on Wednesday night and was awaiting a connecting flight to Massachusetts when he approached the worker, Rabeeya Khan, in the Delta Air Lines Sky Club lounge at Terminal 2 between 7:10 p.m. and 9:45 p.m., the Queens district attorney, Richard A. Brown, said in a statement on Thursday. Ms. Khan wore a head scarf known as a hijab.

Mr. Rhodes went to her office door and asked if she was sleeping and, according to the statement, said: “re you praying? What are you doing?”e then punched the door, which hit the back of her chair. He threatened Ms. Khan and kicked her in the right leg, according to the statement. She moved to a corner of the office but he kicked the door, stepped into the office and blocked her from leaving.

When another person tried to calm him, he moved away from the door and Ms. Khan ran to the front desk of the lounge, according to the statement. Mr. Rhodes followed her, got on his knees and began to bow down in imitation of a Muslim praying and shouted expletives about Islam and ISIS, the prosecutor’ office said.

In an apparent reference to Muslims, he said, according to the prosecutor’ office: “ou can ask Germany, Belgium and France about these kind of people. You will see what happens.”

Mr. Rhodes was waiting to be arraigned on Thursday night. He did not yet have a lawyer, and he could not be reached. He was charged with assault, unlawful imprisonment, menacing and harassment as hate crimes, and related charges. If convicted, he could face up to four years in prison.

The prosecutor’ office said Ms. Khan suffered “ubstantial pain”nd redness in her right leg.

The prosecutor’ office said that when he was arrested, Mr. Rhodes told the police: “ guess I am going to jail for disorderly conduct. I couldn’ tell if it was a man or woman because their back was to me and they had something covering their head.”

Jack Begg contributed research.

A Delta Air Lines baggage claim area at Kennedy International Airport. | Spencer Platt/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170127ed1r0015q



opinion
‘ Think Islam Hates Us’ Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
1,214 words
26 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Eradicating “adical Islamic terrorism”rom the face of the earth has been President Trump’ mantra, first in the campaign, then in his Inaugural Address and remarks a day later to the C.I.A.

No one would argue with fighting back against the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0 , and other terrorist groups that threaten the United States, Europe, the Middle East and beyond. For eight years, President Barack Obama did just that, using a multilayered approach that included launching thousands of air and drone strikes in at least a half dozen countries and killing countless militants, among them Osama bin Laden. While Mr. Obama made significant progress in degrading this threat —he Islamic State has lost considerable territory in both Iraq and Syria —e did not put an end to violent extremism. Mr. Trump is now pledging to do more and better.

The problem is that his approach, as we know it, is more likely to further inflame anti-American sentiment around the world than to make the United States safer. Mr. Trump has not explained how he would destroy the terrorist danger. But his use of slogans like “adical Islam,”hich echo the views of his closest advisers, implies a naïe reading of the threat from about 40,000 extremists, while demonizing and alienating many of the world’ 1.6 billion Muslims.

Mr. Trump’ Plans

The emerging details suggest that Mr. Trump’ plans to eradicate violent extremists are not only at odds with Mr. Obama’; they trample on American values and international law. It was reported on Wednesday that Mr. Trump was planning to block Syrians and others from “error prone”ations from entering the United States, at least temporarily, even though Washington already vets visitors from such countries. While people from Syria, Iran, Sudan, Libya, Somalia, Yemen and Iraq would be blocked by a monthlong ban, Mr. Trump appears, inexplicably, to be exempting Afghanistan and Saudi Arabia, home of 15 of the 19 extremists who hijacked the planes on Sept. 11. Refugee admissions would be halted for 120 days while screening procedures are reviewed, with the number allowed in cut from 110,000 to 50,000.

Another draft executive order would allow the C.I.A. to revive the once-secret program under which terrorism suspects were interrogated in “lack site”risons overseas, which were shut down by Mr. Obama in 2009. The order would also re-examine the use of torture, which was widely condemned in the Bush era and is opposed by Mr. Trump’ own defense secretary.

Mr. Trump would also keep open the prison at Guantáamo Bay, which Mr. Obama tried to close, and reportedly is considering designating the Muslim Brotherhood, which is involved in Muslim politics in a number of countries, as a terrorist organization. Some experts see the move as a chance for the Trump administration to limit Muslim political activity in the United States. But since President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, a NATO ally, sympathizes with the Muslim Brotherhood, such a step would further complicate that fraught alliance.

Taken together, Mr. Trump’ plans would damage America’ credibility as guardian of human rights, anger allies and undermine civil liberties at home. They will also inspire fear in law-abiding Muslims everywhere, but especially those in America, whose help is crucial to identifying and pre-empting young people tempted by extremism.

At the C.I.A. meeting, Mr. Trump hinted at a yet more radical step. During the campaign, he often lamented that America did not take possession of Iraq’ oil after the 2003 invasion. On Saturday, he went further and said “aybe we’l have another chance,”uggesting he may be considering another invasion to seize Iraq’ oil, a violation of international law. Such a move, against an ally no less, could incite extremist attacks against the United States. Mr. Trump seemed not to realize that ISIS gets most of its oil revenue from Syria.

Sources of Inspiration

To understand Mr. Trump’ thinking, one might look to his national security adviser, retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, author of the book “he Field of Fight.”r. Flynn was fired from his job as head of the Defense Intelligence Agency in the Obama administration. He has trafficked in fake news and been part of the world of conspiracy theorists who trade in fantasies that Shariah law is being imposed on Americans.

A fearful tone permeates Mr. Flynn’ book, which warns, “e’e in a world war against a messianic mass movement of evil people, most of them inspired by a totalitarian ideology: Radical Islam.”or Mr. Flynn and fellow radicals, the fight isn’ against a small number of religious fanatics who seek to attack the West and its Arab allies, but an entire religion.

Mr. Obama and former President George W. Bush generally agreed that terrorists had perverted the teachings of Islam, not that Islam was the problem. For them and most national security experts, containing terrorism meant focusing on individuals and groups that were intent on doing harm to America —amely Al Qaeda and groups like ISIS —hile not turning all Muslims into the enemy.

Not so Mr. Trump, who said last year, “ think Islam hates us,”nd Mr. Flynn, who has decried Islamism as a “icious cancer.”oth Mr. Flynn and Sebastian Gorka, the national security editor at the alt-right website Breitbart News, who may be considered for a position in the Trump administration as a counterterrorism adviser and wrote a book titled ”efeating Jihad,”haracterize “adical Islam”o be as grave a threat as Hitler in World War II and the Soviet Union in the Cold War.

In his book, Mr. Flynn labels as extremist enemies a wide range of groups, including not just Sunni Muslim groups like ISIS and Al Qaeda, but countless others and many countries, like North Korea, Shiite-majority Iran, China, Syria, Venezuela and Russia. Mr. Flynn seems to be advocating a shotgun approach toward a target that requires precision.

Mr. Flynn also hints that the battlefield could expand beyond current conflicts in the Middle East, writing that “e must engage the violent Islamists wherever they are”nd promising “evere consequences”or Saudi Arabia and other countries if they continue aiding terrorist groups. He is especially alarmed about Iran and argues that Washington “hould consider how to change Iran from within.”

The president has a responsibility to defend the country against extremist threats, but the ideas of Mr. Flynn and others, if adopted, seem like a recipe for endless world war. It is especially hard to see how destabilizing Iran, one of the few intact countries in the Middle East, would advance American interests at a time the region is in chaos.

The United States undoubtedly must find more effective ways to defeat terrorists, including by undermining their message. If Mr. Trump can do that, it will be to his credit. But to a great extent success will depend on long-term cooperation from Muslim leaders and allies.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY TYLER COMRIE)

Document INHT000020170126ed1q0000h



us
Trump Will Call for a Pentagon Plan to Hit  ISIS  Harder, Officials Say

By MICHAEL R. GORDON, HELENE COOPER and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,461 words
26 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —he White House is drafting a presidential directive that calls on Defense Secretary James N. Mattis to devise plans to more aggressively strike the Islamic State, which could include American artillery on the ground in Syria and Army attack helicopters to support an assault on the group’ capital, Raqqa, officials said.

President Trump, who is to make his first visit to the Pentagon as commander in chief on Friday, will demand that the new options be presented to him within 30 days, the officials said. During the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump repeatedly said that he had a secret plan to defeat the Islamic State, but he also said that he would give his commanders a month to come up with new options.

The White House is also expected to press for a review of the United States nuclear posture —ne that retains all three legs of the nuclear arsenal with weapons aboard bombers and submarines and in underground missile silos —s well as a review of how to achieve the president’ goal of fielding a “tate of the art”ntimissile system.

During the campaign, Mr. Trump pledged to expand the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps, and a draft directive calls for steps to improve the military’ readiness to fight on short notice.

The directive to identify new ways to hasten the demise of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS and ISIL, has been widely anticipated by military commanders, who have begun drafting classified options to increase the pressure on the militant group, especially in Raqqa and Mosul, the stronghold in Iraq.

Work on the directive was described by several current and former officials who are close to the White House and who requested anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the administration’ internal deliberations. The White House had no comment.

The man charged with overseeing this re-examination of American defense is Mr. Mattis, a retired Marine Corps four-star general who commanded American forces in the Middle East and will be working in partnership with Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The men have known each other for years and Mr. Mattis used to be General Dunford’ commanding officer while in the Marines.

Mr. Mattis will face multiple challenges. As an emissary to longstanding allies in Asia and Europe, he has staked out a position as the Trump administration’ reassurer-in-chief.

One of Mr. Mattis’ first moves as defense secretary was to phone the NATO secretary general to assure him that he strongly supported the alliance that Mr. Trump has criticized as “bsolete.”r. Mattis will fly to Asia next week on a trip to allay concerns in Japan and South Korea that the United States might abandon longstanding commitments to their security.

A week after that, Mr. Mattis is expected to make another reassurance trip —his one to Europe —o meet with counterparts at NATO in Brussels and then at a security conference in Munich.

Lawmakers and even some members of the military are hoping that Mr. Mattis can also serve as a counterweight on some of the new administration’ more hard-line positions. In a classified operations center at one Special Operations headquarters, a photo of Mr. Mattis is taped to a board with various captions written underneath. On Thursday morning, the caption read: “atch over us.”

During his first visit to the Pentagon, Mr. Trump will conduct a ceremonial swearing-in of Mr. Mattis and is expected to sign the new directives and have a short meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Mr. Trump and Mr. Mattis appear to have some positive chemistry. They were seen chatting warmly on the reviewing stand during the inaugural parade. The new commander-in-chief relishes referring to “ad Dog”attis at every opportunity, even though the retired general does not like that nickname and insists it is no more than a media invention.

And while they agree on the need for more military spending, some of the defense secretary’ views are at odds with his new boss, including his skepticism of Russia’ intentions, his traditional support for allies and flat opposition to the use of torture in interrogating terrorists.

The day before Mr. Mattis came to work at the Defense Department, he issued a statement to the Pentagon work force that cast the United States as a bulwark of the international order and the guardian of important alliances. In contrast to the “merica First”ratory emanating from the White House, Mr. Mattis vowed that the Pentagon would work “or an America that remains a steady beacon of hope for all mankind.”

“eneral Mattis is prepared to give the president the best advice he can as secretary of defense even if it’ not something the president wants to hear,”aid Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island, the senior Democrat on the Armed Services Committee, who spoke to Mr. Mattis on Tuesday. “he question is, how long can he do that if he’ not being responded to.”

Crafting a plan to step up the fight against the Islamic State is the most urgent task facing Mr. Mattis. When President Barack Obama left office, half of Mosul remained in the hands of the militants. Tens of thousands of American-backed Syrian Kurdish and Arab fighters were closing in on Raqqa, but there was no agreement on which force should seize the capital itself.

The potential options include expanding the use of American Special Operations forces, raising the troop ceilings on United States forces in Iraq and Syria and having the White House delegate more authorities to the Pentagon and its commanders in the field, to speed up decision-making.

A difficult decision also confronts the Pentagon on whether to risk alienating Turkey by arming the Syrian Kurds for the Raqqa battle, or whether to cobble together a more diverse force that could include Turkish troops, Turkish backed opposition groups and perhaps even elements of the Army’ 82nd Airborne Division, as well as Apache helicopters and artillery. Turkey considers the Syrian Kurds terrorists and has been trying to forge closer ties with the Trump administration.

Expanding the American military will also pose challenges because of the soaring cost of some key weapons programs and the ambitious scope of the buildup Mr. Trump is seeking. As the steward of the Pentagon’ nearly $600 billion annual budget, Mr. Mattis will face tough choices, as it seems unlikely that the additional spending Mr. Trump plans for the armed forces can pay for all of the ambitious programs he has promised.

During the campaign, Mr. Trump called for a Navy of 350 ships, up from the current fleet of 272, and to expand the Army to 540,000 troops, an increase of about 65,000. The Air Force and Marines would also grow.

Funding such a military building would be costly. While the Pentagon has yet to outline its spending under the new administration, a paper by Senator John McCain, who heads the Armed Services Committee and is advocating a similar buildup, calls for spending $430 billion more than is currently planned, for the next five years.

Other directives in the works could affect the military. Mr. Trump told ABC News on Wednesday that he would “bsolutely do safe zones”n Syria for refugees fleeing the violence there. A draft executive order obtained by The New York Times calls for Mr. Mattis, along with Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, to produce a plan within 90 days for safe zones in Syria.

In the past, American military officials have warned that such a move would escalate the American involvement in the war in Syria, something the Obama administration staunchly opposed.

Military experts are looking to see who will join Mr. Mattis’ team at the Pentagon —nd how many are picked by the new defense secretary himself. Mr. Mattis’ chief of staff will be Kevin M. Sweeney, a retired rear admiral whom Mr. Mattis has known for years. His senior military assistant will be Rear Adm. Craig S. Faller, who previously served as the top operations officer at Central Command when Mr. Mattis was in charge there.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

PHOTO: Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, left, greeted Defense Secretary James N. Mattis on Saturday at the Pentagon in Arlington, Va. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEX WONG/GETTY IMAGES) (A17)

* James Mattis Strikes Far Harsher Tone Than Trump on Russia

Document INHT000020170127ed1q00012



arts
‘erpetual Revolution’hows Artists Shaping Their Times; Art Review

By HOLLAND COTTER 
1,835 words
26 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In an interview, the singer Nina Simone once said, “n artist’ duty is to reflect the times,”y which she meant, basically, politics of the day, and in her case, racial politics. “ think that is true of painters, sculptors, poets, musicians,”he added. “s far as I’ concerned, it’ their choice, but I choose to reflect the times.”

Institutions can make that choice, too. The International Center of Photography did when it opened its doors in 1974 as a showcase for socially concerned photography, which encompassed photojournalism and so-called street photography. For over 40 years, the center has stayed on mission, even as the technology of picture-making has expanded, and the main street has become the internet.

A new exhibition, “erpetual Revolution: The Image and Social Change,”eflects those shifts. It’ as committedly topical as anything the center has done, with sections focused on climate change, immigration, gender issues, racial turmoil, terrorism and the 2016 election. At the same time, it looks different from shows past because digital media —martphone videos, Twitter outtakes, Instagram feeds —utnumber photographic prints.

The embrace of the digital was probably inevitable for the center, an institution that clearly doesn’ want to freeze into a yesterday-museum. But it necessitates a rethinking of old ideas. It requires seeing photography as part of a larger, amorphous category, one morally up for grabs, called visual culture. And it requires recognizing that in the digital present, visual culture does more than reflect reality: For better and for worse, it creates it.

For the center, the transition has been bumpy. It started decisively with the 2016 exhibition “ublic, Private, Secret,” the institution’ inaugural venture on the Bowery. Some people loathed the show, finding it a meanspirited mess that mixed too many media to no discernible end. (For me, it captured the random, narcissistic viciousness of internet culture to a T, and gave it a history.) “erpetual Revolution”s an improvement.

It pushes the use of new media even further, but in a directed way, and with nuances attributable, my guess is, to the fact that this is a group effort. The center curators Carol Squiers and Cynthia Young have led a team that includes the assistant curators Susan Carlson and Claartje van Dijk, and the adjunct curators Joanna Lehan and Kalia Brooks, with assistance from Akshay Bhoan and Quito Ziegler. Different curators handled individual sections, but everyone was working with a shared model.

The opening section, on climate change, gives a sense of the governing method. It starts with a familiar photograph: the 1968 NASA shot of the Earth, as seen from the moon, an image that became a kind of logo for a nascent ecology movement, which produced the Environmental Protection Agency two years later. Next comes a bit of digital wizardry in a recent video charting temperature changes across the globe during roughly the past century. Then the apocalypse, or what looks like one, in a clip from the 2012 film “hasing Ice,” in which melting glaciers, filmed by the American photographer James Balog, split apart and collapse in agonized slow motion.

Other works bring cosmically scaled events down to ground level. In a mural-like collage, made from internet-sourced photos and Post-it notes, the artist Rachel Schragis reconstructs the New York People’ Climate March of 2014. Instagram pictures by the Native American photographer Camille Seaman document a protest in progress against the laying of a fuel pipeline at the Standing Rock Sioux Reservation in North Dakota.

Here we’e in breaking-news territory. The collage, with its miniature banners and countless, tightly packed figures, looks like a flashback, or flash-forward, to the recent Women’ March. Ms. Seaman’ photographs are whiplash reminders that, in his first week in office as president, Donald J. Trump not only ordered a go-ahead for the pipeline but also imposed a communications blackout on the E.P.A.

You’ be hard-pressed to find any relief to this grim picture, though the show comes up with one in a fanciful video by Mel Chin, shot in Paris during the 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference, when the city was still reeling from terrorist attacks. The film makes the point that all violence —ersonal, ideological, environmental —s connected. And it does so through an apparitional figure: an Inuit visitor who drives a sled pulled by French poodles through Paris parks and insists that the earth’ condition, though dire, is reparable if people will lay down their arms and work together.

The show’ second section, “he Flood: Refugees and Representation,”lso blends static and moving images, but makes a strong case for traditional photography as a form of evidence and a vehicle of emotion. There’ digital work here, including a video starring —nd that’ the right word —n unfailingly cheerful Syrian refugee named Thair Orfahli, who documented a hazardous Mediterranean crossing and a rescue by the Italian coast guard in emails, tweets, videos and selfies generated by his smartphone, his only possession.

It’ a spirit lifter to encounter Mr. Orfahli (and infuriating to think that if he’ arrived on American shores under our newly proposed refugee policies, he might have been turned away). Yet my eye kept returning to conventional photographs hung or projected on the gallery wall: to black-and-white images of people trying to flee war-torn Europe in the 1930s and ’0s, by Robert Capa and Ruth Gruber; and 2015 pictures of Middle Eastern refugees arriving, exhausted and shaken, in Greece, by Daniel Etter and Sergey Ponomarev.

Is my partly unconscious preference for the still picture simply the result of long-established habits of looking? Or is there another, resistant factor involved? When I look at moving images, my viewing time and pace is predetermined; I’ on someone else’ clock. When I look at a photograph, I’ on my own clock. I see an image, but I also have the option of contemplating it, living in it, savoring its details, thinking it through.

The show picks up on the bottom level of the center’ duplex space, with nearly three dozen photographs in a section called “lack Lives (Have Always) Mattered.”hese pictures are from the center’ collection and constitute a capsule tour of African-American history from before the Civil War to the 1960s.

It’ a story of heroes (Marian Anderson, Elizabeth Eckford) and horrors (an 1863 shot of a man’ whip-scarred back; a 1968 picture of a Black Panthers’ffice window pierced by police bullets). It’ also about everyday African-American life, intrinsically political and captured in images of 19th-century cotton field workers; World War I soldiers; black members of the South Carolina legislature during Reconstruction.

And the chronicle is brought up to date in three strong video pieces connected to the Black Lives Matter movement. One, by the collective HowDoYouSayYaminAfrican?, is a solid wall of images, playing on 32 stacked monitors, related to the killing of Michael Brown by a white police officer in Ferguson, Mo. Another is a set of digital memorials to Philando Castile, who was also killed by a white officer, compiled by the Minnesota website Pollen Midwest. And the third video, by Sheila Pree Bright, layers old and recent documentary material, including Ms. Simone’ interview, to make a case for a new black civil rights movement. And that movement overlaps with another, explored in an adjoining section called “he Fluidity of Gender.”

The fact that two of the founders of Black Lives Matter —Alicia Garza and Patrisse Khan-Cullors —re gay women is just one point of intersection; there are many. Although the L.G.B.T.Q. movement has been substantially documented, a visual history of the current transgender revolution is in the start-up stage. The show does its part to expand the record, much of it in digital form.

There are a few vintage items: a video clip of the transgender pioneer Christine Jorgensen, giving a poised, no-nonsense press interview in 1952; and a sassy slide-show paean to 1980s performers by Linda Simpson titled “he Drag Explosion.” lot of what’ here, though, is new. From last year comes the music video “ Am Her,”y the African-American trans singer Shea Diamond, and one by the self-described multigendered Mykki Blanco (born Michael David Quattlebaum Jr.), delivering a rap version of Zoe Leonard’ 1992 election-year anthem about wanting a lesbian for president.

The ethnic variety of this section is wide, as suggested by hashtags like #queerappalachia and #QueerMuslim. And the degree, and kind, of self-invention is dizzying, and contagious.

Unsurprisingly, this sense of openness bumps up hard against the show’ penultimate section, “ropaganda and the Islamic State,”hich consists of ISIS promotional videos. Designed for internet distribution, they’e complicated and artful. They, too, play with self-invention and theater, but with the aim of hammering down, rather than loosening up, utopian possibilities.

It’ oppressive stuff, installed, as if for maximum discretion, like a traditional photography display: a line of small, harmless-looking framed things —ideo screens in this case —n the wall. Oppressive, too, is the exhibition’ coda, “he Right-Wing Fringe and the 2016 Election.”ith Facebook, Twitter and Instagram as the primary platforms for its racist and misogynistic images, it suggests two things.

One, that with the unedited flow of visual information now streaming through the internet, “oncerned photography”as both a weaker, and potentially more powerful, presence than ever. And, two, that to an unprecedented degree, images —all them art or not —eflect and shape the times.

At the moment, the shaping power is up for grabs by opposing revolutions, one led by the White House, the other by feet in the street. The street needs to take visual culture —ncluding photography —nd make it its own, right now. This is where artists come in.

Perpetual Revolution: The Image and Social Change Through May 7 at the International Center of Photography, Manhattan; 212-857-0000, icp.org

PHOTOS: A detail from “onfronting the Climate: A Flowchart of the People’ Climate March,” collage of internet photos and Post-it notes, by Rachel Schragis, in the show “erpetual Revolution.”PHOTOGRAPH BY RACHEL SCHRAGIS) (C19); An image from Mel Chin’ “he Arctic Is Paris,” video that the artist shot during the 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MEL CHIN); Top, an image from the video “1960Now: Art + Intersection,”y Sheila Pree Bright, which looks at black history. Above, glaciers in “hasing Ice,”y James Balog, a film on climate change. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SHEILA PREE BRIGHT; JAMES BALOG, 2016 CHASING INC., LLC); A screen shot from the video “he Right-Wing Fringe and the 2016 Election.”PHOTOGRAPH VIA INTERNATIONAL CENTER OF PHOTOGRAPHY) (C24)

Document INHT000020170130ed1q0000k



Movies
Review: Climate Change and Conflicts in ‘he Age of Consequences’

By GLENN KENNY 
369 words
26 January 2017
22:27
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Last year, Jared P. Scott tackled financial inequality in “equiem for the American Dream,” a film about Noam Chomsky, of which he was a director. In “he Age of Consequences,” Mr. Scott looks at climate change from the perspective of military experts rather than that of scientists.

Michael Breen, a former Army officer, considers the role of climate change in human conflicts. “hink about relationships we don’ often look at,”e says. “he civil war in Syria, now going on for years, hundreds of thousands dead —he entire region is in chaos as a result.”he movie details how a three-year drought helped precipitate that war.

Talking about one of the strategies of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, the retired Brig. Gen. Stephen Cheney states, “ou control the water, you control the livelihood of the people.”limate change affects the amount of water, and so terrorist organizations move to where the water is. The connection between environmental disaster and terrorism is drawn, persuasively. (The “ad Max: Fury Road”cenario in which a despot clings to power by holding on to a water supply starts to look mildly plausible.)

The information here is compelling and frightening, but the movie is ham-handed. Malcolm Francis’ almost nonstop score is emphatic to a fault; interviewees extrapolate a “erfect storm”f concurrent catastrophes that could cripple the United States; there’ no bright side, and scant hope, just 70 minutes of unrelenting bad news served with dollops of implicit audience-blaming. A tacked-on eight-minute “all to action”oda feels halfhearted.

At one point, a historian observes that “dvanced societies were very vulnerable to confusing lifestyle with life itself.”his may be true, but delivered in this tricksy, overdetermined way, it’ likely to elicit a pot-calling-the-kettle-black response from overwhelmed viewers.

Not rated. Running time: 1 hour 20 minutes.

The Age of Consequences investigates climate change impacts on increased resource scarcity, migration, and conflict through the lens of national security and global stability. Through unflinching case-study analysis, distinguished U.S. military admi | By ENCOMPASS FILMS and FLASHPOINT FILMS 

Document NYTFEED020170126ed1q008hl



EDITORIAL
Editorial Desk; SECTA
'I Think Islam Hates Us'

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
1,215 words
26 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
28
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Eradicating ''radical Islamic terrorism'' from the face of the earth has been President Trump's mantra, first in the campaign, then in his Inaugural Address and remarks a day later to the C.I.A.

No one would argue with fighting back against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, and other terrorist groups that threaten the United States, Europe, the Middle East and beyond. For eight years, President Barack Obama did just that, using a multilayered approach that included launching thousands of air and drone strikes in at least a half dozen countries and killing countless militants, among them Osama bin Laden. While Mr. Obama made significant progress in degrading this threat -- the Islamic State has lost considerable territory in both Iraq and Syria -- he did not put an end to violent extremism. Mr. Trump is now pledging to do more and better.

The problem is that his approach, as we know it, is more likely to further inflame anti-American sentiment around the world than to make the United States safer. Mr. Trump has not explained how he would destroy the terrorist danger. But his use of slogans like ''radical Islam,'' which echo the views of his closest advisers, implies a naïe reading of the threat from about 40,000 extremists, while demonizing and alienating many of the world's 1.6 billion Muslims.

Mr. Trump's Plans

The emerging details suggest that Mr. Trump's plans to eradicate violent extremists are not only at odds with Mr. Obama's; they trample on American values and international law. It was reported on Wednesday that Mr. Trump was planning to block Syrians and others from ''terror prone'' nations from entering the United States, at least temporarily, even though Washington already vets visitors from such countries. While people from Syria, Iran, Sudan, Libya, Somalia, Yemen and Iraq would be blocked by a monthlong ban, Mr. Trump appears, inexplicably, to be exempting Afghanistan and Saudi Arabia, home of 15 of the 19 extremists who hijacked the planes on Sept. 11. Refugee admissions would be halted for 120 days while screening procedures are reviewed, with the number allowed in cut from 110,000 to 50,000.

Another draft executive order would allow the C.I.A. to revive the once-secret program under which terrorism suspects were interrogated in ''black site'' prisons overseas, which were shut down by Mr. Obama in 2009. The order would also re-examine the use of torture, which was widely condemned in the Bush era and is opposed by Mr. Trump's own defense secretary.

Mr. Trump would also keep open the prison at Guantáamo Bay, which Mr. Obama tried to close, and reportedly is considering designating the Muslim Brotherhood, which is involved in Muslim politics in a number of countries, as a terrorist organization. Some experts see the move as a chance for the Trump administration to limit Muslim political activity in the United States. But since President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, a NATO ally, sympathizes with the Muslim Brotherhood, such a step would further complicate that fraught alliance.

Taken together, Mr. Trump's plans would damage America's credibility as guardian of human rights, anger allies and undermine civil liberties at home. They will also inspire fear in law-abiding Muslims everywhere, but especially those in America, whose help is crucial to identifying and pre-empting young people tempted by extremism.

At the C.I.A. meeting, Mr. Trump hinted at a yet more radical step. During the campaign, he often lamented that America did not take possession of Iraq's oil after the 2003 invasion. On Saturday, he went further and said ''maybe we'll have another chance,'' suggesting he may be considering another invasion to seize Iraq's oil, a violation of international law. Such a move, against an ally no less, could incite extremist attacks against the United States. Mr. Trump seemed not to realize that ISIS gets most of its oil revenue from Syria.

Sources of Inspiration

To understand Mr. Trump's thinking, one might look to his national security adviser, retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, author of the book ''The Field of Fight.'' Mr. Flynn was fired from his job as head of the Defense Intelligence Agency in the Obama administration. He has trafficked in fake news and been part of the world of conspiracy theorists who trade in fantasies that Shariah law is being imposed on Americans.

A fearful tone permeates Mr. Flynn's book, which warns, ''We're in a world war against a messianic mass movement of evil people, most of them inspired by a totalitarian ideology: Radical Islam.'' For Mr. Flynn and fellow radicals, the fight isn't against a small number of religious fanatics who seek to attack the West and its Arab allies, but an entire religion.

Mr. Obama and former President George W. Bush generally agreed that terrorists had perverted the teachings of Islam, not that Islam was the problem. For them and most national security experts, containing terrorism meant focusing on individuals and groups that were intent on doing harm to America -- namely Al Qaeda and groups like ISIS -- while not turning all Muslims into the enemy.

Not so Mr. Trump, who said last year, ''I think Islam hates us,'' and Mr. Flynn, who has decried Islamism as a ''vicious cancer.'' Both Mr. Flynn and Sebastian Gorka, the national security editor at the alt-right website Breitbart News, who may be considered for a position in the Trump administration as a counterterrorism adviser and wrote a book titled ''Defeating Jihad,'' characterize ''radical Islam'' to be as grave a threat as Hitler in World War II and the Soviet Union in the Cold War.

In his book, Mr. Flynn labels as extremist enemies a wide range of groups, including not just Sunni Muslim groups like ISIS and Al Qaeda, but countless others and many countries, like North Korea, Shiite-majority Iran, China, Syria, Venezuela and Russia. Mr. Flynn seems to be advocating a shotgun approach toward a target that requires precision.

Mr. Flynn also hints that the battlefield could expand beyond current conflicts in the Middle East, writing that ''we must engage the violent Islamists wherever they are'' and promising ''severe consequences'' for Saudi Arabia and other countries if they continue aiding terrorist groups. He is especially alarmed about Iran and argues that Washington ''should consider how to change Iran from within.''

The president has a responsibility to defend the country against extremist threats, but the ideas of Mr. Flynn and others, if adopted, seem like a recipe for endless world war. It is especially hard to see how destabilizing Iran, one of the few intact countries in the Middle East, would advance American interests at a time the region is in chaos.

The United States undoubtedly must find more effective ways to defeat terrorists, including by undermining their message. If Mr. Trump can do that, it will be to his credit. But to a great extent success will depend on long-term cooperation from Muslim leaders and allies.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY TYLER COMRIE) 

Document NYTF000020170126ed1q0006k



Foreign Desk; SECTA
An Inside Look at the War on  ISIS  in Iraq

By IVOR PRICKETT 
1,026 words
26 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq -- After three months of fighting, the battle to retake Mosul has entered a new chapter, but the Islamic State's vast arsenal of car bombs and suicide vests is far from spent and most of the civilian population is still trapped.

By Friday, the government forces had pushed the militants across the Tigris River, which divides the city. With a partial victory in sight, a small group of journalists were invited by the government to report from the besieged city.

The mood among the troops was mostly celebratory: The Islamic State was on the run. But the fighting was far from over, and the danger still all too real. On the other side of the Tigris -- just a few hundred yards away and home to 750,000 people -- the militants were still in control.

I was embedded with a special forces unit, led by Staff Col. Muhanad Saad. These soldiers are among the Iraqi Army's best troops. They faced Islamic State booby traps, gunmen and, perhaps scariest of all, suicide car bombers. At one point, the troops pointed their rifles skyward to shoot down an ISIS drone carrying an explosive payload.

As our convoy of tanks, armor-plated bulldozers and Humvees snaked through the city, small groups of commandos peeled off to search houses in which they believed militants were hiding. Fearing booby traps, they moved carefully through buildings, peering into cupboards and behind couches, always careful not to move anything that could trigger a makeshift explosive.

The militants who remained in eastern Mosul were there to fight to the death. Slowly, the soldiers picked off fighters one by one. The body of one fighter was found sprawled in the gated driveway of a home on a leafy street in the upscale Andalus neighborhood. His dusty, mangled body was at odds with what still was a beautiful and serene part of the city.

A boy, no more than 10, appeared from the house next door and hardly gave the macabre scene on his doorstep a second glance.

Though much of the worst fighting was over, the soldiers were still on alert for suicide car bombers, a fear well founded.

Occasionally, a radio would crackle with news that a car bomber had been spotted nearby. After a few tense minutes, we would hear the sound of a missile fired by a coalition warplane and the car exploding.

At one point, a suspicious car was reported nearby and heading straight for our position.

The bomber had broken through a line of parked cars, intended to stop just such an attack, and detonated his explosives. The fireball destroyed two Humvees and injured four soldiers.

The bomb shattered nearby windows, left a crater the size of a boulder, and threw burning pieces of the vehicle into the first floor of a nearby house.

Slowly, residents emerged from their homes to greet and thank their liberators. Visibly pale and wan, presumably from spending days indoors away from the fighting, men warily peered from their homes' front gates, while the women and girls inside waved and cried out.

Much of the soldiers' work was slow going. Clearing houses, room by room. Or searching the huge, unfinished mosque in Al Thaqafa neighborhood.

Several military snipers took up positions on the balconies of the once-luxurious Nineveh International Hotel. From there they could look across the Tigris, monitoring and targeting their enemy several hundred yards away.

Many of the residents able to leave have sought refuge at the camps on the edge of Nineveh Province and in Iraqi Kurdistan.

The humanitarian situation in eastern Mosul is dire. Most aid organizations have avoided the front lines because of security concerns.

Thousands of people have fled eastern Mosul as the fighting has intensified and the front lines have shifted. All five of the Tigris River bridges that connected the city were destroyed in airstrikes at the end of last year.

Utilities like running water and electricity are nonexistent in many districts, and the city lacks basic medical care.

As the battle moves west, humanitarian organizations are worried about the 750,000 people still under Islamic State control in the western half of the city.

Although Iraqi forces and coalition airstrikes have tried to avoid civilian casualties, there is no avoiding the fact that this fighting is taking place in a heavily populated urban environment.

One man, Khalid Mohammed Qassim, 42, wanted to check on the flour factory where he had worked for 15 years as a driver. While walking, he and his 16-year-old son, Zaid Khalid Mohammed, were killed when they were struck by a roadside bomb, Mr. Qassim's nephew said.

They were buried together in a cemetery in Gogjali, a suburb, where the gravediggers say they bury about 10 people every day. As fighting spreads to the western half of the city, they said, they will soon be busier.

Iraqi special forces soldiers surveyed an ISIS car bombing that had reached their lines in eastern Mosul. They have pushed the militants across the river dividing the city, but great risks remain.; Iraqi soldiers, left, took aim at an armed ISIS drone in eastern Mosul shortly after retaking the area. At right, over a bridge damaged by fighting, some Iraqis fled and others returned to another recently retaken neighborhood in the city's east.; If capturing territory in Mosul has been painstaking and deadly, securing it has also been slow going. At left, soldiers with the special forces unit, among the Iraqi Army's best troops, cleared a vast mosque in Al Thaqafa. Above, Iraqi fam- ilies left the eastern neighborhood shortly after Islamic State militants were driv- en out. Much of Mosul's population has been trapped during the three months of fighting. Many of those able to leave the city have sought refuge at camps on the edge of Nineveh Province and in Iraqi Kurdistan. Across the Tigris River in western Mosul -- home to 750,000 people -- the militants were still in control. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170126ed1q0005m



Editorial
Opinion
‘ Think Islam Hates Us’

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
1,210 words
26 January 2017
09:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Eradicating “adical Islamic terrorism”rom the face of the earth has been President Trump’ mantra, first in the campaign, then in his Inaugural Address and remarks a day later to the C.I.A.

No one would argue with fighting back against the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0 , and other terrorist groups that threaten the United States, Europe, the Middle East and beyond. For eight years, President Barack Obama did just that, using a multilayered approach that included launching thousands of air and drone strikes in at least a half dozen countries and killing countless militants, among them Osama bin Laden. While Mr. Obama made significant progress in degrading this threat —he Islamic State has lost considerable territory in both Iraq and Syria —e did not put an end to violent extremism. Mr. Trump is now pledging to do more and better.

The problem is that his approach, as we know it, is more likely to further inflame anti-American sentiment around the world than to make the United States safer. Mr. Trump has not explained how he would destroy the terrorist danger. But his use of slogans like “adical Islam,”hich echo the views of his closest advisers, implies a naïe reading of the threat from about 40,000 extremists, while demonizing and alienating many of the world’ 1.6 billion Muslims.

Mr. Trump’ Plans

The emerging details suggest that Mr. Trump’ plans to eradicate violent extremists are not only at odds with Mr. Obama’; they trample on American values and international law. It was reported on Wednesday that Mr. Trump was planning to block Syrians and others from “error prone”ations from entering the United States, at least temporarily, even though Washington already vets visitors from such countries. While people from Syria, Iran, Sudan, Libya, Somalia, Yemen and Iraq would be blocked by a monthlong ban, Mr. Trump appears, inexplicably, to be exempting Afghanistan and Saudi Arabia, home of 15 of the 19 extremists who hijacked the planes on Sept. 11. Refugee admissions would be halted for 120 days while screening procedures are reviewed, with the number allowed in cut from 110,000 to 50,000.

Another draft executive order would allow the C.I.A. to revive the once-secret program under which terrorism suspects were interrogated in “lack site”risons overseas, which were shut down by Mr. Obama in 2009. The order would also re-examine the use of torture, which was widely condemned in the Bush era and is opposed by Mr. Trump’ own defense secretary.

Mr. Trump would also keep open the prison at Guantáamo Bay, which Mr. Obama tried to close, and reportedly is considering designating the Muslim Brotherhood, which is involved in Muslim politics in a number of countries, as a terrorist organization. Some experts see the move as a chance for the Trump administration to limit Muslim political activity in the United States. But since President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, a NATO ally, sympathizes with the Muslim Brotherhood, such a step would further complicate that fraught alliance.

Taken together, Mr. Trump’ plans would damage America’ credibility as guardian of human rights, anger allies and undermine civil liberties at home. They will also inspire fear in law-abiding Muslims everywhere, but especially those in America, whose help is crucial to identifying and pre-empting young people tempted by extremism.

At the C.I.A. meeting, Mr. Trump hinted at a yet more radical step. During the campaign, he often lamented that America did not take possession of Iraq’ oil after the 2003 invasion. On Saturday, he went further and said “aybe we’l have another chance,”uggesting he may be considering another invasion to seize Iraq’ oil, a violation of international law. Such a move, against an ally no less, could incite extremist attacks against the United States. Mr. Trump seemed not to realize that ISIS gets most of its oil revenue from Syria.

Sources of Inspiration

To understand Mr. Trump’ thinking, one might look to his national security adviser, retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, author of the book “he Field of Fight.”r. Flynn was fired from his job as head of the Defense Intelligence Agency in the Obama administration. He has trafficked in fake news and been part of the world of conspiracy theorists who trade in fantasies that Shariah law is being imposed on Americans.

A fearful tone permeates Mr. Flynn’ book, which warns, “e’e in a world war against a messianic mass movement of evil people, most of them inspired by a totalitarian ideology: Radical Islam.”or Mr. Flynn and fellow radicals, the fight isn’ against a small number of religious fanatics who seek to attack the West and its Arab allies, but an entire religion.

Mr. Obama and former President George W. Bush generally agreed that terrorists had perverted the teachings of Islam, not that Islam was the problem. For them and most national security experts, containing terrorism meant focusing on individuals and groups that were intent on doing harm to America —amely Al Qaeda and groups like ISIS —hile not turning all Muslims into the enemy.

Not so Mr. Trump, who said last year, “ think Islam hates us,”nd Mr. Flynn, who has decried Islamism as a “icious cancer.”oth Mr. Flynn and Sebastian Gorka, the national security editor at the alt-right website Breitbart News, who may be considered for a position in the Trump administration as a counterterrorism adviser and wrote a book titled ”efeating Jihad,”haracterize “adical Islam”o be as grave a threat as Hitler in World War II and the Soviet Union in the Cold War.

In his book, Mr. Flynn labels as extremist enemies a wide range of groups, including not just Sunni Muslim groups like ISIS and Al Qaeda, but countless others and many countries, like North Korea, Shiite-majority Iran, China, Syria, Venezuela and Russia. Mr. Flynn seems to be advocating a shotgun approach toward a target that requires precision.

Mr. Flynn also hints that the battlefield could expand beyond current conflicts in the Middle East, writing that “e must engage the violent Islamists wherever they are”nd promising “evere consequences”or Saudi Arabia and other countries if they continue aiding terrorist groups. He is especially alarmed about Iran and argues that Washington “hould consider how to change Iran from within.”

The president has a responsibility to defend the country against extremist threats, but the ideas of Mr. Flynn and others, if adopted, seem like a recipe for endless world war. It is especially hard to see how destabilizing Iran, one of the few intact countries in the Middle East, would advance American interests at a time the region is in chaos.

The United States undoubtedly must find more effective ways to defeat terrorists, including by undermining their message. If Mr. Trump can do that, it will be to his credit. But to a great extent success will depend on long-term cooperation from Muslim leaders and allies.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Tyler Comrie 

Document NYTFEED020170126ed1q002ju



Talk
Magazine
Joy Reid Has Never Heard a Good Argument for Trump

Interview by ANA MARIE COX 
774 words
25 January 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

A few weeks ago, you said the media should stop covering Donald Trump’ tweets in order to force him into giving a press conference. Now that we’e seen one, did you find it useful? It wasn’ a press conference, and it wasn’ useful. It was a weird third-world pep rally. Trump could make a very fine African or Middle Eastern dictator —t’ the same combination of machismo, charisma and lack of any concern for morals, ethics or standards of behavior that we saw in Hosni Mubarak or Mobutu Sese Seko.

I do think that the media, both left and right, is fascinated by Trump, but our fascination detracts from our ability to cover him. The media needs to start ignoring him until we can make him talk to us in a normal way: not on Twitter and not at a show, which is what a press conference is. He can’ take not having our attention.

Your show fills the time slot left by Melissa Harris-Perry, who left MSNBC after she felt the network was “ilencing”er because of her politics. Do you think her claims had any merit? I wish they had been able to figure out a way for her to do her show in the context of an election. Not every executive could understand the importance of a show like hers in a political year. In the business of television, there’ an emphasis on providing politics to viewers —ut for black women, the Melissa Harris-Perry show was political.

Right, and if you’e a person of color, you’e more sensitive to the lived experience of racism and how it manifests itself in the real world, which might’e been useful for anticipating the rise of Trump. Do you think that there was a difference in how black journalists were able to understand why Trump appealed to people? I think the way that black people, particularly, experience Donald Trump is interesting. If all you knew was the Trump from “he Apprentice,”rom the “ome Alone”ovie, from hip-hop songs, and if all he’ doing is saying: “’ a business guy, I’ going to get you jobs, I’ going to eliminate these terrible trade deals that we hate”nd being a celebrity, he could’e actually been a pretty effective crossover Republican candidate! The problem is, from the moment he became a “irther,”e exposed the inner Trump —he racist Trump, the Trump that New Yorkers know —o the whole world.

During the campaign, you interviewed dozens of Trump supporters and surrogates —as there anyone who presented a sound argument for why they supported him? No. We had one Hispanic woman say that she was for Trump because she needed her taxes to be cut. She was the only person who ever made that argument —or other people, it was always immigration or ISIS or some other thing.

“ake America Great Again”eems to be nostalgia for a time when white supremacy was a more effective institution. White male supremacy. One of my most incorrect assumptions was that white women, particularly white women with college degrees, would have voted in much higher numbers for Hillary Clinton, just because of the sheer outrage over Trump, but the outrage was a lot less in the end than a lot of us thought.

I read a precampaign-season interview with you, and you were apprehensive about Hillary’ appeal to black voters. I firmly believe that she and Bill did real damage to their reputations among African-Americans in 2008, and we saw that play out in the lack of enthusiasm about her.

What did you think about her efforts to capture the African-American vote? At the end of the day, you have to go to those cities and be on the ground. Clinton believed the data that black people were just going to show up just because we’e Democrats. But black people know how to live in a terrible system; we’e been living in a terrible system most of the time we’e been in America. You’e not going to scare us by saying: “f you don’ vote, a racist is going to be the president.”lack people are just like: “eally? Again?”

Sign up for  our newsletter  to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Interview has been condensed and edited.

Joy Reid | Stephen Voss for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170125ed1p002s1



world
A Times Photographer’ Inside Look at the War on  ISIS  in Mosul

By IVOR PRICKETT 
1,028 words
24 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq —fter three months of fighting, the battle to retake Mosul has entered a new chapter, but the Islamic State’ vast arsenal of car bombs and suicide vests is far from spent and most of the civilian population is still trapped.

By Friday, the government forces had pushed the militants across the Tigris River, which divides the city. With a partial victory in sight, a small group of journalists were invited by the government to report from the besieged city.

The mood among the troops was mostly celebratory: The Islamic State was on the run. But the fighting was far from over, and the danger still all too real. On the other side of the Tigris —ust a few hundred yards away and home to 750,000 people —he militants were still in control.

I was embedded with a special forces unit, led by Staff Col. Muhanad Saad. These soldiers are among the Iraqi Army’ best troops. They faced Islamic State booby traps, gunmen and, perhaps scariest of all, suicide car bombers. At one point, the troops pointed their rifles skyward to shoot down an \b ISIS\b0  drone carrying an explosive payload.

As our convoy of tanks, armor-plated bulldozers and Humvees snaked through the city, small groups of commandos peeled off to search houses in which they believed militants were hiding. Fearing booby traps, they moved carefully through buildings, peering into cupboards and behind couches, always careful not to move anything that could trigger a makeshift explosive.

The militants who remained in eastern Mosul were there to fight to the death. Slowly, the soldiers picked off fighters one by one. The body of one fighter was found sprawled in the gated driveway of a home on a leafy street in the upscale Andalus neighborhood. His dusty, mangled body was at odds with what still was a beautiful and serene part of the city.

A boy, no more than 10, appeared from the house next door and hardly gave the macabre scene on his doorstep a second glance.

Though much of the worst fighting was over, the soldiers were still on alert for suicide car bombers, a fear well founded.

Occasionally, a radio would crackle with news that a car bomber had been spotted nearby. After a few tense minutes, we would hear the sound of a missile fired by a coalition warplane and the car exploding.

At one point, a suspicious car was reported nearby and heading straight for our position.

The bomber had broken through a line of parked cars, intended to stop just such an attack, and detonated his explosives. The fireball destroyed two Humvees and injured four soldiers.

The bomb shattered nearby windows, left a crater the size of a boulder, and threw burning pieces of the vehicle into the first floor of a nearby house.

Slowly, residents emerged from their homes to greet and thank their liberators. Visibly pale and wan, presumably from spending days indoors away from the fighting, men warily peered from their homes’ront gates, while the women and girls inside waved and cried out.

Much of the soldiers’ork was slow going. Clearing houses, room by room. Or searching the huge, unfinished mosque in Al Thaqafa neighborhood.

Several military snipers took up positions on the balconies of the once-luxurious Nineveh International Hotel. From there they could look across the Tigris, monitoring and targeting their enemy several hundred yards away.

Many of the residents able to leave have sought refuge at the camps on the edge of Nineveh Province and in Iraqi Kurdistan.

The humanitarian situation in eastern Mosul is dire. Most aid organizations have avoided the front lines because of security concerns.

Thousands of people have fled eastern Mosul as the fighting has intensified and the front lines have shifted. All five of the Tigris River bridges that connected the city were destroyed in airstrikes at the end of last year.

Utilities like running water and electricity are nonexistent in many districts, and the city lacks basic medical care.

As the battle moves west, humanitarian organizations are worried about the 750,000 people still under Islamic State control in the western half of the city.

Although Iraqi forces and coalition airstrikes have tried to avoid civilian casualties, there is no avoiding the fact that this fighting is taking place in a heavily populated urban environment.

One man, Khalid Mohammed Qassim, 42, wanted to check on the flour factory where he had worked for 15 years as a driver. While walking, he and his 16-year-old son, Zaid Khalid Mohammed, were killed when they were struck by a roadside bomb, Mr. Qassim’ nephew said.

They were buried together in a cemetery in Gogjali, a suburb, where the gravediggers say they bury about 10 people every day. As fighting spreads to the western half of the city, they said, they will soon be busier.

PHOTOS: Iraqi special forces soldiers surveyed an ISIS car bombing that had reached their lines in eastern Mosul. They have pushed the militants across the river dividing the city, but great risks remain.; Iraqi soldiers, left, took aim at an armed ISIS drone in eastern Mosul shortly after retaking the area. At right, over a bridge damaged by fighting, some Iraqis fled and others returned to another recently retaken neighborhood in the city’ east.; If capturing territory in Mosul has been painstaking and deadly, securing it has also been slow going. At left, soldiers with the special forces unit, among the Iraqi Army’ best troops, cleared a vast mosque in Al Thaqafa. Above, Iraqi fam- ilies left the eastern neighborhood shortly after Islamic State militants were driv- en out. Much of Mosul’ population has been trapped during the three months of fighting. Many of those able to leave the city have sought refuge at camps on the edge of Nineveh Province and in Iraqi Kurdistan. Across the Tigris River in western Mosul —ome to 750,000 people —he militants were still in control. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Document INHT000020170126ed1o0000q



Notebook
Magazine
Who Didn’ Go to the Women’ March Matters More Than Who Did

By JENNA WORTHAM 
1,190 words
24 January 2017
17:27
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

There’ a photo making the rounds from the women’ march in Washington of a black woman named Angela Peoples (taken by her friend Kevin Banatte) holding a sign that reads, “on’ Forget: White Women Voted for Trump.”n the photo, she stands nonchalantly, casually sucking on a lollipop with a jaded look in her eyes that suggests her familiarity with the ritual of protest, of demonstrating for civil liberties. Behind her stand three white women, all wearing the pink knitted “ussyhats”hat the march made famous. Two are on their phones, pleased grins beaming from their faces. One appears to be taking a triumphant selfie.

A crowd scientist told The New York Times that half a million people came to Washington for the march, and a professor at the University of Connecticut calculated that across the United States, between 3.6 million and 4.6 million people demonstrated. International protests happened in cities like Nairobi, Oslo and Bangkok. The point is: A hell of a lot of women turned out to march. But the photo of Marie captures the fracturing view of America, seen through the lens of civil rights and feminism, that was crystallized after Nov. 8, 2016.

By some descriptions, the turnouts were multigenerational and multiracial. And it’ true that there were children everywhere, and their presence was one of the more hopeful notes of the day’ events, suggesting a long future of activism. And it is also true that some of the most visible speakers at the marches in the United States were women of color (America Ferrera, the Honduran-American actress, gave a rousing speech in D.C., as did Janet Mock. Aisha Tyler and Jessica Williams spoke at the march in Utah, during Sundance), but that was not reflected in the majority of the crowds. Most of the slide shows from the marches show only the occasional black attendee (including Rihanna, who, according to Instagram, showed up to the New York march after the sun went down).

But that didn’ prevent blackness from manifesting in the crowd. Popular signs infuriatingly lifted from moments in black culture, including “t’ Clit,” pun combining the popular slang “it”ith the reference to female anatomy, and several variations of “e Shall Overcomb,”hich conflated the gospel hymn and anthem of the civil rights movement with a garish cartoon of Donald Trump’ saffron-colored cloud of hair. There were other signs, too —argely held by white people, it’ worth noting —hat said, “e love our Muslim, Immigrant, L.G.B.T.Q., Latin Brothers and Sisters,”s well as Black Lives Matters posters. At one point during the march in Manhattan, which I observed for about an hour, an enormous photograph of Mahatma Gandhi floated by —n icon of nonviolence resistance, yes, but also someone who referred to African leaders more than once as savages and kaffirs, a South African derogatory slur. There were also many signs equating gender justice with racial justice. Vagina plushies abounded, as did drawings of vulva and birth canals, and legs spread exuberantly wide. As rallying cries, these were initially thrilling to see, but they began to feel exclusionary as the day wore on. Equating of vaginas with feminism with gender equality felt outdated, given that there were a number of trans women who showed up to support the cause. Other photos were also emblematic of this divide —otably, a sign carried by Amir Talai, an actor and improv performer, that said, “’l See You Nice White Ladies at the Next #BlackLivesMatter March, Right?”

But it is the photo of Peoples that resonates the most for me. It felt indicative of the ways in which the day’ events could be viewed as problematic: the notion that women’ rights were suddenly the most important cause in our nation, or that there haven’ been protests and activist movements worth attending until the election of Donald Trump. The photo of Peoples is certainly the image that was most shared among the black women I know and that surfaced in feeds from women who opted out of the march, who chose to spend time with their families or one another instead. Those who were criticized for not participating reminded their followers of the suffrage movement, when black women were increasingly marginalized in the fight for the right to vote, and highlighted the lack of policing at the women’ march, a luxury never granted at Black Lives Matters demonstrations. And they reminded anyone who’ forgotten that 53 percent of all white women who voted voted for Trump, while 94 percent of black women voters cast their ballots for Hillary Clinton. They reminded people that it is very likely that the white women in the photograph probably know —r are related to —omeone who voted for Trump. That photo cuts to a truth of the election: While black women show up for white women to advance causes that benefit entire movements, the reciprocity is rarely shown.

Every woman I spoke with who traveled to the D.C. march came back brimming with the energy of radicalism and the spirit of change. And it seems to have propelled people into action: Swingleft, which describes itself as an online network created to support progressive candidates in swing districts to “ake back the House in 2018,”eported that it had signed up more than 100,000 people this weekend. The official women’-march site now features a guide to “0 actions in 100 days”hat provides information for contacting senators to protest specific legislation. But here’ something that has stayed with me: On Sunday night, I got a voice message from a rattled friend describing an incident at a D.C. restaurant after the march. She had been with other friends —rown and black, Muslim, speaking Arabic —ll in town for a memorial service, having a quiet dinner afterward to help one another through their grief. A woman approached them and began asking invasive questions about Trump. The group initially complied, and tried to explain their fears when the situation escalated, culminating in the stranger’ hurling words at them like “ISIS”nd “Taliban.”earby sat a table of white women, still proudly donning their pussyhats. The women watched silently. None elected to intervene. “sn’ this what you marched for?”y friend said to them. “sn’ this what today was about? Standing up for injustice? Yet when you see it happen in your face, you just enjoy your meal quietly?”

The nature of American activism –nd feminism –s molting, fast. The coalitions that formed on Saturday will have bigger questions to organized around, questions that will prove more urgent in the years to come. For whom are they marching? Is it only for themselves?

Sign up for  our newsletter  to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Jenna Wortham is a staff writer for the magazine.

Kevin Banatte 

Document NYTFEED020170124ed1o004jx



The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
Love, Lust and Addiction in Old San Juan

By CHARLES ISHERWOOD 
994 words
24 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

x -- I spent a significant portion of ''Tell Hector I Miss Him,'' a new play by Paola Láaro that opened on Monday at the Atlantic Theater Company's second stage, waiting for the title character to arrive. Spoiler alert: Like a certain figure in a seminal modern drama by Samuel Beckett, he never does.

This would not be a notable problem had Ms. Láaro's play compelled rapt attention. But while it is populated by some sharply drawn characters dangling eccentricities and pathologies (addiction foremost among them), and features some passages of biting humor, this darkish comedy-drama lacks focus and narrative drive. I waited in vain, not just for Hector's hopefully galvanizing arrival, but for the dozen characters' lives to connect in meaningful ways.

To be fair, some do, but some don't, lending the play a scattered quality. It comes to feel like a few short plays spliced together to form a full-length one, a collage that lacks an overarching design. Because the plot has so many strands, we never have a chance to engage fully with any one of them.

Still, under the sympathetic direction of David Mendizáal, the ample cast, which includes Selenis Leyva and Dascha Polanco from ''Orange Is the New Black,'' brings defining individuality to their characters, infusing them with a palpably real humanity, despite the occasional whimsical quirk. (One unhinged young woman meows like a cat.)

What they all share is a locale, a down-at-the-heels, drug-infested corner of Puerto Rico's capital, San Juan. Clint Ramos's set, dominated by two stone walls, captures the impoverished atmosphere efficiently, although it strains the eye's patience to stare at these clammy-looking walls, which could almost suggest a prison -- perhaps intentionally -- for two hours and change. (More soothing are the video screens above the stage that show waves lapping the beach.)

A recurring theme: love trouble. One story arc follows a faintly melodramatic triangle among Mostro (Juan Carlos Hernádez), who owns a bodega that binds together some of the story lines; his voluptuous wife, Samira (Ms. Leyva), who has been unable to become pregnant; and her passionate lover, the drug dealer Jeison (Victor Almanzar).

Mr. Almanzar brings a furious intensity to his performance, his eyes blazing with ardor whenever he sees his beloved, whom he is determined to separate from her husband. Ms. Leyva's Samira, however, remains irresolute, lapping up the flaming confessions of love from Jeison, as well as the riotous sex, but reluctant to break with a husband who, while remote and dull, has at least proved steady. In Mr. Hernádez's grave performance, the emotionally reserved Mostro refuses to engage in the theatrics Jeison wants to invoke, retaining a rocklike stillness and stoicism despite the storms threatening to break around him.

Another plot strand involves a similarly frustrated passion, this time on the part of the 16-year-old Isis (Yadira Guevara-Prip, oozing schoolgirlish infatuation), painfully enamored of Malena (Ms. Polanco, all wary indifference), who is virtually unknown to her and 10 years older than she is. Although Malena and her friend Tati (Analisa Velez) do not initially welcome the company of this would-be sidekick and paramour, they eventually warm to her presence. One of the funnier and brasher passages -- Ms. Láaro does not shy away from raw language, to put it mildly -- finds all three bonding over complaints that they don't much like the looks of their genitalia.

Other characters include Toñ (a half-jumpy, half-broody Alexander Flores), a teenager who's been kicked out of school for sexually harassing a teacher; the hotheaded and put-upon Palito (an aptly jittery Sean Carvajal), Jeison's brother, who was born with fetal alcohol syndrome and is moony about Tati, who puts up with him mainly because he's free with his drugs and money; and El Mago (Luis Vega), who earns money doing card tricks for tourists, and comes to the rescue of his friend Hugo (Flaco Navaja) when, after a drunken binge, he soils himself on a bench.

While Ms. Láaro's characters are certainly vivid, they are sometimes burdened with baggage that is never really unpacked. In addition to being prone to flights of exaggerated lyricism on the subject of her love for Malena, for instance, Isis also has a mysterious disease we learn little about. Toñ, whose mother (Lisa Ramirez) is a chronic alcoholic, has thoughts of killing himself, which he confesses to Mostro.

It is, of course, admirable for Ms. Láaro to depict the full range of burdens and stresses that bedevil her characters, and the socioeconomic climate that engenders them. But in trying to paint such an expansive portrait of a community bound mostly by dysfunction, ''Tell Hector I Miss Him'' stretches itself too thin, resulting in a play with more breadth and color than depth.

Tell Hector I Miss Him

Tickets Through Feb. 12. Atlantic Theater Company's Stage 2, Manhattan, 866-411-8111; atlantictheater.org. Running time: 2 hours 10 minutes.

Credits By Paola Láaro; directed by David Mendizáal; sets by Clint Ramos; costumes by Dede M. Ayite; lighting by Eric Southern; sound by Jesse Mandapat; fight direction by UnkleDave's Fight-House; dialect coach, Sol Crespo; production stage manager, Laura Smith; production manager, Ian Paul Guzzone; associate artistic director, Annie MacRae; general manager, Pamela Adams. Presented by Atlantic Theater Company, Neil Pepe, artistic director; Jeffory Lawson, managing director.

Cast Victor Almanzar (Jeison), Sean Carvajal (Palito), Alexander Flores (Toñ), Yadira Guevara-Prip (Isis), Juan Carlos Hernádez (Mostro), Selenis Leyva (Samira), Talene Monahon (La Gata), Flaco Navaja (Hugo), Dascha Polanco (Malena), Lisa Ramirez (Mami), Luis Vega (El Mago) and Analisa Velez (Tati).

Analisa Velez, left, and Dascha Polanco in ''Tell Hector I Miss Him,'' directed by David Mendizáal, at the Atlantic Theater Company. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CAITLIN OCHS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170124ed1o0005v



What’ Going On in This Picture?
The Learning Network
What’ Going On in This Picture? | Jan. 23, 2017

By THE LEARNING NETWORK 
535 words
23 January 2017
11:30
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Updated: Jan. 26, 2017

Students

1. After looking closely at the image above (or at the full-size image), think about these three questions:

•hat is going on in this picture?

•hat do you see that makes you say that?

•hat more can you find?

2. Next, join the conversation by clicking on the comment button and posting in the box that opens on the right. (Students 13 and older are invited to comment, although teachers of younger students are welcome to post what their students have to say.)

3. After you have posted, try reading back to see what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting another comment. Use the “eply”utton or the @ symbol to address that student directly.

Each Monday, our collaborator, Visual Thinking Strategies, will facilitate a discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time by paraphrasing comments and linking to responses to help students’nderstanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.

4. On Thursday afternoons, we will reveal at the bottom of this post more information about the photo. How does reading the caption and learning its back story help you see the image differently?

_________

More?

•ee all images in this series or a slide show of 40 of our favorite images.

•earn how other teachers use it.

•ead our introductory post.

•ind out about the philosophy, curriculum and professional development opportunities offered by Visual Thinking Strategies.

_________

Updated: Jan. 26, 2017

This week’ image comes from the Jan. 13, 2017 “The Week in Pictures”lide show. The original caption reads:

Iraqi federal police officers demonstrated their skills at a Police Day event in Baghdad on Saturday [Jan. 7].

The Iraqi federal police are currently involved in the battle to retake Iraq’ second largest city, Mosul, from the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL. The article “Along Mosul’ Front Line, Desperate Civilians and Dug-In Troops and Fighters”escribes this effort. Tyler Hicks writes:

...I recently spent three weeks in this volatile zone, first with the Iraqi Army in eastern Mosul and then, after setbacks for the army, whose block-by-block battle of attrition was not going the way it had hoped, with units of the Iraqi federal police.

The police, traveling in armored vehicles, are playing a significant role in the battle for Mosul, sometimes supporting the army. They are also responsible for holding their own territory around the city.

The police have been tasked with maintaining areas of the front line; nearby, ISIS fighters are ready and in position.

When holding ground and not on an advance, the two sides intermittently exchange rifle and mortar fire, low-level shows of force that tend to harass more than inflict serious casualties.

What’ going on in this picture? Look closely at the image above or view it in a larger size, then tell us what you see by posting a comment. On Thursday afternoon, we will reveal more about the image and its origins at the bottom of this post. | Karim Kadim/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170123ed1n002bd



FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The Mail Room

By JEANNE MARIE LASKAS 
9,096 words
22 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
31
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

On a recent October morning in the White House mailroom, on the ground floor of the Executive Office Building just beside a loading dock, 10 interns sat at two long tables, each trying to get through 300 letters. Grab a bundle, sit down and read. It was pretty straightforward: Read. A girl doesn't want her mom to be deported, and can the president please help? A guy finally admits to his wife that he's gay, and now he would like to tell the president. A car dealer writes to say his bank is shutting him down, and thanks for nothing, Mr. President. A vet who can't stop seeing what he saw in Iraq writes a barely intelligible rant that makes his point all the more intelligible: ''Help.'' An inmate admits to selling crack to all those people but he wants the president to know he is not a lost cause: ''I have dreams Mr. President, big dreams.'' A man can't find a job. A woman can't find a job. A teacher with advanced certification can't find a damn job.

 A lesbian couple just got married; thank you, Mr. President. A man sends his medical bills, a woman sends her student-loan statements, a child sends her drawing of a cat, a mother sends her teenager's report card -- straight A's, isn't that awesome, Mr. President?

This pile, that pile, another pile over there; pull from the middle if you want. The narrative was sloppy and urgent, America talking all at once. No filter. The handwriting, the ink, the choice of letterhead -- every letter was a real object from a real person, and now you were holding it, and so now you were responsible for it.

Mr. Obama -- My President,

In 2007 I was proud of my hands. They had veneered calluses where my palms touched my fingers. Cuts and scrapes were never severe. Splinters and blisters merely annoyed me. With a viselike grip and dexterous touch my hands were heat-tolerant and cold-ignorant. I was nimble when whittling or when sharpening an ax. I could exfoliate with an open palm when my wife's back itched or my cat arched for a rub. My nails were usually stained after a chore; they were tougher, not cracked, seldom manicured. My hands defined my work, passions, my life.

After 23 years as a land surveyor and nearly 2 years unemployed, I miss my career and my old hands. I kneel nights and clutch new hands together, praying we all can recover what seems lost. May God guide your hands to mold our future.

Thank you for listening to the Citizen I am,

Bobby Ingram

Oxford, Miss.

At the beginning of his first term, President Obama said he wanted to read his mail. He said he would like to see 10 letters a day. After that, the 10LADs, as they came to be called, were put in a purple folder and added to the back of the briefing book he took with him to the residence on the second floor of the White House each night.

Choosing which letters made it to the president started here in the Executive Office Building adjacent to the White House, in the ''hard-mail room,'' which had the tired, unkempt look of a college study hall during finals -- paper everywhere, files stacked along walls, bundles under tables, boxes propping up computer monitors dotted with Post-its, cables hanging. Hushed young men in ties and hushed young women in sweater sets and hose -- you dress up if you work for the White House -- held pencils between their teeth or behind their ears, all of them with their heads bent, reading. There was an equally crowded work space, ''the email room,'' in a satellite office just outside the White House gates on Jackson Place. All in all, the Office of Presidential Correspondence -- ''O.P.C.'' was what everyone called it -- required the orchestration of 50 staff members, 36 interns and a rotating roster of 300 volunteers to keep up with about 10,000 letters and messages every day.

Anyone could nominate a letter or email for inclusion in the day's 10LADs. They called it ''sampling.'' To sample a letter in the hard-mail room, you just wrote ''sample'' (in pencil) on the top left corner of a letter, and then you walked it over and dropped it in the wooden inbox with a sticker on it that said ''Samples.'' About 2 percent of the total incoming mail ended up there. Did the letter move you in some particular way? Don't overthink it. Sample it. The bar was kept deliberately low. These were people writing, and you're a person reading, and the president is a person. Just keep remembering that, and you'll be fine.

Dear Mr. President,

It's late in the evening here in Oahu, and the sun will soon be sinking behind the horizon onto the ocean. [ ... ] Sir, I was injured in Afghanistan in 2011. [ ... ] I wasn't afraid in Afghanistan, but I am horrified at the thought of my future. I want to serve my country, make a difference and live up to the potential my family sees in me. I am scared, I think, because I have no plan on what employment to pursue. It is something that is extremely difficult to me; and with my family leaving the island soon I am truly lost. Sir, all my life I've tried to find what a Good man is, and be that man, but I realize now life is more difficult for some. I'm not sure where I am going, and it is something that I cannot shake. [ ... ]

Sincerely,

Patrick Holbrook

Oahu, Hawaii

''You get attached,'' Jamira Chick, an intern, told me. She had her hair bundled tightly on top of her head and wore a pretty print top. She said that one time she opened a letter from a woman who was writing the president to say she had lost a family member to gun violence. ''She had enclosed photos,'' Chick said. ''Just blood all over in a car. ... '' She tapped her eraser on the table, up and down on the table.

''Everybody has that one letter,'' the staff member in charge of the interns, Yena Bae, told me. The letters could take a toll. Unlike most other shops at the White House, O.P.C. offered monthly counseling sessions to anyone who felt the need.

Besides deciding whether to set a letter aside for the president to read, you had to code it. Every letter. Code it with a ''disposition,'' on the top left corner (again, in pencil). Gun violence; health care; drone strikes; domestic violence; Ukraine; taxes. Put your initials under the code. Code a stack, then stand up to stretch your neck and your legs and take your stack over to ''the wall,'' a tan shelving unit stuffed with paper, labeled shelf after shelf with corresponding dispositions. Gitmo; mortgage crisis; immigration; bees. (Bees?) The codes corresponded to more than 100 different form-response letters from the president that the O.P.C. writing team, a group of nine, worked to constantly update. Meantime, all the letters from kids went into a separate bin, to be picked up by the kid team upstairs; requests for birthday, anniversary and baby acknowledgments went to the greetings team; gifts went to the gifts team. A casework team of six across the hall handled letters that required individual attention from a federal agency. Maybe someone needed help getting benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs, for example; a caseworker could step in and investigate. Two more codes to be aware of: ''Sensitive'' meant someone was writing to the president about a loss, a sickness or other personal trauma. Those went over to Jack Cumming, a quiet guy in beige and the occasional shy grin who spent his days reading letters of condolence from the president, and who often needed a break from the unbearable sadness, and so he liked to hang out in the hard-mail room. ''It's nice to come in here and just ... read,'' he said.

The most important code everyone needed to know about was ''red dot.'' A red dot was an emergency. These were from people writing to the president to say they wanted to kill themselves, or someone else, or they seemed in some way on the edge; if you were wondering if you should write ''red dot'' on a letter, you probably should, and then you immediately walked that one across the hall and gave it to Lacey Higley, the woman in the back corner more or less in charge of rescuing people.

''Do you need a break?'' Bae asked me, whispering, as you do in the hard-mail room. She was sitting with us, flipping through letters faster than us, scribbling. Like all the O.P.C. staff members, she was young, mid-20s; she had carefree, shiny long brown hair, and she wore two rings, a regular band in the regular place and then a thin silver one sitting above a knuckle for flair. ''Do you need cookies? We have cookies.'' She reached for a tub of oatmeal-raisins and slid it. I asked her if she had a letter that haunted her.

''It was from a mother who missed her son,'' she said. She pushed her hair behind her ears. The son had been kidnapped, and the investigation was underway. Bae read the letter a dozen times, stunned by details in it that for reasons of O.P.C. confidentiality she could not reveal to me. ''Everything was hush-hush.'' She told me she alerted the authorities, then felt helpless because there was nothing more she could do. ''Nothing.'' Weeks later, she learned that the son had been killed. She came in to the office and sat at her computer and sobbed. ''What if his mom wrote again?'' She told me the experience changed the direction of her life and her sense of her place in the world.

Chick was leaning in to hear Bae tell the story of the mother and the lost son. She had put her pencil down. ''It's weird I'm going to go from this to being back at school,'' Chick said. ''It's hard to explain all this to my friends.''

''You can't,'' Bae said.

''I never thought about how powerful a letter was.''

''Did you even know we had a correspondence office before you came here?'' Bae asked her.

''I had no idea.''

''You think you're going to be the mail lady or something.''

''We're in the mailroom.''

''The mailroom.''

On a whiteboard was the countdown: ''You have 99 days to make a difference in the life of a letter writer,'' referring to Jan. 19, 2017, the last day of the Obama administration and the last day for this O.P.C. staff, nearly all of whom were political appointees and would no longer have a job at the White House. The election was less than a month away, and Donald Trump was still trailing Hillary Clinton by 8 points, according to the polls. ''Our time is, like, ticking,'' Bae told me. ''We want to put our letter-writers in good shape for the next administration. We want them to be in good hands.''

Presidents have dealt with constituent mail differently over the years. It started simply enough: George Washington opened the mail and answered it. He got about five letters a day. Mail back then was carried by foot, or on horseback or in stagecoaches -- not a high volume. Then came steamboats, then rail and a modernized postal system, and by the end of the 19th century President William McKinley was overwhelmed. One hundred letters every day? He hired someone to help, and that was the origin of O.P.C. It wasn't until the Great Depression that things got especially tricky. In his weekly fireside chats, Franklin D. Roosevelt began a tradition of speaking directly to the country, inviting people to write to him and tell him their troubles. About a half-million letters came pouring in during the first week, and the White House mailroom became a fire hazard. Constituent mail grew from there, and each succeeding president formed a relationship with it. By the end of his presidency, Nixon refused to read anything bad anyone said about him. Reagan answered dozens of letters on weekends; he would stop by the mailroom from time to time, and he enjoyed reading the kid mail. Clinton wanted to see a representative stack every few weeks. George W. Bush liked to get a pile of 10 already-answered letters on occasion. These, anyway, are the anecdotal memories you find from former staff members. Little hard data exists about constituent mail from previous administrations; historians don't focus on it, presidential libraries don't feature it; the vast majority of it has long since been destroyed.

President Obama was the first to come up with a deliberate and explicit practice of 10 letters every day. If the president was home at the White House (he did not tend to mail when he traveled), he would be reading constituent mail, and everyone knew it, and systems were put in place to make sure it happened. The mail had currency. Some staff members called it ''the letter underground.'' Starting in 2010, all hard mail would be scanned and preserved. Starting in 2011, every email every day would be used to create a word cloud, its image distributed around the White House so policy makers and staff members alike could get a glimpse at what everyday Americans were writing in to say.

Dear Mr. President,

[ ... ] YOU, sir, are the PRESIDENT of the United States. YOU, sir, are the one person that IS supposed to HELP the LITTLE PEOPLE like my family and others like us. We are the ones that make this country what it is. You say that jobs are up and spending is up. YOU, sir, need to come to my neck of the woods and see how wrong that is. Because here in Spotsylvania County, it's not. I live in Partlow, a rural community of Spotsylvania, and I tell you what ... jobs are few and far between. My husband and I just want to be able to live and be able to buy a cake or a present for our kids when it's their birthday or for Christmas. That's another thing -- my boys didn't even have a Christmas because we did not have money to buy them presents. Have YOU ever had to tell your girls that Santa isn't coming to your house? [ ... ]

Sincerely,

Bethany Kern

Partlow, Va.

So much of the mail in the beginning of Obama's presidency was about economic hardship and helplessness. There was a feeling of dread about climate change, and a loss of faith in everything from government to banks to the Catholic Church. Here was the new guy who said he could fix things. It was the getting-to-know-you phase. They told him their problems. They told him to quit smoking. They told him, wow, a black guy in the White House. They told him to get Bin Laden. They told him to create jobs. ''Let's see if you're as smart as we hope you are.''

The tone of the letters was the main difference that Annmarie Emmet, a volunteer and a retiree, told me she saw. She read mail all through most of Bush's two terms in office, then stayed on. ''With Bush it would be more like, 'Why aren't you helping these people as a group, or doing more for that group?' As opposed to personal struggles. I would say they felt a more personal connection with the Obamas. Kind of like, 'I'm like you were, I need your help.' And then from the beginning the L.G.B.T.Q. people have flocked to him. You never saw that in the Bush administration.''

Dear Mr. President,

(Because the person I love can be dishonorably discharged for loving me back, even though he is honorably serving his country right now in Iraq, I have to send this letter anonymously. It pains me to have to do so.)

[ ... ] My partner is currently serving in Iraq, and is in a situation where he is under fire on a daily basis. He's a good soldier, and our country needs him to continue doing the excellent job that he has been recognized for.

The day he deployed, I dropped him off far from his base's main gate, and he walked alone in the dark and the rain to report for duty. Where the rest of his buddies were surrounded by spouses and children at mobilization ceremonies, he stood by himself.

The phone trees don't have my name on them, and base support services don't apply -- even though we've been together for 16 years and are raising a beautiful child together. Our communication is self-censored, and we are cruelly unable to nurture each other at the exact moment we both need it the most.

If something were to happen to him, no one from his unit will call me. If, like so many good soldiers before him, he gives that last full measure of devotion, no one will come knock on my door. No one will present me with a flag. It is, and would be, as if the most important thing in his life -- his family -- never existed. [ ... ]

In 2009, Natoma Canfield, a cancer survivor from Medina, Ohio, wrote in detailing her staggering health insurance premiums, a letter Obama would keep framed and hung in a corridor between his private study and the Oval Office. ''I need your health reform bill to help me!!! I simply can no longer afford to pay for my health care costs!!'' It stood in for the tens of thousands of similar letters the mailroom was handling on the health care issue alone. They saw spikes in volume after major events like the mass shootings in Newtown, Conn., and Charleston, S.C.; the Paris terrorist attacks; the government shutdown; Benghazi. You could see it in the word clouds. ''Jobs'' might grow for a time, or ''Syria,'' or ''Trayvon,'' or a cluster like ''family-children-fear'' or ''work-loans-student'' or ''ISIS-money-war'' surrounding a giant ''Help,'' the most common word of all. After a gunman opened fire on police officers in Dallas last year, the word ''police'' ballooned, surrounded by ''God-guns-black-America'' with a tiny ''peace'' and even tinier ''Congress.''

When Obama started commuting prison sentences, a large influx of inmate mail followed. There were scores of regulars writing in. Like the woman who emailed, daily, asking to become the ambassador to Cuba. (She quit after Shaquille O'Neal got the sports-envoy gig.) If one issue remained constant, a solid drumbeat, it was gun violence.

Mr. President,

My wife and I very recently lost our 22-year-old son, David Jr. He took his life with a handgun that he purchased. Our son was precious to us. He could have done anything he chose to do.

I am writing because our son was suffering from mental illness yet still was able to purchase a gun. He had been involuntarily hospitalized when he was 17, yet Pennsylvania allows people with this on their record to purchase a gun.

The sadness we are feeling is overwhelming us. We are trying to be strong for our other three sons, but we are breaking down every day. [ ... ]

Thank you.

David Costello

Philadelphia

The conversation happening in the mail did not always align with the one the White House may have been advancing. ''For years and years, sentencing disparities and criminal-justice-reform issues were coming a lot into hard mail, because that's often the last-resort channel,'' Fiona Reeves told me. She was the director of O.P.C., in charge of everything. ''There was this feeling like only we knew about it.'' The letters made their way to Obama -- Reeves decided to include inmates in his nightly reading, ending a standard practice among modern administrations of ignoring inmate mail, or forwarding it to the Justice Department without a response from the president. In 2014, when the administration rolled out a Justice Department program offering executive relief to federal prisoners serving long sentences for nonviolent drug crimes, it surprised no one in the mailroom. The president, they were happy to see, was reading the mail.

There was a similar trajectory with issues around same-sex marriage and repealing the military's ''don't ask, don't tell'' policy. These conversations happened in the mail whether or not they happened anywhere else at the White House. The guy who wrote in anonymously in 2009 about his partner in Iraq wrote again in 2014, and this time he used his name.

July 4, 2014

Dear Mr. President,

On Aug. 3 my husband, David Lono Brunstad, will be promoted to senior master sergeant, and I'll be there to hand him his new shirt with the extra stripes on it.

[ ... ] My husband will deploy next June, but this time his pack will be a little lighter without the worry of whether or not his family will be taken care of. Sir, I doubt that I will ever be able to thank you in person, so I just need you to know that this military family will always be grateful for all you have done for us.

With sincere gratitude,

Darin Konrad Brunstad

Vancouver, Wash.

When I met with Reeves, she was sitting on the blue couch in her office on the fourth floor of the Executive Office Building, surrounded by letters, all potential 10LADs. Chief among her duties was sorting through the samples each day, roughly 200 or 300 of them between the ones the hard-mail team set aside and the ones the email team forwarded to her. She had to choose the 10 the president would actually read. And no, she didn't want help. ''I have to read,'' she said, bouncing a stack of pages up and down and into order. She was in her early 30s, unadorned, the kind of person who wore her professionalism earnestly: a well-practiced posture, a sensible maroon dress, sensible flats. You could imagine her becoming dean of a really hard liberal-arts college one day. She grew up in a house loud with conversation about the way government works -- her father is the presidential historian Richard Reeves. She had wanted a career in publishing, not politics. She went to Duke, studied public policy and African and African-American studies, and then came Obama.

Curating the 10LADs was a job she regarded as sacrosanct. She thought of it as a daily conversation with the president, each package an array of voices she believed most accurately rendered America's mood: Here's what America is feeling, Mr. President. ''Sometimes I think of it as a tray passing under a door,'' she said.

Dear Mr. President,

[ ... ] My family has been in farming for years. When I was young, I watched my father and grandfather work from before the sun came up to after I went to bed in order to provide our family with an income. Now grain prices are dropping so low that farmers across the nation are beginning to question whether they will be able to make a profit. America produces food and products to be shipped around the world, yet often in our own small towns, many cannot even make a proper living without federal assistance.

[ ... ] During your presidency you have been busy with controversial topics such as gun control, refugees and health insurance, but what do you plan to do about the above-addressed issues? [ ... ] We must fix these problems first, Mr. President, if we wish to maintain the United States of America.

Respectfully,

Chloe Carson

For Reeves, getting a couple hundred letters down to 20 was one kind of challenge, but the real work was getting to 10. She had to be ruthless. The two previous directors (both of whom lasted two years) used a linear system: subject folders. Give the president letters from energy, health care, immigration and so on. ''But then letters in each folder are sort of in competition with each other instead of with the broad group,'' she said.

I suppose the point was obvious, but it took me a moment to compute the implications. It had to do with fairness, and an underlying assumption that the letters represented people, not problems.

''Anyway, a disorderly pile is more honest,'' she said. Today's pile was down to 15. She read through them again, one then the next. Her fingers were long, and her nails were painted shiny red, and she held the pages gently, laying each one down slowly, as if she didn't want to hurt it. ''Well, this one has to make it,'' she said. ''And then this one, it's hard to follow, but I think even the fact that it's hard to follow is part of the story. ... And then this, we're getting so many of these long-term legacy reflections, I don't know. ... ''

She looked for stories. Not pro-this or con-that, not screeds, not opinions about what someone heard on N.P.R. The president needed to hear the stories -- that's what he couldn't get himself. ''He can't walk down a street and see what it normally looks like,'' she said. She thought of the letters as a periscope outside the bubble, as a way for him to see as he used to see, before Secret Service protection and armored vehicles and a press pool and the world watching.

''So we have one, two, three, four ... nine, 10, and then this one is 11 so we have to remove one.'' She read, shook her head. ''O.K., O.K., I guess.'' She draped the discard on the far end of the couch. She looked over at it, then reached out to give it a little pat.

The finalists were now a pile on her lap, and she began shuffling them, pulling one out, putting it behind another, and another in front. I wondered about all the shuffling.

''Oh, the order is critical,'' she said. It was like putting a book of poems together, or a photo album. ''The order in which you see stories affects the way you perceive each one,'' she said. ''We sometimes use the term 'sucker punch' in this office, which is brutal, but. ... '' ''Ballsy'' was the word one staff member used to describe Reeves. She could put three Dakota Access Pipeline pleas back to back. She could set the president up with a letter from someone gushing about the Affordable Care Act and then another from someone on the margin whose life was made worse because of it. ''It's not: 'You failed,' '' she said. ''It's more, 'Solutions don't solve things for everyone.' ''

She grabbed a pencil. ''Sometimes on Friday, particularly on Friday, we'll end with one that's like, 'Hey, I like the way you tie your tie.' '' She called that a chaser. It could be a comment about the dog, or about riding his bike, or just, ''Hey, are you a pancakes or waffles man?''

Dear Mr. President,

I think this country needs more spunk. With all the attack, the Zika virus and the wars, this country is a very sad place. Please do something fun. Wear a tie-dye shirt and shorts to something important. Go on a water-skiing trip in the caribbean. Take your family to disney world. Do something fun and outgoing. Also, please say something that will make everyone calm. You do not know how many polotics worries I have. [ ... ]

Sincerly,

Lily, Age 8

''O.K., this is it,'' Reeves announced, finally, gathering the pages on her lap, smoothing them like you would pet a cat.

She flipped over her pencil and went at the letters with her eraser, removing any and all codes. The president should definitely not see codes. ''If a letter takes a turn that is surprising in the text -- say, on Page 3 something surprising happens in her life, but the way we've assigned what category it falls into kind of spoils the surprise -- then the writer doesn't get to bring the president through her experience in the same way.'' That's why everybody had to use pencil.

I asked President Obama if he read the letters in the sequence in which Reeves gave them to him.

''I actually do!'' he said.

He said he liked to read the mail after dinner. He took the briefing book to the Treaty Room, did the work in the front first and saved the letters in the purple folder for last. ''There are occasions where the letter is particularly, uh, pointed at what an idiot I am,'' he said.

I asked him how he came up with the idea of reading 10 letters a day, and he thought awhile, then credited his chief of staff when he first got to the Senate. ''Pete Rouse,'' he said. Rouse had made it a point to set up a responsive correspondence office. ''Constituents feel like you are hearing them, and that you are responding to them -- that makes up for a lot of stuff,'' Obama remembers Rouse telling him. ''That kind of instilled in me the sense of -- the power of mail. And people knowing that if they took the time to write something that the person who represented them was actually ... paying attention.''

I don't know why I was surprised by how slowly the president talked. He seems so pensive on TV, but one on one, he is even more pensive, pulling out each word only after having examined it, like an old man putting together a jigsaw puzzle of some swirly seascape where there is blue, but then there is blue, and then there is ''blue,'' and ... blue! It occurred to me that the letters gave him permission to legitimately slow down, an opportunity for nuance and contradiction. ''I, maybe, didn't understand when I first started the practice how ... meaningful it would end up being to me,'' he said. ''By the time I got to the White House and somebody informed me that we were going to get 40,000-or-whatever-it-was pieces of mail a day,'' he continued, ''I was trying to figure out how do I in some way duplicate that experience I had during the campaign. And I think this was the idea that struck me as realistic. Ten a day, I figured I could do.''

I asked him if there were letters that stuck with him, and he talked about the mail he got from wounded soldiers and veterans, particularly those who had PTSD. He thought back to other letters. He said the good ones weren't necessarily the dramatic ones.

''The letters that matter the most to me are the ones that ... make a connection,'' he said. ''Somebody just recently wrote me a letter about when they were growing up -- their mom always used to use the N word and was derogatory about African-Americans, but was also an unbelievably great mom who worked three jobs to put the kids through school, and how ... sort of both troubling and proud -- how troubling this woman saw her mother's prejudice, but how proud she was of her mom as a person. And how, toward the end of her life, her attitudes changed, and she ended up announcing she was going to vote for the black guy. She had now passed away, but she thought I should know that.

''You know, there are those kinds of letters, I think, that -- shape your attitudes.''

He volunteered stories of other letters: a woman in Minnesota writing about her monthly expenses, a dad writing to say that his son had befriended an illegal immigrant and that the experience had flipped his own bigotry on its head. He talked about a guy who wrote recently to say how joyful he was that the Obama administration was about to end. ''I remember that one said, 'Pack up your bags because, thank goodness, we're about to undo everything you've done, it couldn't have come a moment too soon,' something along those lines. I don't think I responded to that one.''

I asked him about the line between the person and the president when it came to reading the mail. I wondered if the letters had a way of breaking down the barrier. I wasn't even sure if that was a good thing, but maybe it was the unintended consequence of the 10LADs experiment.

''I tell you, one of the things I'm proud of about having been in this office is that I don't feel like I've ... lost myself,'' he said. Like everything else, this thought was coming out slowly. But I suppose not losing yourself is a big thing to think about quickly.

''I feel as if -- even if my skin is thicker from, you know, public criticism,'' he said, ''and I'm wiser about the workings of government, I haven't become ... cynical, and I haven't become callused. And I would like to think that these letters have something to do with that.''

I asked him how he might advise Donald Trump on what to do with the mail if he were to become president.

He laughed. ''You know what, this is a great habit. But um, it, uh,'' he said about the idea of a President Trump reading constituent mail. ''I think it worked for me because it wasn't something I did for anyone else -- I did it because it ... sustained me. So maybe it will sustain others in the future.

''O.K.?''

''Back from the OVAL'' was what the stamp said on the letters Obama had read. They were returned in batches to O.P.C., and most had some kind of notation in the margins. ''What's going on here?'' the president may have written, which meant he was requesting a follow-up memo from staff with some broader context -- say, in response to a teenager dealing with a trend he didn't understand. He might say, ''D.O.J., can we help?'' which meant he wanted the staff to reach out to the Justice Department to look into the situation, like making sure an inmate is getting the medications he needs. Or he could simply say ''Reply,'' and if he did that, he would offer notes in the margins for the writing team to use as guidelines for how to respond in his name.

Kolbie Blume was the person who translated those notes from the president. Her office was on the fifth floor of the Executive Office Building -- where most of the elevators don't go; you had to take a back staircase. ''Even people in the White House don't know this office exists,'' she told me. She had the clean, untouched look of an adolescent: a neat, short bob, a buttoned-up top with pearls. She was 23. ''This is my first job out of college,'' she said. ''I mean, it's a lot of pressure.'' She grew up in Utah, saw Obama on TV when she was in high school and became one of the only Democrats in town.

Blume was working on a letter to a man who was angry about being profiled by the police in his community. She showed me some of Obama's handwritten comments in the margins. He had underlined sentences and added exclamation points; the words he wrote were sparse, but Blume understood the code. ''See?'' she said. ''You can break down the sections of his thoughts: I'm mad, too. My administration can't intervene. But this is what we are doing. No one should have to fear being profiled. And then he ends with, This is what you need to do.''

She'd been at this for two years, and by now she had it down. ''It took me awhile,'' she said. ''It's so easy to think linearly, like, O.K., here's a person who wrote about climate change, let's just plunk in some language about climate change here.'' Reeves kept tossing those letters back to her, saying, ''No.'' This was a person she was writing to. And the president was a person.

''And I vividly remember, almost like an epiphany,'' she told me. ''It was like, one day I just got it.'' Every letter coming from the president was ultimately a variation on the same theme, she realized. ''It's: 'Look, I hear you. You exist. I'm listening, and your voice matters.' '' There was something surprising about all of this, the idea of the president in the role of a nation's therapist.

I reached out to some of the people who sent letters to President Obama and asked them why they decided to write. ''Well, I never thought he'd read it,'' was the most common refrain, followed by: ''I was desperate.''

''My mom, my brother and I were cleaning up the glass,'' Ashley DeLeon, who is from Jacksonville, N.C., told me, relaying the story about the night in 2014 when she decided to write to the president. It was Christmas. ''All the remnants of the fish tank and everything that my father had shot up,'' she was saying. ''And he shot the flag that was awarded to him when he retired and all of his medals and everything -- all the memorabilia associated with the Marine Corps, he shot first. And that to me spoke more than anything. And so we cleaned up as much as we could, and then I went upstairs and I wrote the letter. And -- yeah, I wrote it that night.''

Dear Mr. President,

My father was a United States Marine for 22 years before retiring as a master sergeant. As part of the infantry, he deployed on six occasions. Each deployment, my father came back less and less like himself. [ ... ] But after he retired, my father was forgotten. [ ... ] He no longer had the brotherhood of fellow Marines; no one thanked him for his service; no one called to check on his well-being. He was diagnosed with severe PTSD and was medically disabled.

So he drank. And drank. [ ... ] He would drink all night, come back at 6 a.m., sleep all day and repeat the cycle.

I am a junior at the University of North Carolina Wilmington. [ ... ] Every day I would look in the mirror and see the remnants of him in my facial features. But the man that I resembled so much, the man who constituted half of me, wasn't one that I knew any longer.

Christmas Eve was a rainy day in Jacksonville, N.C., Mr. President. I was taking a shower upstairs when I heard the first two shots. I knew it was him. As I jumped out of the shower and ran down the stairs in nothing but a towel I could see my father pacing in the living room with a shotgun in his hand and tears in his eyes. He yelled at me, his little girl: ''Get the f*** out of my house! GET OUT!'' And in that moment I knew that I had two choices: to run and leave my little brother upstairs and my dad with a loaded weapon. Or to stay. I chose the latter. You see, I chose to stay in that room and fight over that gun because I knew that my dad was still in there somewhere. He had to be. As I struggled with my father, he shot. And shot. The small girl who grew up waving the American flag at her daddy's homecomings yelled ''NOOOO'' from the bottom of her gut. Glass shattered. The dogs barked. [ ... ]

I didn't care if I died, Mr. President. I'm 21 years old, and I would sacrifice myself without a second thought to save the man who raised me from taking his own life. Because when his country turned their back on him, I was still there. The light has long been gone from his eyes, but he is still my father. I am still his little girl. [ ... ]

I'm writing to ask you for your help. Not for my family, Mr. President. My family died that night. I'm asking you to help the others. The little girls and boys who have yet to see their mothers' and fathers' souls die away. They need help. Get them help. Don't forget about them. They need you. Just like Sasha and Malia need you. They do.

With hope,

Ashley DeLeon

Jacksonville, N.C.

DeLeon's letter ended up in a pile just like all the others in the O.P.C. hard-mail room. A staff member read it and wrote, ''red dot.'' He took it across the hall to Lacey Higley. ''This is the first time that I read something and I needed to take a walk,'' he told her. ''We need to make sure someone else sees this. We need to make sure this goes somewhere.'' Higley scanned the letter, forwarded the scan to the V.A.'s crisis unit. Then she took the letter to Reeves. ''The president needs to see this,'' she said. Reeves included DeLeon's letter in that day's 10LADs.

DeLeon's letter didn't come back in the next batch marked ''Back from the OVAL.'' It didn't come back in the batch after that either. Some letters the president stewed over. Some letters he answered in his own hand, on a white card marked, ''The White House.''

Ashley --

I was so moved by your letter. As a father, I can only imagine how heartbreaking the situation must be, and I'm inspired by the strength and perspective you possess at such a young age.

I am asking the V.A. to reach out to your family to provide any support that you need. And please know that beneath the pain, your father still loves his daughter, and is surely proud of her.

Sincerely,

Barack Obama

Ashley told me she was shocked when she got a letter back from the president. She said she was grateful. But that didn't mean she got her dad back. He later crashed his motorcycle into an S.U.V. ''He had two gallon-size freezer bags full of medication at the time that he died,'' she said.

Higley told me she kept DeLeon's letter hanging over her desk. It was the letter that helped shape in her a sense of purpose. ''It was one of those moments where you just kind of realize the importance of what you're doing,'' she said. ''It led me on a new path. Like, helping people and helping families like Ashley's is something I want to do.''

When people in the West Wing talked about ''the letter underground,'' this is part of what they meant. This whole thing was just supposed to be about the president getting 10 letters a day, but the mail grew into something else; letters informed policy proposals and speeches -- Obama referred to DeLeon's letter when he signed the Clay Hunt Suicide Prevention for American Veterans Act into law -- and they affected people personally. Reeves was the chief driver of the letter underground. Why should the president be the only one reading 10LADs, she reasoned a few years ago. ''I started spamming people,'' she told me. Constituent letters began popping into the inboxes of top aides and speechwriters and advisers. Why not? It caught on. Recently, Valerie Jarrett, a senior adviser to Obama, asked why she wasn't on the list for the 10LADs, so Reeves added her.

''I'm a big hustler of the mail,'' Reeves said. ''My whole team, we are Kool-Aid drinkers for these letter writers.'' And I suppose that was the surprising point. The Kool-Aid wasn't something Obama was serving. The Kool-Aid was the mail.

This was the message Reeves was preaching, and Blume was preaching, and this was the message you were bombarded with in the hard-mail room: Individual voices matter. Empathy was the name of the game. If that was the code of the mailroom, well, maybe it worked to sway the minds of lawmakers, and maybe it didn't, but there was a certain degree of sorrow attached to the thought that an experiment like that had to end.

It was raining on the morning after the election, and I arrived at the White House gates early. No one at the main O.P.C. office on the fourth floor was in yet except for Reeves, who was shuffling through papers while I sat on the other side of her desk. ''Well,'' she said, looking up. Her face held the vague puffiness of a morning after little sleep.

''Well,'' she started again, raising her chin. She was having trouble making eye contact. The sky outside her window was a flat, steely gray. I could hear the distant whir of a printer revving up. There was a wet umbrella at my feet.

''Well, your hair looks great,'' she said, ''Um.''

I told her no, her hair did. ''Oh, it's just. ... '' She shook her head to make a swish. We discussed my bangs. Hair talk, even for someone as poised as Reeves, is a refuge.

Email was expected to fire in at an unprecedented rate the day after the election, and over in the email room, A staff member stood up to address the packed room of about 50 people -- all hands on deck -- who were becoming confused about what to do. ''We're seeing a lot of people in meltdown mode,'' he said, referring to the letter writers. He was a young, slightly pear-shaped guy with jet black hair. The first task, he told everyone, was to simply read. As a matter of routine, each email was coded according to the same scheme as the hard mail, with the prewritten policy-response letters ready to go. But that day staff members were forced to come up with new codes in order to categorize the flow: ''election pro,'' ''election con'' and ''legacy.''

''So 'election pro' is like, 'Donald Trump is the best, and this is a great day for America,' '' he told the group. People leaned their heads away from the rows of screens to listen, and others looked up from laptops jammed into corners. There were tissues. People were crying. McMuffins had been brought in, along with doughnuts, juice, Power Bars.

''And then 'election con' is going to be like, 'I'm scared,' '' he went on. He was standing in the middle of the room, and you could tell he was not used to having to make his voice carry. ''So, like, 'I don't know what to do, I have a disability, I'm in an L.G.B.T. family, I don't know what's going on anymore.' That's 'election con.' ''

''Then 'legacy' is gonna be, 'You know, I was really disappointed about last night, your family is amazing, I think you did great things' -- that's 'legacy.' Some of these things will be a little vague, and I know it's going to be hard, but feel free to ask questions as we're going through this, and let's try to make sure you're being as specific as possible.''

''What about people talking about election recounts and fraud and rigging?'' one intern asked.

''Election fraud? Just close those out -- ''

''What about people writing before the results were out?'' another asked. ''Like people writing in to say, 'I'm looking forward to President Clinton,' but it's clearly obvious that that's ... not.''

''Yeah. We can close those. We can close those out.''

''What if they're saying, 'I'm nervous about the election, I don't know what I'll do'?''

''Election con.''

''Do we need to call up the military?''

Election con.

''My wife is undocumented, I have three children, I've never been so scared in my life.''

''I'm disabled, I have seizures, will I still have health care.''

''Is he going to void my marriage? Am I going to still be with the person I love?''

Con. Con. Con.

The writing team would have to figure out a response to the election email later that day. What, exactly, should Obama say to all these people?

At the end of the day, Reeves had to pick the 10LADs from the email that came flying in, and Kyle Herman, on the writing team, had to compose the response to America in meltdown mode.

''I haven't gotten very far,'' he told me in his office, sitting in front of a blank screen.

He had been up all night, at his parents' house in Ohio, where he'd been knocking on doors to get out the vote, and then he flew back to work, and he had never expected to have to write a letter like this.

''Personally, the worst thing is that it feels like a rebuke of the connection we're trying to make between the president and the people,'' he said. ''Like, if our responsibility in this office is to connect the president to the people, I'm asking myself, 'Did we fail?' ''

He looked at me, expecting something.

''And I don't understand it, because he's read more mail than any president in history, he seems more connected to the people than any president in history.''

I felt compelled to remind him that Obama wasn't running for re-election. Clinton was the one who lost.

''The bargaining stage of grief,'' he mumbled.

I could hear Bae outside in the hall, laughing and joking with some other staff members; the discrepancy was palpable. Bae was the kind of person you would want at your mother's funeral. She told me she had tried to cheer Herman up. ''I said, 'Kyle, isn't it so cool?' '' she said. ''I think we have a real opportunity to home in on the president's message. But more than that, like, this is friggin' America. Which is like, what an opportunity. Like, what an honor. You know what I mean? Like, Woo! What an honor! Like, what? I lived my life!''

She told me that the team had handed over all the transition materials -- pages and pages explaining O.P.C. procedures -- to Trump's transition team. Reeves told them she would be available for in-person briefings. She wanted to explain everything, how they built the systems they built, and why.

''It's like, the Obama administration did all this to hear people's stories,'' Bae said. ''How could they possibly not meet us and grow it further?''

Like everyone else in O.P.C., Bae would be leaving once the new administration took over. That, of course, was always the plan. And the letters had set them on a new course. Bae was applying for graduate programs, where she considered studying kidnapping negotiations. Blume was looking for a Ph.D. program in children's literature. Higley will forge a career path in mental health and suicide prevention. Reeves said she wanted to focus on being married for a while.

I stopped by Reeves's office to see how she was coming with the 10LADs. She was already on the couch with the finalists on her lap. ''I had some rice pudding,'' she said, managing a smile. The emails had been printed, and she was flipping through the pages considering the sequence. ''I think it will hit him like it hit us, a pile of voices that don't follow a tight narrative.'' She spoke quietly as she sorted, mostly to herself. ''People concerned for others,'' she said, holding a few out. ''People concerned for themselves,'' she said about another group, and when she was finished she sat up straight.

''O.K., so this is the first one,'' she said, showing it to me. The writer was cheering Trump's victory. He recommended a fire into which Obama could put all of his executive orders and, together with the rest of the ruinous liberals, watch them burn.

''It's an introduction, because it sort of feels like the day began,'' Reeves said, and I could tell she had no interest in defending her choice.

''And then I like the personal nature of this one for the second,'' she said, going through her choices with the satisfaction of an author reading her final draft. ''She's married to someone who voted different from her. But they will continue to be a family. Then this one is incredible. What a guy. Then behind him -- this is someone who is in dire financial straits. I felt that was someone whose voice really matters right now.''

She gathered the letters. She checked her phone. She jiggled the lid on the glass water bottle that always accompanied her. ''So I'm going to hand them off. And they'll get scanned and sent around.'' On the whiteboard was the countdown: 72 days until the experiment ended, and the new administration decided how to handle the mail.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Jeanne Marie Laskas is a best-selling author and a professor at the University of Pittsburgh. She is a new contributing writer for the magazine and a correspondent for GQ.

Sorted letters at the Office of Presidential Correspondence. (MM30); In the Obama White House's hard-mail room, each intern and staff member read and categorized 300 letters a day. (MM33); Magnetic labels for sorting the thousands of messages the Obama White House received daily, of which 10 reached the president. (MM36); Presidential mail that has been labeled -- always in pencil, so it can be erased -- and added to the ''election outcome'' pile. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAMON WINTER/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM39) 

Document NYTF000020170122ed1m0006e



FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
'I Wish to Hell I'd Just Kept Saying the Exact Same Thing'

By JONATHAN ALTER 
2,135 words
22 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
40
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Joe Biden's personal compartment on the modified Boeing 757 that serves as Air Force Two had the feel of a motel manager's office equipped with state-of-the-art communications gear. The room held a little black couch with a pullout bed he had slept on more times than he could count over the last eight years, during which he logged more than a million miles aloft. We were en route back to Wilmington, Del., from Cartagena, Colombia, in early December, and Biden was sitting in a black leather seat with a binder in his lap.

It contained the speech he had given at the Democratic National Convention in July. He told me he had been rereading it. He began reciting aloud: ''If you live in neighborhoods like the one Jill and I grew up in, if you worry about your job and getting decent pay. ...'' His voice accelerated. ''If you worry about your children's education, if you're taking care of an elderly parent, there's only one person in this race who. ...'' He looked up at me and sighed. ''I wish to hell I'd just kept saying the exact same thing.''

Biden was afflicted with regret. He was sorry that, on the campaign trail, he had spoken so often about Donald Trump's unfitness for office and not enough about what Hillary Clinton would do for the middle class. He was sorry he didn't push harder inside the White House for a middle-class tax cut. And he was still torn over his decision not to run for president, a race that he said would have been ''brutal'' but that he also believed he could have won.

I spoke with Biden intermittently in the months before and after Election Day, and I had no doubt as to why he didn't jump in. He was still corny, gabby, lovable Uncle Joe, the guy who once said: ''Stand up, Chuck! Let 'em see you!'' to a man in a wheelchair. But nearly every speech and interview now included some moving mention of his son Beau, who died of brain cancer in 2015, and how much Biden was doing, and intended to continue to do for the rest of his life, to speed the search for cancer cures.

I saw Biden cry in Manchester, N.H., in October when holding an infant that he was told was named after Beau. I saw him near tears in West Mifflin, Pa., the weekend before the election, when he was joined onstage by the former Pittsburgh Steelers Franco Harris and Mel Blount -- which reminded him of the footballs the team owner sent to young Beau and his brother, Hunter, in the hospital after they were injured in the 1972 car accident that killed Biden's first wife and baby girl.

On his deathbed, Beau advised his father to run, but many friends -- including President Obama -- didn't think he was up to it emotionally, and the vice president finally agreed. ''For all that's important to me in almost a sacred sense,'' he told me mournfully, the decision was unavoidable. ''The family was broken, and I was more broken than I thought I was.'' How broken? ''I don't know what I'd do if I was in a debate and someone said, 'You're doing this because of your son,' '' he told me one late November day in his West Wing office. ''I might have walked over and kicked his ass.''

And yet minutes later, he was standing at his desk, fidgeting and replaying what might have been in 2016. The South Carolina primary would have given him a strong start, he said, citing his internal polls there. ''Hard to believe, but I was more popular with blacks than Barack was.''

Biden clearly loathes the new president; he said during the campaign that if he and Trump were in high school, he'd ''take him behind the gym'' for the way he bragged about groping women. Trump reminded him of the bullies who teased him as a child on account of his stutter, calling him ''B-B-Biden.'' But the politician who has long believed all politics is personal wants to keep it impersonal with Trump. ''The president and I have concluded that there's no value in making that ad hominem argument,'' he told me of Obama. ''It gets you nowhere.''

Biden wasn't shocked that Hillary Clinton lost. He had noticed before the election that Trump was connecting with the people he grew up with in Pennsylvania. This shaped his thoughts on how Democrats should respond. When the subject of Trump came up aboard Air Force Two, Biden referred to a well-worn story about how, as a freshman senator, he saw Jesse Helms, the archconservative North Carolina Republican, ripping into a piece of disabilities legislation. Biden was furious about it and began attacking Helms to Mike Mansfield, the Democratic Senate majority leader. Puffing on his pipe, Mansfield asked Biden if he knew that Helms and his wife had adopted a disabled 9-year-old boy no one else would take. ''Question a man's judgment, not his motives,'' Mansfield instructed.

Biden, who was invited by Helms decades later to give his eulogy, is convinced that absorbing Mansfield's advice is what allowed him to work with Senate Republicans during the Obama years, to negotiate the approval of the New Start nuclear-arms-reduction treaty, the end of ''don't ask, don't tell'' and the expansion of the earned-income tax credit, among other accomplishments. His approach to Trump, he said, wouldn't be fundamentally different. ''It falls in that category,'' Biden told me. ''It's one thing to say: 'I think the proposal on the following is a serious mistake. I think it's gonna do the following damage.' It's another thing to say, 'The guy's a fucking idiot, and he is an egomaniac who's a whatever.' ''

Biden suggested he might lobby former Republican colleagues when ''circumstances generate blowback among mainstream Republicans.'' He remains in the shrinking camp that believes Trump may yet step up, at least a bit, to the demands of high office. His hope is that Trump's ''sense of grandeur is so immense that he'd rather succeed than unleash these forces.'' Given how many Trump voters would lose their insurance under full repeal of the Affordable Care Act, he may well back off of repealing it, Biden said. As for the rest of his own administration's legacy, he said, ''I'm not prepared to bet my granddaughter's college tuition, but it's less likely to be undone than frayed on the edges.''

Biden's biggest worry is that Trump, for all his bluster, could be a global bystander, unwilling to engage a messy world with anything more than chest-thumping. ''The question I get everywhere is: 'Is American leadership going to continue?' '' he told me on Air Force Two. If Trump ''just stays behind the lines -- hands off -- it could be very ugly. Very, very ugly.''

In July, the president of Latvia asked Biden to fly there as soon as possible and give a televised speech assuring the Baltic states that the United States would fulfill its NATO obligations and defend them against a Russian invasion. He did so, emphatically, but his promises offer little comfort post-Election Day. The prospect of Vladimir Putin fulfilling his dream of re-establishing Russian hegemony over Eastern Europe is not far from Biden's mind. ''Now if we walk away -- Hungary, Poland, even the Baltic states, these guys all start to hedge their bets,'' he said.

Biden's national security adviser, Colin Kahl, who was with the vice president on the plane, interjected to outline the contradictions in Trump's emerging foreign policy. If the United States is going to be more cooperative with Russia and Bashar al-Assad's Syria but more confrontational with Iran, Kahl asked, how will Trump handle them joining together to fight ISIS? ''It's like a Rubik's cube trying to figure this guy out,'' Biden sighed. ''We have no freakin' idea what he's gonna do.''

When they were Senate colleagues, and Biden was chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, Biden thought Obama was in too much of a hurry -- and Obama found the chairman a tad condescending. But in the White House, the two men became exceptionally close. ''There was never a point,'' Obama told me recently, ''where I thought he was distancing himself from me or positioning himself. Never been a time when he wasn't telling me something he really thought.'' Their families, too, drew together. ''Family has been central for us -- that's our baseline,'' Obama told me. ''We both feel freer to do what we think is right because if it doesn't work out, our families will still love us.''

Biden later told friends that he thought the president was sincerely looking out for him in 2015 when he advised him not to run -- though he also felt Obama had grown fond of the bright mark he could leave on history by passing the baton from the first black president to the first female president.

The big question now is when, and how, they will re-enter the arena. Obama has already said that, unlike George W. Bush, he won't refrain from commenting on his successor. Biden may go further. Amid discussion of resistance to Trump, he surprised me with talk of 2020, when he'll turn 78. ''I'll run,'' the vice president deadpanned, ''if I can walk.'' Three days later, he informed the Washington press corps that he wasn't joking.

Biden isn't likely to run, but keeping the door ajar gives him a bigger voice in Democratic Party debates. The one that worries him most is over repositioning to win back Trump voters. He has little patience with Democrats who want to move either left or right. '' 'We gotta move to the center,' 'We gotta move to those white guys,' 'We gotta move to those working-class people' or 'We gotta double down on the social agenda.' '' It's a false choice, he said: ''They are totally compatible. I have never said anything to the A.C.L.U. that I wouldn't say to the Chamber of Commerce.''

This was the vision of the Democratic Party to which Biden had dedicated his career. ''Amtrak Joe'' famously commuted every day from Wilmington to Washington -- three hours round-trip, for 36 years. He told me that as the train neared Baltimore, he habitually peered into the rapidly passing homes close to the tracks -- a flip book of middle-class families of various backgrounds who might have recognized themselves in his convention speech. ''I wonder what the conversation at the dinner table is,'' he told me.

Sometimes he saw his own family in the early 1960s in those houses. He imagines the families' struggles with everyday expenses: '' 'Honey, we need a new set of tires, but you gotta get another 20,000 miles out of them.' That's the goddamn discussion people are having! That's their lives!''

Before the election, Biden had begun to map out what his post-vice-presidential plans would look like. Soon he would be back on Amtrak, riding to and from a foreign-policy institute bearing his name at the University of Pennsylvania and a domestic-policy center at the University of Delaware, and continuing the ''cancer moonshot'' -- a Biden-led initiative marshaling resources in government and the private sector to accelerate cancer research. In the meantime, he'll help play defense against Trump. ''Even if the Democratic Party didn't want me, I'm not walking away,'' he said. ''I've worked on this stuff my whole life.''

After Air Force Two touched down on the tarmac in Wilmington, I asked him about a line he liked to use before the election. ''So do you still believe what your grandfather said, that God looks out for drunken Irishmen and the United States of America?'' Biden said he wasn't sure about the Irishmen, but he was about the country. ''I have to believe that,'' he said. ''There's no sense being in this business unless you're an optimist.''

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Jonathan Alter is the author of two books about the Obama administration, ''The Promise'' and ''The Center Holds.'' He is working on a biography of Jimmy Carter.

Biden in Washington on Dec. 14. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIK MADIGAN HECK) (MM41) 

Document NYTF000020170122ed1m00062



Arts and Leisure Desk; SECTAR
Putting Her Demons, and Family, to Work

By ELYSA GARDNER 
1,209 words
22 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Paola Láaro's inner left wrist is marked with a jagged outline of Puerto Rico, where she was born and raised. ''My uncle tattooed me, in exchange for a pack of Marlboro Reds,'' Ms. Láaro, a playwright and actress, explained. ''My dark theory is that if I'm found dead in a corner of a street and I have no ID, they can just take my body there. Everyone will know where I come from.''

Ms. Láaro had just spent the morning watching a rehearsal of her new play -- her first to be produced professionally -- ''Tell Hector I Miss Him,'' which is now in previews and opens Monday, Jan. 23, at the Atlantic Theater Company. The cast includes two stars of the hit Netflix series ''Orange Is the New Black,'' Selenis Leyva and Dascha Polanco, as well as Ms. Láaro's fellow writer-performer Lisa Ramirez, in whose work ''To the Bone'' she acted two years ago.

Before the company broke for lunch, two other actors, Flaco Navaja and Luis Vega -- playing a luckless cocaine enthusiast named Hugo and a clown-like figure called El Mago in Old San Juan -- ran a scene in which they have drug-induced visions. The dialogue is gritty but lyrical, sprinkled with Spanish and pocked with profanity.

Ms. Láaro drank it in, plainly still tickled to hear her words read back to her by pros. As Mr. Vega patted down and shook out his jacket, pretending to look for Hugo's fix, she bent over laughing. She then stared, rapt, as El Mago shed his joyful mask and addressed a spirit from his past.

El Mago (Spanish for magician) is based on Ms. Láaro's paternal grandfather, who has so longed to be reunited with his dead wife that he has devised various suicide strategies, and related them -- with some humor, apparently -- to the playwright's mother. ''He says, 'Tell the kids to come visit me in the next 20 days, because I'm going to die,''' Ms. Láaro recalled. ''Poor man, he's 97, and he keeps living and living.''

At 28, Ms. Láaro is as effervescent as her wit is sometimes morose, and she sees no contradiction in that. ''The pain comes in through my back,'' she explained. ''I'm always questioning: How do my characters stay sane? How do I stay sane in the world? When I leave my apartment, what mask do I need to navigate it?''

Stephen Adly Guirgis, a Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright who mentored Ms. Láaro as she earned her M.F.A. from Columbia University in 2013, remembers when she first approached him after a panel: ''Her head was down. She couldn't look me in the eye.'' Mr. Guirgis still recognized a ''kindred spirit'' in Ms. Láaro, even before reading her thesis play, called ''Contigo.'' He recommended her for a summer ensemble program at Labyrinth Theater Company, with which he has a long affiliation. ''It helped save my life,'' Ms. Láaro said.

''I was not doing good,'' she added, ''and these people came into my life like angels.''

For Mr. Guirgis, ''The mentoring process was about sorting out which demons are your friends, which you can use and run with, and which need day-to-day management. So much of her stuff is really big and deep and painful, and intensely personal.''

Indeed, Ms. Láaro said of her new play: ''Most of this is based on my family and people I grew up with, and yes, there's a lot of me in it. I'm showing concepts of love that may seem faulty -- that are faulty, but they are love. They were to me, you know?''

The community represented in ''Tell Hector'' would seem more disenfranchised than the one that produced Ms. Láaro, whose parents are both professionals; Ms. Láaro lived with them in a suburb of San Juan before moving, at 17, to study at the State University of New York at Purchase.

But the plot has echoes in her personal experience, including a character with fetal-alcohol syndrome inspired by her uncle.

Ms. Láaro was also interested in addressing broader issues in Latino culture, as well as universal themes. ''This could be any neighborhood,'' she said. ''For me, it's always about the relationships. I'm asking, where is the love in macho culture, in tradition?''

In ''Tell Hector,'' mind you, love can blossom when the guys aren't around. Ms. Polanco's Malena -- ''the hottest woman in the neighborhood,'' Ms. Láaro noted -- is coveted by Isis, a breathless teenage girl.

''People think that in Hispanic countries they don't accept gay people, and in some cases they don't -- there are parents that would try to beat that out of you,'' she said. ''But there are parents who are more accepting.''

Ms. Láaro defines herself as pansexual; her own parents, she said, are ''the people you can come to with all your problems, and they won't judge you.''

She paused. ''They're the people you can come to and say, 'I want to kill myself.''' Her eyes were warm as she uttered the last sentence, offering reassurance, telling you not to worry.

''She's grown so much,'' Mr. Guirgis said. ''Everything great about her was there from the beginning, but she's really blossomed. She's become my best friend, really.'' When Philip Seymour Hoffman, who collaborated frequently with Mr. Guirgis, died in 2014, ''Paola was the one who called me first, and she was over in 15 minutes.''

Neil Pepe, Atlantic's artistic director, first met Ms. Láaro during readings of Mr. Guirgis's ''Between Riverside and Crazy,'' which had its debut at the theater in 2014.

''There's a bravery and power in Paola's writing I find rare among young writers, but also a maturity,'' he said. ''She spoke so empathetically to the humanity of these characters, and she also understood how to flesh them out dramatically.''

Though now consumed with ''Tell Hector,'' Ms. Láaro has finished another play and has been auditioning for film and television roles. (She'll play a prostitute in the coming movies ''Pimp'' and an undercover cop in ''Scenes From the Underground.'') ''I'd love to make this play into a film,'' she said of the Atlantic show. ''And I'd love to write for television. I think there should be more Hispanic writers, especially for shows that have anything to do with Hispanic people. Let's write our own stories and create work for ourselves.''

She tapped her left wrist again. ''It all comes back to the same thing, to here,'' she said. ''It's for the people who supported me -- and the people who brought me down, too. My thing is, if I show you my heart, maybe you won't feel alone. If I show you my pain, maybe you can express yours. And we can all work through it, together.''

Top, Paola Láaro, whose ''Tell Hector I Miss Him'' is her first play to be staged professionally; above, Selenis Leyva and Victor Almanzar in the production. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KRISTA SCHLUETER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; CAITLIN OCHS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170122ed1m0005u



NONFICTION
Book Review Desk; SECTBR
On the Fringes of  ISIS 

By DEXTER FILKINS 
1,287 words
22 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
13
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

THE WAY OF THE STRANGERS

Encounters With the Islamic State

By Graeme Wood

317 pp. Random House. $28.

In early 2011, as American forces were packing up to leave Iraq after eight years of fighting and occupying, one of the war's most hideous byproducts was lurching toward what appeared to be certain death: Al Qaeda in Iraq, which had recently renamed itself the Islamic State in Iraq, had seen most of its leaders killed and its membership whittled to a handful of dead-enders, who were huddled in sanctuaries in and around the northern city of Mosul.

But then the Americans departed, and a vast uprising against the government across the border, in neighboring Syria, took off. Suddenly, the Islamic State in Iraq, led by an ambitious former graduate student who called himself Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, saw its fortunes brighten anew. Baghdadi dispatched a handful of fighters to Syria and within a few months they were running operations across much of the country. Iraq promptly returned to chaos, and in April 2013, Baghdadi, presiding over a vast fief that stretched from the Iraqi desert to the outskirts of Damascus, rechristened his group yet again -- as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS -- and appointed himself caliph. Tens of thousands of volunteers from around the world flocked to defend his far-off kingdom in the sand.

In the years since, ISIS' breathtaking lust for anarchy -- temple-smashings, beheadings, crucifixions -- has inevitably prompted the question: What do these people want? The usual answers -- money, power, status -- do not seem to suffice. Graeme Wood, a correspondent for The Atlantic and a lecturer at Yale, believes he has found something like an answer, and that it can be located in the sacred texts, teachings and folklore of early Islam. In ''The Way of the Strangers,'' Wood, through a series of conversations with ISIS enthusiasts, shows that many of them claim to want the same thing: a theocratic state without borders, ruled by a leader who meets a series of strict qualifications, and who adheres to a brand of Islam that most people -- including most Muslims -- would find stifling and abhorrent.

The most novel aspect of Wood's book is that he shows, convincingly, that the stifling and abhorrent practices of the Islamic State are rooted in Islam itself -- not mainstream Islam, but in scriptures and practices that have persisted for centuries. There's no use denying it. ''For years now, the Islamic State and its supporters have been producing essays, fatwas, .â€ˆ.â€ˆ.â€¯ilms and tweets at an industrial pace,'' Wood writes. ''In studying them we see a coherent view of the world rooted in a minority interpretation of Islamic scripture that has existed, in various forms, for almost as long as the religion itself.'' That goes for the most barbarous practices as well: ''Slavery has been practiced by Muslims for most of Islamic history, and it was practiced without apology by Muhammad and his companions, who owned slaves and had sex with them.''

Wood has obviously studied the old Islamic texts. And he makes clear, in the conversations he has with Islamic State supporters, that they have, too. The value of ''The Way of the Strangers'' is that it gives the lie to the notion, repeated so often in the West as to become a clichÃ© that ISIS zealots are betraying Islam, and that their practices are un-Islamic. They are Islamic, and in that sense, the end-state of their murderous program is not hard to discern.

The Islamic State, such as it is, is a dangerous place, and Wood's book amounts to a tour around its far edges, where it can be safely traversed. And so we sit down with Hesham Elashry, a suit tailor in Cairo who tries to convert Wood to his Salafist ways. We meet Yasir Qadhi, a Houston-born scholar who abandoned his hard-line views and earned a Ph.D. at Yale. We tag along with Wood as he travels to Footscray, Australia, to meet a jihad-minded young man named Musa Cerantonio, who writes about ISIS on Twitter and Facebook, and who follows an obscure strain of doctrinaire Islam, popular in the Islamic State, known as Dhahirism. And we trace the path of John Georgelas, a.k.a. Yahya Abu Hassan ibn Sharaf, a native of Plano, Tex., who rebelled against his middle-class upbringing, converted to Islam and made the pilgrimage to Syria in 2013 to join the Islamic State; he was wounded soon after and since then has been one of the group's chief propagandists. Together, Wood's conversations amount to a thorough discussion of the theological underpinnings of the Islamic State.

Still, while ''The Way of the Strangers'' has its moments, I often found myself wondering how useful all this theology really is. The first problem with Wood's argument is the people he has chosen to speak for ISIS; with the exception of Georgelas, whom Wood did not meet, none of the characters featured in his book have actually fought for, or even joined, the Islamic State. They are fellow travelers, whose zealotry has not brought them to join the group they claim to support. Cerantonio, the Australian, lives with his mother. Elashry, the tailor, complains that he is ''too old'' to travel to Syria or Iraq. While I sympathize with the obvious logistical challenges involved in trying to sit down with real-live ISIS theologians, the armchair quality of the people Wood features here can make his discussions feel abstract. If the subtitle of your book is going to be ''Encounters With the Islamic State,'' then you owe it to your readers to get closer than London or Footscray.

That leads to another, broader problem with Wood's discussion. Is religion really that important to these people? Wood does not discount the presence of ''dullards and goofballs'' in the movement, but he is adamant that Islam is at the heart of the engine that drives not just the Islamic State's leaders, but also its fighters. ''The foot soldiers view their mission in religious terms and spend great energy on piety and devotion.''

Assessing human motives is always a tricky game, even when we are trying to decipher our own. While I don't deny that Islam provides the framework within which ISIS operates, describing the group as essentially a bunch of religious fanatics strikes me as simplistic. My own experience in the Muslim world, and especially in Iraq, was that the motivations for joining a militant organization were varied and complex. Some fighters joined because they hated a rival group -- Shiites, say. Others took up arms because they were seeking revenge for a wrong done to their family -- by the American Army, say. Still others became militant because doing so offered them an unparalleled chance to rob, rape and kill. Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi, who founded Al Qaeda in Iraq -- ISIS' precursor -- was a thug and a gangster who used Islam to justify what he was doing anyway.

Did Mohammed Emwazi, the British-born Muslim who became known as ''Jihadi John'' for personally beheading Western hostages, really join ISIS to get closer to God? Groups like Al Qaeda and ISIS have always struck me as primarily death cults: Murder first, pray later. All the better if you can find sacred texts to justify your actions, of course. But murder just the same.

Dexter Filkins, a former Baghdad correspondent for The Times, is a staff writer at The New Yorker and the author of ''The Forever War.''

Islamic State supporters in Mosul, June 2014. (PHOTOGRAPH FROM ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170122ed1m0004w



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Under Siege in Syria,  ISIS  Inflicts More Damage on Ancient Structures in Palmyra

By DAN BILEFSKY; Hwaida Saad and Maher Samaan contributed reporting. 
504 words
21 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Islamic State militants have destroyed the facade of a second-century Roman amphitheater and another ancient monument in the historic city of Palmyra, Syria, the Syrian state-run news agency reported on Friday.

The news agency, SANA, said the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, had destroyed part of the amphitheater and severely damaged a tetrapylon, a square structure of four plinths, each with four columns. The agency said the tetrapylon had two columns still standing and appeared to have been ''intentionally destroyed using explosives.''

The smashing of the ancient structures was a further attempt by the group to impose its will by destroying monuments or artifacts that it says do not conform to its strict interpretation of Islam. The group's demolition of historic sites in Iraq, Libya, Syria and elsewhere has drawn international opprobrium; Unesco has branded the actions ''cultural cleansing.''

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group based in Britain, said the destruction of the two sites in Palmyra appeared to have taken place on Jan. 11. The observatory said the acts could have been a demonstration of force before the militant group, which is under siege in Iraq and in Syria, retreats from the city.

The Islamic State retook Palmyra in December, nine months after Syrian government forces, backed by Russia, pushed the group out. The militant group had terrorized citizens and destroyed numerous priceless remains in the desert city, declared a World Heritage site by Unesco.

The targeting of Palmyra's cultural treasures has particular resonance as the city's heritage, which embodies Greek, Persian, Roman and Islamic cultures, is a vivid symbol of a prewar, multicultural Syria that is anathema to the Islamic State's brutal and monolithic worldview.

Maamoun Abdulkarim, Syria's director general of antiquities and museums, called Friday for the world to save Palmyra from further destruction. ''ISIS is destroying Palmyra, building after building,'' he said. ''In the past, their goal was ideological,'' he added, but as the group is steadily losing territory, it has become a matter of ''revenge.''

The Islamic State captured Palmyra in May 2015, and it quickly started targeting cultural sites and killing soldiers and some residents who had been left behind. In a matter of months, the militants began to plunder and destroy ancient artifacts, including the 1,800-year-old Arch of Triumph, once a popular draw for tourists, and the nearly 2,000-year-old Temple of Baalshamin.

At the time, Unesco's director general, Irina Bokova, said the destruction of the Arch of Triumph ''shows how extremists are terrified by history and culture.''

Celebrated as the ''Pearl of the Desert,'' Palmyra, about 150 miles northeast of Damascus, was once a refuge for travelers on the Silk Road, the ancient trade route. Temples have stood in Palmyra for thousands of years.

Follow Dan Bilefsky on Twitter @DanBilefsky .

Document NYTF000020170121ed1l00055



Washington; SECT
U.S. Airstrike Kills More Than 100 Qaeda Fighters in Syria

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT 
547 words
21 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- As the clock wound down on Barack Obama's presidency, an Air Force B-52 bomber carried out a punishing airstrike against a training camp of Al Qaeda in Syria, the Pentagon said Friday.

The attack, which took place west of Aleppo, killed more than 100 fighters, according to the Pentagon. Armed drones were also involved in the operation, which took place Thursday evening local time.

It was the second major strike carried out by American warplanes in Mr. Obama's waning hours in the White House. On Thursday, the Pentagon reported that B-2 stealth bombers had flown their first combat mission in nearly six years to attack two training camps in Libya that were being used by the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIS or ISIL.

The flurry of airstrikes against militant groups in North Africa and the Middle East illustrates the challenges that President Trump faces in carrying out the vow in his inaugural address to combat ''radical Islamic terrorism,'' which he promised to ''eradicate completely from the face of the earth.'' The extremists have proved to be resilient and are operating in far-flung countries that are racked by internal fighting and where there is little or no American military presence.

The B-52 strike on Thursday, the Pentagon said, was directed at the Shaykh Sulayman Training Camp in Idlib. Pentagon officials said that it had been in operation for several years but had only recently become a base for ''core Al Qaeda'' extremists, who have largely come from outside Syria to fight and plot attacks. All told, 14 bombs and missiles were used in that attack.

''The removal of this training camp disrupts training operations and discourages hard-line Islamist and Syrian opposition groups from joining or cooperating with Al Qaeda on the battlefield,'' Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said in a statement.

The airstrike was condemned by the Syrian opposition group Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, which complained that the camp for new recruits was one of theirs and that the practical effect would be to eliminate fighters who are confronting Bashar al-Assad, the Syrian leader. Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, formerly known as the Nusra Front, claims to have broken with Al Qaeda, but American officials say they are still a Qaeda affiliate.

''America chose to confront the Syrian people and their mujahedeen,'' the group said in a statement, which was translated by the SITE Intelligence Group, which studies terrorist groups.

The Pentagon has announced other attacks against Qaeda operatives in recent days, asserting that more than 150 terrorists had been killed since Jan. 1.

On Thursday, the Pentagon disclosed that it had carried out an airstrike on Tuesday in Idlib Province that killed Mohammad Habib Boussadoun al-Tunisi, whom it described a Qaeda leader linked to plots against Western targets.

According to a Pentagon statement, Mr. Boussadoun went to Syria in 2014 after spending several years in Europe and other countries in the Middle East where he maintained ties with extremists. Earlier in January, airstrikes killed two other Qaeda leaders, the Pentagon said.

Follow Michael R. Gordon @gordonnyt and Eric Schmitt @EricSchmittNYT on Twitter.

Document NYTF000020170121ed1l0004w



World; Middle East
U.S. Airstrike Kills More Than 100 Qaeda Fighters in Syria

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT 
564 words
21 January 2017
01:10
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —s the clock wound down on Barack Obama’ presidency, B-52 bombers carried out a punishing airstrike against a training camp of Al Qaeda in Syria, the Pentagon said Friday.

The attack, which took place west of Aleppo, killed more than 100 fighters, according to the Pentagon. Armed drones were also involved in the operation, which took place Thursday evening local time.

It was the second major strike carried out by American warplanes in Mr. Obama’ waning hours in the White House. On Thursday, the Pentagon reported that B-2 stealth bombers had flown their first combat mission in nearly six years to attack two training camps in Libya that were being used by the Islamic State, which is also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL.

The flurry of airstrikes against militant groups in North Africa and the Middle East illustrates the challenges that President Trump faces in carrying out the vow in his inaugural address to combat “adical Islamic terrorism,”hich he promised to “radicate completely from the face of the earth.”he extremists have proved to be resilient and are operating in far-flung countries that are racked by internal fighting and where there is little or no American military presence.

The B-52 strike on Thursday, the Pentagon said, was directed at the Shaykh Sulayman Training Camp in Idlib. Pentagon officials said that it had been in operation for several years but had only recently become a base for “ore Al Qaeda”xtremists, who have largely come from outside Syria to fight and plot attacks. All told, 14 bombs and missiles were used in that attack.

“he removal of this training camp disrupts training operations and discourages hard-line Islamist and Syrian opposition groups from joining or cooperating with Al Qaeda on the battlefield,”apt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said in a statement.

The airstrike was condemned by the Syrian opposition group Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, which complained that the camp was one of theirs and that the practical effect would be to eliminate fighters who are confronting Bashar al-Assad, the Syrian leader. Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, formerly known as the Nusra Front, claims to have broken with Al Qaeda, but American officials say they are still a Qaeda affiliate.

“merica chose to confront the Syrian people and their mujahedeen,”he group said in a statement, which was translated by the SITE Intelligence Group, which studies terrorist groups.

The Pentagon has announced other attacks against Qaeda operatives in recent days, asserting that more than 150 terrorists had been killed since Jan. 1.

On Thursday, the Pentagon disclosed that it had carried out an airstrike on Tuesday in Idlib Province that killed Mohammad Habib Boussadoun al-Tunisi, whom it described a Qaeda leader linked to plots against Western targets.

According to a Pentagon statement, Mr. Boussadoun went to Syria in 2014 after spending several years in Europe and other countries in the Middle East where he maintained ties with extremists. Earlier in January, airstrikes killed two other Qaeda leaders, the Pentagon said.

* Obama’ Stark Options on \b ISIS\b0 : Arm Syrian Kurds or Let Trump Decide

* \b ISIS\b0  Destroys Part of Roman Amphitheater in Palmyra, Syria

* Despite Syria Cease-Fire, U.N. Says, Aid Isn’ Reaching Besieged Areas

Document NYTFEED020170121ed1l0002u



U.S.; Politics
U.S. Removes Libya From List of Zones With Looser Rules for Drone Strikes

By CHARLIE SAVAGE 
866 words
21 January 2017
00:43
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —efore ceding power, the Obama administration quietly removed a former extremist stronghold in Libya from a list of combat zones where United States counterterrorism drone strikes are authorized without obeying special rules intended to prevent civilian deaths, officials said on Friday.

The change means that as Donald J. Trump’ presidency begins, the United States is targeting Islamist militants in three known “reas of active hostilities,”here strict guidelines to protect civilians do not apply: Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria. For much of 2016, there was a fourth: The region around Surt, Libya.

It is not clear whether Mr. Trump will keep those civilian-protection rules —alled the “Presidential Policy Guidance,”r P.P.G. —or airstrikes outside of active war zones. Issued by Mr. Obama in 2013, they require “ear certainty”hat a bombing will kill no civilians, and that the target must pose a threat to Americans —ot just to American interests.

The Obama administration developed the guidelines in response to criticism that airstrikes were killing too many civilians, and in turn fueling anti-Americanism and helping terrorists recruit new members. But some military and C.I.A. officials have chafed under the limits.

Mr. Trump’ team has not said what it will do with the 2013 rules. But a statement posted on the White House website after he was sworn in on Friday said the new administration would “ursue aggressive joint and coalition military operations when necessary”o defeat the Islamic State.

Last August, after the fledgling Libyan government asked for help in dislodging militants from the city of Surt, the Obama administration quietly designated it an “rea of active hostilities,”here the guidelines to prevent civilian deaths did not apply. The change gave the military a freer hand to target Islamic State fighting positions and equipment. Under ordinary combat rules established by the laws of war, some bystander deaths are permissible if deemed necessary and proportionate.

At the time, the government did not announce that Mr. Obama had exempted Surt from the extra safeguards established by the 2013 rules. The New York Timesfirst reported the change in late November.

Between August and December, the military said it carried out 435 airstrikes to drive out the Islamic State from Surt, a campaign called Operation Odyssey Lightning. It concluded the campaign on Dec. 19.

But Mr. Obama this week briefly turned Odyssey Lightning back on, and expanded its geographic scope, to authorize a major airstrike on Jan. 19 against suspected Islamic State training camps in the desert about 25 miles southwest of Surt. The bombings killed more than 80 militants, the military said. It did not report any civilian deaths, but said it was still evaluating the results.

In response to questions from The Times on Friday, officials at the Pentagon said that when Odyssey Lightning ended last month, so also did the military’ authority to carry out airstrikes in Surt without obeying the 2013 rules. But when Mr. Obama briefly revived the operation for the strikes this week, its exemption from those rules was temporarily turned back on too, they said.

Col. Mark Cheadle, a spokesman for the United States Africa Command, said the expanded targeting authority expired again at midnight between Jan. 19 and Jan. 20, and now “here are no more”reas in Libya where the 2013 rules do not apply.

The administration had offered a clue that Surt was no longer exempted from the 2013 rules in a report the Office of the Director of National Intelligence issued late Thursday.

The report summarized official estimates of militants and civilians killed last year in counterterrorism airstrikes where the 2013 safeguards generally applied. But it also mentioned that areas of active hostilities, where the protections do not apply, currently include Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria. It made no mention of Libya.

The report also said that in 2016, the United States carried out 53 such airstrikes that killed between 431 and 441 militants and one civilian. Those figures apparently include a huge airstrike in Somalia in March that killed about 150 people at what the military said was a graduation ceremony for Islamist fighters.

The government disclosed Thursday’ report under an executive order Mr. Obama issued last July requiring annual public disclosure of casualty estimates from counterterrorism airstrikes away from active-hostilities zones. That order was part of a broader effort late in Mr. Obama’ tenure to make the government less secretive about drone strikes. It is also not clear whether Mr. Trump will keep that requirement.

Follow Charlie Savage on Twitter@charlie_savage.

* U.S. Bombs \b ISIS\b0  Camps in Libya

* U.S. Releases Rules for Airstrike Killings of Terror Suspects

* U.S. Reveals Death Toll From Airstrikes Outside War Zones

* Obama Expands War With Al Qaeda to Include Shabab in Somalia

Barack Obama and Donald J. Trump at the presidential swearing-in ceremony at the United States Capitol on Friday. It was not clear whether Mr. Trump would keep in place civilian-protection rules established by Mr. Obama in 2013. | Damon Winter/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170120ed1k00b9l



World; Middle East
 ISIS  Destroys Part of Roman Amphitheater in Palmyra, Syria

By DAN BILEFSKY 
593 words
20 January 2017
14:06
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Islamic State militants have destroyed the facade of a second-century Roman amphitheater and another ancient monument in the historic city of Palmyra, Syria, the Syrian state-run news agency reported on Friday.

The news agency, SANA, said the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL, had destroyed part of the amphitheater and severely damaged a tetrapylon, a square structure of four plinths, each with four columns. The agency said the tetrapylon had two columns still standing and appeared to have been “ntentionally destroyed using explosives.”

The smashing of the ancient structures was a further attempt by the group to impose its will by destroying historic monuments or artifacts that it says do not conform to its strict interpretation of Islam. The group’ demolition of historic sites in Iraq, Libya, Syria and elsewhere has drawn international opprobrium; Unesco has branded the actions “ultural cleansing.”

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group based in Britain, said the destruction of the two sites in Palmyra appeared to have taken place on Jan. 11. The observatory said the acts could have been a demonstration of force before the militant group, which is under siege in Iraq and in Syria, retreats from the city.

The Islamic State retook Palmyra in December, nine months after Syrian government forces, backed by Russia, had pushed the group out. The militant group had terrorized citizens and destroyed numerous priceless remains in the desert city, declared a  World Heritage site by Unesco.

The targeting of Palmyra’ cultural treasures has particular resonance as the city’ heritage, which embodies Greek, Persian, Roman and Islamic cultures, is a vivid symbol of a prewar, multicultural Syria that is anathema to the Islamic State’ brutal and monolithic worldview.

Maamoun Abdulkarim, Syria’ director general of antiquities and museums, on Friday called for the world to save Palmyra from further destruction. “ISIS is destroying Palmyra, building after building,”e said. “n the past, their goal was ideological,”e added, but as the group is steadily losing territory, it has become a matter of “evenge.”

ISIS captured Palmyra in May 2015, and quickly started targeting cultural sites and executing soldiers and some residents who had been left behind. In a matter of months, the militants began to plunder and destroy ancient artifacts, including the 1,800-year-old Arch of Triumph, once a popular draw for tourists, and the nearly 2,000-year-old Temple of Baalshamin.

At the time, Unesco’ director general, Irina Bokova, said the destruction of the Arch of Triumph “hows how extremists are terrified by history and culture.”

Celebrated as the “earl of the Desert,”almyra, located about 150 miles northeast of Damascus, was once a refuge for travelers on the Silk Road, the ancient trade route. Temples have stood in Palmyra for thousands of years.

Hwaida Saad and Maher Samaan contributed reporting.

* Archaeological Victims of \b ISIS\b0  Rise Again, as Replicas in Rome

* Using Violence and Persuasion, \b ISIS\b0  Makes Political Gains

* Syrian War Takes Heavy Toll at a Crossroad of Cultures

* The Crimes of Palmyra

The amphitheater in Palmyra, Syria, in 2016. Unesco has branded the destruction of heritage sites by the Islamic State “ultural cleansing.” Bryan Denton for The New York Times | The tetrapylon, right, at Palmyra, Syria, in April 2016. According to reports from the state-run news agency SANA, only two columns are still standing, with the rest “ntentionally destroyed using explosives.” Bryan Denton for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170120ed1k004pi



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Bombs  ISIS  Camps in Libya, Killing Over 80

By ERIC SCHMITT and MICHAEL R. GORDON 
667 words
20 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Two United States Air Force B-2 bombers attacked Islamic State training camps in Libya overnight, killing more than 80 militants, including some who were involved in plotting terrorist attacks in Europe, the Pentagon said on Thursday.

The attack, which also included strikes by armed reaper drones flying from a base in Sicily, was a parting shot from President Obama at the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, and one of his final actions as commander in chief.

''We need to strike ISIL everywhere they show up,'' Ashton B. Carter, the departing defense secretary, told reporters. ''We know that some of the ISIL operatives in Libya were involved in plotting attacks in Europe.''

Islamic State fighters were driven out of Surt, the group's coastal stronghold, last year by Libyan fighters backed by American air power. After conducting 495 strikes against truck bombs, heavy guns, tanks and command bunkers in the city, the Pentagon's Africa Command announced an end to air operations on Dec. 19.

But the taking of Surt did not put an end to Islamic State operations in Libya. The militant group is believed to have several hundred fighters in the country. Many of them, including fighters who fled from Surt, began to regroup at two training camps about 25 miles southwest of the city, officials said.

When the initial flurry of airstrikes in Surt were completed last year, Mr. Obama asked to be notified if the Pentagon saw another opportunity to strike. On Monday, Mr. Obama approved airstrikes against the camps.

''We had 100 terrorists training,'' said Peter Cook, the Pentagon press secretary. ''That was a risk we could not accept.''

To buttress its assertions, the Pentagon released surveillance video of the militants at one of the camps unloading rocket-propelled grenades and shells from a truck.

The B-2 bombers dropped more than 100 satellite-guided bombs and were chosen in part for their ability to loiter over the target area, Pentagon officials say. After the B-2s dropped their bombs, the Reaper drones followed up with their strikes.

The Pentagon did not say whether any of the plots it said were being hatched at the camps were imminent, whether senior Islamic State commanders were among the targets, or if Libyan fighters supported by the United States moved in on the ground after the strikes were carried out.

Jonathan Winer, the Obama administration's special envoy to Libya, told Congress in November that the Islamic State, as it suffered defeats in Surt, was most likely forming cells elsewhere in the country. He called on Libyans to unite behind the country's fledgling Government of National Accord to combat the terrorists.

A recent analysis by the American Enterprise Institute, a policy organization in Washington, found that Islamic State militants operating as ''desert brigades'' south of Surt had ambushed Libyan military positions, disrupted supply lines with explosives and established checkpoints on key roads. The Islamic State is recruiting foreign fighters into southern Libya and is most likely relying on the same havens used by Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, according to the analysis.

Mr. Carter, at a Pentagon news conference, suggested that the Islamic State would continue to have a foothold in Libya as long as the country was racked by internal strife.

''As long as the conditions of civil war are there, the Libyans don't have the unity,'' Mr. Carter said. ''If they did, I think they themselves could make short work of ISIL.''

The two B-2 bombers flew a round-trip mission of about 34 hours from Whiteman Air Force Base in Missouri, military officials said. It was the first time that a B-2 had been used in combat since March 2011, when three of the planes carried out airstrikes in Libya.

Follow Eric Schmitt @EricSchmittNYT and Michael R. Gordon @gordonnyt on Twitter.

Document NYTF000020170120ed1k0005u



Contributing Op-Ed Writer
Opinion
What Does Vladimir Putin See in Donald Trump ?

By THOMAS B. EDSALL 
2,134 words
19 January 2017
10:02
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

At noon on Friday, Donald Trump will become the 45th president of the United States. Millions of Americans will rejoice at the sight, and millions more will not. As a rule, foreign leaders don’ attend the inauguration of American presidents, but Russia’ president, Vladimir Putin , will be there in spirit. To understand why and to understand what’ happening as Trump takes over the White House, we need to go back two weeks.

On Jan. 6, the C.I.A., the F.B.I. and the National Security Agencyasserted  with “igh confidence”hat “ussian efforts to influence the 2016 US presidential election”ormed part of a broader, worldwide agenda “o undermine the US-led liberal democratic order.”

According to the intelligence report , “ssessing Russian Activities and Intentions in Recent US Elections,”Vladimir Putin , “ssessing Russian Activities and Intentions in Recent US Elections,”

ordered an influence campaign in 2016 aimed at the US presidential election. Russia’ goals were to undermine public faith in the US democratic process, denigrate Secretary Clinton, and harm her electability and potential presidency. We further assess Putin and the Russian Government developed a clear preference for President-elect Trump.

The intelligence assessment raises the question: what made Trump an attractive vehicle through which to attempt to weaken the liberal democratic order. Why him?

Brendan Nyhan , a professor of government at Dartmouth and a contributor to The Upshot , made the case succinctly:

Trump has flouted the norms of American elections and governance at every turn, including calling for the jailing of an opposing candidate, encouraging violence against protesters, endorsing the torture of prisoners, suggesting he might not respect the results of the election, falsely claiming that millions of illegal votes were cast, failing to resolve unprecedented conflicts of interest or to even disclose his tax returns, and attacking a federal judge based on his ethnicity (and that’ of course a highly incomplete list). I can’ directly assess the IC report, but it’ fair to say that the liberal democratic order is being disrupted both in the U.S. and around the world.

On Oct. 13 in National Review, the conservative columnist Charles Krauthammer  argued that Trump’

incendiary talk is an affront to elementary democratic decency and a breach of the boundaries of American political discourse.”rauthammer added: “t takes decades, centuries, to develop ingrained norms of political restraint and self-control. But they can be undone in short order by a demagogue feeding a vengeful populism.

I asked several other political analysts to give me their view of Trump’ appeal to those seeking  to destabilize  the American political order.

Norman Ornstein , a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute , sent me his thoughts:

One, the Russians have known for a long time that Trump was susceptible to flattery, especially from major authority figures. Two, he had a significant following in the US as a mega-celebrity. Three, if he got engaged in politics, it would be divisive — good early example being his birther efforts. Four, he would perplex, frustrate and divide Republican establishment figures, most of whom were hostile to Russia, but a divided major party serves to disrupt the democracy. I doubt they thought he would win, but he would encourage or exacerbate divisions in the society, challenge many fundamental norms over his own narcissistic sociopathic views of himself and his entitlements, and break a lot of crockery without a second’ misgiving. His victories, with the GOP nomination and the election were unexpected icing on the cake.

Heather Conley , the director of the Europe Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (a center-right think tank) and a co-author of the recently released report, “The Kremlin Playbook ,”ave me her view of Trump’ allure for hackers:

One of our conclusions was that the Kremlin seeks out political and economic forces which weaken the “est’ desirability, credibility and moral authority.”t does this to make Russia’ neighbors less interested in seeking to cooperate and integrate with Europe or the U.S., making them more dependent on Russia. It seeks to undermine NATO ’ unity in the hopes of seeking a new grand bargain with the U.S. in which the U.S. will recognize Russia’ sphere of influence and will not interfere in its internal issues.

Conley continued:

Against this backdrop, during the presidential campaign Mr. Trump was the only candidate that openly questioned America’ commitment to NATO and its commitment to defend the Baltic States. He was the only candidate who was not very critical of Russia’ actions in Ukraine and Syria and chose to reframe them in ways that were in sync with Russian policy. He has proposed a new relationship with Russia. In other words, based on Mr. Trump’ statements, his views appear to align with Russian interests.

There are those who dispute the conclusions of the government’ intelligence report.

Glenn Greenwald , who has written critically  of domestic surveillance by the United States government,  argues  that “n the key claims —hat Putin directed this hacking and that he did so to elect Donald Trump —here is no evidence for it.”Matt Taibbi, a contributing editor at Rolling Stone who spent several years reporting in Russia, contended  that the “eport is long on jargon but short on specifics.”

Anne Applebaum , a Washington Post columnist who is also a longtime writer on Russia , presents a counterargument  to Greenwald and Taibbi: forget the intelligence report, she suggests, there is more than enough publicly available material to support the charge of Russian involvement.

“nstead of wasting more time”ebating the contents of the report, Applebaum wrote on Jan. 13, “aybe we ought to abandon our obsession with ‘ecrets’nd ‘pies’nd look at what is sitting in front of us.”

Here is Applebaum’ case.

First, “rump’ real estate empire relies, though we don’ know how much, on Russian money.”

Second, Applebaum writes,

Paul Manafort , Trump’ former campaign manager, spent many years working on behalf of the thuggish Russian-backed Ukrainian president, Viktor Yanukovych , who eventually fled his own country. Manafort maintains links  to pro-Russian groups in Ukraine. His name appeared on a list of people who took large chunks of cash from Yanukovych . He hasn’ gone away —n fact, he has lived in Trump Tower .

Third, according to Applebaum, “rump operatives at the convention altered the Republican Party platform ”o eliminate a call to provide arms to Ukrainians who are resisting a Russian takeover.

Fourth:

Throughout the campaign, Trump unquestioningly repeated slogans and conspiracy theories —“bama invented ISIS”nd “illary will start World War III”—lifted from Sputnik , the Russian propaganda website.

Finally, Applebaum argues as evidence of Trump’ pro-Russia tilt that

Trump is willing to risk serious conflict with China, to destroy U.S. relations with Mexico, to dismiss America’ closest allies in Europe and to downgrade NATO , our most important military alliance.

All this provides the basis for Applebaum’ conclusion:

Trump doesn’ have to be a Manchurian candidate who has been hypnotized or recruited by foreign intelligence. It’ enough that he has direct and indirect links to a profoundly corrupt and violent foreign dictator, whose policies he admires, whose advisers he shares and whose slogans he uses. That’ kompromat enough for me.

During the past nine days, a highly contentious  debate has emerged over the validity and accuracy  of a leaked, unverified 35-page dossier  put together by a former British MI6 official. The dossier, financed  by Trump opponents, both Republican and Democratic —laims that Russia has gathered compromising sexual and financial material about Trump.

Many of the domestic and foreign policy experts I contacted suggested that Russia would not need to blackmail Trump to get what it wanted —hat Trump’ susceptibility to praise has made him vulnerable to manipulation.

David Leege, a professor emeritus of political science at Notre Dame, wrote me:

Trump was a willing but unwitting accomplice because he loved the flattery, saw it only as a business opportunity, and had so little understanding of international relations to recognize how affairs of state could be caught up in it.

Along similar lines, Sandy Maisel, a political scientist at Colby, argued that Trump’

ego is such that he never asked, nor does he ask yet, what playing into the Russians needs and desires meant for our system. An unwitting —go-driven —ool of Putin’ goal to undermine faith in our system and in the Clinton candidacy.

Gary Jacobson, a political scientist at the University of California, San Diego, was outspoken in his response to my question asking why the Russians favored Trump:

His shameless mendacity, narcissism, authoritarian instincts, inability to tolerate opposition or criticism, hostility to formal institutions and the media, vast ignorance of foreign and domestic issues, indifference to constitutional restraints and eagerness to whip up and exploit xenophobia and (barely disguised) racism. We might add his affection for authoritarian leaders and other tough guys. Have I left anything out? Probably. All of these characteristics lead him to say things and propose actions antithetical to democratic norms and standards.

Fred Wertheimer, founder and president of Democracy 21 , a nonpartisan organization promoting campaign finance reform, agreed that

Putin sees in Trump someone who is enormously susceptible to flattery, which Putin is perfectly happy to provide in order to achieve his national objectives.

Putin’ major objective, Wertheimer wrote by email, is

to break up the Western alliance and he appears to see Trump as an excellent vehicle to achieve this goal.

In an interview  on Jan. 16 with the Times of London and Germany’ Bild, Trump repeated his assertion that NATO is “bsolete”nd suggested that sanctions against Russia could be dropped in return for a reduction of nuclear arms.

Molly McKew, a consultant who has advised such anti-Putin government leaders as Mikheil Saakashvili, a former president of Georgia, and Vlad Filat, a former prime minister of Moldova, published an essay in Politico Magazine on Jan. 1. “Putin’ Real Long Game ,”cKew argued, is to capitalize on Europe’ struggle with surging immigration and economic stagnation. As she put it:

Vladimir Putin has seized the momentum of this unraveling, exacting critical damage to the underpinnings of the liberal world order in a shockingly short time.

This threat, McKew warns, should not be taken lightly:

The West is already at war, whether it wants to be or not. It may not be a war we recognize, but it is a war. This war seeks, at home and abroad, to erode our values, our democracy, and our institutional strength; to dilute our ability to sort fact from fiction, or moral right from wrong; and to convince us to make decisions against our own best interests.

How do “kompromat ”nd cyber hacking corrode public belief in verifiable truth?

In a Jan. 15 Times article, my colleague Amanda Taub writes :

Specific leaks may take aim at powerful individuals, but in the longer term, kompromat serves the interests of the powerful, which is why it is often a tool of autocrats. By eroding the very idea of a shared reality, and by spreading apathy and confusion among a public that learns to distrust leaders and institutions alike, kompromat undermines a society’ ability to hold the powerful to account and ensure the proper functioning of government.

Masha Gessen, writing  in The Times on Jan. 14, noted that in the debate over Russia’ role in the election,

Mr. Trump’ version of reality got a boost: There was no such thing as truth, only a battle of opinions proffered by different actors, each of whom strives to be loudest.

Over the next few months, the Senate Intelligence Committee plans to investigate  foreign influence in the 2016 election, an inquiry that will test the independence and integrity of the Republican-controlled Congress.

The fact is, though, that despite Russia’ campaign, Trump won under democratic rules, with his contempt for behavioral and political norms  on incessant display. He carried a majority of Electoral College votes, more counties than any Republican candidate since 1984 and two million more votes than Mitt Romney collected in 2012.

This means that we are facing the prospect of a renegade commander in chief armed with the considerable powers of the executive branch and a seemingly compliant legislature. Trump has already dealt a body blow to the political process. We will soon learn how much harm he can inflict once in office.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook  and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter .

A souvenir shop in Moscow. | Andrey Rudakov/Bloomberg 

Document NYTFEED020170119ed1j0030d



world
Persecuted Minority in Myanmar Is Escalating Its Armed Insurgency

By RICHARD C. PADDOCK, ELLEN BARRY and MIKE IVES 
1,725 words
19 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BANGKOK —he insurgent group announced its existence with a predawn attack on three Myanmar border guard posts. Hundreds of Rohingya militants, armed mainly with knives and slingshots, killed nine police officers and seized weapons and ammunition.

It was about time, Naing Lin, 28, said of the October attack near his village, Kyee Kan Pyin.

“he government is torturing us,”e said by phone this week. “he aim of the group is to protect our rights. That’ all. They are doing what they should do.”

The beginning of an armed resistance is just one of several developments that are reshaping the conflict over Myanmar’ persecuted Rohingya minority with potentially far-reaching consequences.

The group that attacked the border posts, Harakah al-Yaqin, is believed to have several hundred recruits, substantial popular support and ties to Saudi Arabia and Pakistan, according to a report by the International Crisis Group. Separately, there has been a surge of international humanitarian and political support for the Rohingya cause, mainly from Muslim countries that have cast the Rohingya as the Palestinians of Southeast Asia.

The combination threatens to internationalize and escalate a long-simmering conflict. The Myanmar government has responded to the attacks with a sweeping counterinsurgency campaign that witnesses and human rights groups say has included the killing of hundreds of civilians, the burning of villages and the systematic rape of women and girls.

In addition, some analysts fear that turning the Rohingya into a transnational Muslim cause could draw foreign jihadists of varying stripes to Myanmar, adding terrorism to an already combustible mix and giving the Myanmar military a convenient excuse for a draconian response.

But after decades of persecution and violence, to which the rest of the world largely responded with a shrug, some Rohingya say an armed response is overdue.

“hey are doing good things,”r. Naing Lin said of the insurgents. “hey are protecting our rights. If it’ needed, I might join them.”

The attack on the border posts in Rakhine State was a “ame changer,”ccording to the International Crisis Group report.

Harakah al-Yaqin, Arabic for “aith Movement,”s directed by about 20 Rohingya éigré in Saudi Arabia and led on the field by another 20 or so Rohingya with international training and experience in guerrilla warfare, the report said. It is well connected in Pakistan and Bangladesh and appears to be attracting financial backing from the Rohingya diaspora and major private donors in Saudi Arabia and the Middle East, the report said.

The militia enjoys growing support from many Rohingya in Myanmar who see it as the only alternative to government repression, the International Crisis Group said. The organization warned that a continued heavy-handed approach by the military would backfire, leading more Rohingya to back the militants and possibly inspiring foreign Islamic groups to join the conflict.

There have already been signs of interest by the Islamic State, or ISIS. In November, Indonesian authorities arrested three men who claimed allegiance to the Islamic State and were accused of planning to bomb prominent sites across Jakarta, including the Myanmar Embassy.

This month, Malaysian authorities detained a man who the government said was an Islamic State follower heading to Myanmar to carry out attacks.

“ll this clearly demonstrates I.S. slowly and steadily making inroads to influence the Rohingya issue,”aid Rohan Gunaratna, a professor of security studies at the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies in Singapore. “ou can even say it’ an attempt to hijack the Rohingya agenda.”

The Myanmar government has largely denied allegations of human rights abuses, and it says it is responding to the situation according to the rule of law.

The government has barred journalists and aid workers from entering the conflict area, in northern Rakhine State just over the Naf River from Bangladesh, and accusations that the military is carrying out a campaign of murder, rape and arson have not been independently verified.

But the reports and images of violence there have fueled the concern of other countries in the region, especially Bangladesh and Malaysia.

On Thursday, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, a coalition of 56 countries, will hold an emergency session in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, where it is expected to call for an immediate halt to military operations in Rakhine State, an independent investigation into accusations of human rights abuses, and humanitarian aid to the affected areas.

At the same time, countries in the region are wary of escalating violence in their backyards.

Bangladesh, struggling to contain the spread of Islamist extremist networks within its own borders, is concerned about the rise of an insurgency next door and the prospect of Rohingya militants using Bangladesh as a base to carry out attacks in Myanmar.

Refugees fleeing the crackdown in Myanmar have been “ouring over the border”nto makeshift settlements, said Shafqat Munir, a research fellow at the Bangladesh Institute of Peace and Security Studies. “f there is a risk of potentially radicalized people coming in, that presents quite a challenge.”

Still, in contrast to previous crises, there has been little effort to stem the flow by sending refugees back to Myanmar. About 65,000 Rohingya are believed to have arrived in Bangladesh since October, joining about a half-million already living in the refugee camps near Cox’ Bazar.

Islamist organizations, including the powerful Hefazat-e-Islam, organized large rallies in Dhaka, the Bangladeshi capital, in November and December, urging the government to give the Rohingya shelter.

Madrasa students have journeyed to the refugee camps from far-flung cities to help build temporary shelters. Others travel halfway across the country from Dhaka and beyond to hand small gifts of cash to the once-reviled Rohingya.

Mohammad Yunus, 26, whose family fled to Bangladesh in 1992, is astonished by the change.

“angladeshis once had hatred for us,”e said. “hey would call us names. They used to say we were Burmese, with a bad tone, and swear at us in different ways. But now they have the idea that we are persecuted.”

Bangladeshi television is broadcasting sympathetic news coverage of Rohingya suffering in Myanmar, and images purported to be of atrocities carried out by the Myanmar military are circulating on social media, including on WhatsApp and Facebook.

Mohammad Imam Hussein, whose mosque near the Myanmar border provides aid to hundreds of refugees, said the videos have brought the conflict home for Bangladeshis.

“hey’e seeing with their own eyes what is happening to them,”e said. “arlier, there was no interaction between us, and I didn’ have the same feeling. But now I have seen it with my own eyes. I have seen people being killed.”

That Malaysia is taking a leading role in promoting the Rohingya cause is not entirely unexpected, given that it is the largest officially Muslim nation in Southeast Asia and that it has taken in tens of thousands of Rohingya refugees.

But a rally led by Prime Minister Najib Razak in Kuala Lumpur in December to protest Myanmar’ military crackdown was extraordinary in a region where leaders rarely criticize each other and countries largely mind their own business.

Mr. Najib called the military campaign “enocide”nd called out Myanmar’ de facto leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, a Nobel laureate, for not doing enough to prevent the bloodshed. “oes she really have a Nobel Peace Prize?”e asked.

While his motives may have been less than pure —ritics said he was trying to distract attention from allegations that he stole $1 billion in government funds and to rally voters in Malaysia’ Muslim heartland ahead of coming elections —is voice has been strong.

Malaysia, along with Saudi Arabia, is also home to Rohingya Vision, a satellite broadcaster and advocacy group that has helped circulate videos and news from Rakhine State.

Muhammad Noor, its Saudi-born managing director, says the station has 30 paid citizen journalists in Myanmar and is financed by Rohingya donors from across Southeast Asia and the Middle East. He says the station reaches at least 150,000 viewers with its app, social media channels and websites in English, Arabic and Burmese.

“e’e trying to tell the story to the world that the amount of persecution is in a very extreme level,”e said.

Another Malaysian group, the Malaysian Consultative Council for Islamic Organization, is trying to organize an aid flotilla along the lines of the ill-fated one that tried to break an Israeli blockade of Gaza in 2010. The group, hoping to draw attention to the Rohingyas’light, says it will set sail early next month.

Whether the confluence of international attention and militarization ratchets up the pressure on Myanmar is hard to fathom. Despite her dual roles as state counselor and foreign minister, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi has little authority over the military under the power-sharing detailed in Myanmar’ military-imposed Constitution. But she has so far resisted international pressure to use her position to criticize the violence, speak out for the Rohingya or even call for an independent investigation of the allegations of atrocities in Rakhine State.

Chris Lewa, director of the Arakan Project, a Rohingya rights organization, says that increased international attention may attract extremists but could also pressure the government to seek a long-term solution.

“ithout pressure,”he said, “othing will happen.”

Richard C. Paddock reported from Bangkok; Ellen Barry from Cox’ Bazar, Bangladesh; and Mike Ives from Hong Kong. Saw Nang contributed reporting from Mandalay, Myanmar, and Maher Sattar from Cox’ Bazar.

PHOTOS: Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh. About 65,000 have arrived from Myanmar since October. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALLISON JOYCE/GETTY IMAGES) (A1); Border guards in Rakhine State, Myanmar, in December. Rohingya militants attacked border posts in October, killing nine officers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NYIEN CHAN NAING/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) (A9)

* ‘here Are No Homes Left’ Rohingya Tell of Rape, Fire and Death in Myanmar

* 14 Countries Press Myanmar to Allow Aid in Rohingya Areas

* Kofi Annan, in Myanmar, Voices Concern Over Reported Abuses of Rohingya

* Rohingya Face Health Care Bias in Parts of Asia, Study Finds

* Myanmar’ Leader Faulted for Silence as Army Campaigns Against Rohingya

* Violence Escalates Between Myanmar Forces and Rohingya

* A Migrant Mother’ Anguished Choice

Document INHT000020170120ed1j0000h



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Insurgency Heralds Shift for Myanmar Minority

By RICHARD C. PADDOCK, ELLEN BARRY and MIKE IVES; Richard C. Paddock reported from Bangkok; Ellen Barry from Cox's Bazar, Bangladesh; and Mike Ives from Hong Kong. Saw Nang contributed reporting from Mandalay, Myanmar, and Maher Sattar from Cox's Bazar. 
1,653 words
19 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BANGKOK -- The insurgent group announced its existence with a predawn attack on three Myanmar border guard posts. Hundreds of Rohingya militants, armed mainly with knives and slingshots, killed nine police officers and seized weapons and ammunition.

It was about time, Naing Lin, 28, said of the October attack near his village, Kyee Kan Pyin.

''The government is torturing us,'' he said by phone this week. ''The aim of the group is to protect our rights. That's all. They are doing what they should do.''

The beginning of an armed resistance is just one of several developments that are reshaping the conflict over Myanmar's persecuted Rohingya minority with potentially far-reaching consequences.

The group that attacked the border posts, Harakah al-Yaqin, is believed to have several hundred recruits, substantial popular support and ties to Saudi Arabia and Pakistan, according to a report by the International Crisis Group. Separately, there has been a surge of international humanitarian and political support for the Rohingya cause, mainly from Muslim countries that have cast the Rohingya as the Palestinians of Southeast Asia.

The combination threatens to internationalize and escalate a long-simmering conflict. The Myanmar government has responded to the attacks with a sweeping counterinsurgency campaign that witnesses and human rights groups say has included the killing of hundreds of civilians, the burning of villages and the systematic rape of women and girls.

In addition, some analysts fear that turning the Rohingya into a transnational Muslim cause could draw foreign jihadists of varying stripes to Myanmar, adding terrorism to an already combustible mix and giving the Myanmar military a convenient excuse for a draconian response.

But after decades of persecution and violence, to which the rest of the world largely responded with a shrug, some Rohingya say an armed response is overdue.

''They are doing good things,'' Mr. Naing Lin said of the insurgents. ''They are protecting our rights. If it's needed, I might join them.''

The attack on the border posts in Rakhine State was a ''game changer,'' according to the International Crisis Group report.

Harakah al-Yaqin, Arabic for ''Faith Movement,'' is directed by about 20 Rohingya éigré in Saudi Arabia and led on the field by another 20 or so Rohingya with international training and experience in guerrilla warfare, the report said. It is well connected in Pakistan and Bangladesh and appears to be attracting financial backing from the Rohingya diaspora and major private donors in Saudi Arabia and the Middle East, the report said.

The militia enjoys growing support from many Rohingya in Myanmar who see it as the only alternative to government repression, the International Crisis Group said. The organization warned that a continued heavy-handed approach by the military would backfire, leading more Rohingya to back the militants and possibly inspiring foreign Islamic groups to join the conflict.

There have already been signs of interest by the Islamic State, or ISIS. In November, Indonesian authorities arrested three men who claimed allegiance to the Islamic State and were accused of planning to bomb prominent sites across Jakarta, including the Myanmar Embassy.

This month, Malaysian authorities detained a man who the government said was an Islamic State follower heading to Myanmar to carry out attacks.

''All this clearly demonstrates I.S. slowly and steadily making inroads to influence the Rohingya issue,'' said Rohan Gunaratna, a professor of security studies at the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies in Singapore. ''You can even say it's an attempt to hijack the Rohingya agenda.''

The Myanmar government has largely denied allegations of human rights abuses, and it says it is responding to the situation according to the rule of law.

The government has barred journalists and aid workers from entering the conflict area, in northern Rakhine State just over the Naf River from Bangladesh, and accusations that the military is carrying out a campaign of murder, rape and arson have not been independently verified.

But the reports and images of violence there have fueled the concern of other countries in the region, especially Bangladesh and Malaysia.

On Thursday, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, a coalition of 56 countries, will hold an emergency session in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, where it is expected to call for an immediate halt to military operations in Rakhine State, an independent investigation into accusations of human rights abuses, and humanitarian aid to the affected areas.

At the same time, countries in the region are wary of escalating violence in their backyards.

Bangladesh, struggling to contain the spread of Islamist extremist networks within its own borders, is concerned about the rise of an insurgency next door and the prospect of Rohingya militants using Bangladesh as a base to carry out attacks in Myanmar.

Refugees fleeing the crackdown in Myanmar have been ''pouring over the border'' into makeshift settlements, said Shafqat Munir, a research fellow at the Bangladesh Institute of Peace and Security Studies. ''If there is a risk of potentially radicalized people coming in, that presents quite a challenge.''

Still, in contrast to previous crises, there has been little effort to stem the flow by sending refugees back to Myanmar. About 65,000 Rohingya are believed to have arrived in Bangladesh since October, joining about a half-million already living in the refugee camps near Cox's Bazar.

Islamist organizations, including the powerful Hefazat-e-Islam, organized large rallies in Dhaka, the Bangladeshi capital, in November and December, urging the government to give the Rohingya shelter.

Madrasa students have journeyed to the refugee camps from far-flung cities to help build temporary shelters. Others travel halfway across the country from Dhaka and beyond to hand small gifts of cash to the once-reviled Rohingya.

Mohammad Yunus, 26, whose family fled to Bangladesh in 1992, is astonished by the change.

''Bangladeshis once had hatred for us,'' he said. ''They would call us names. They used to say we were Burmese, with a bad tone, and swear at us in different ways. But now they have the idea that we are persecuted.''

Bangladeshi television is broadcasting sympathetic news coverage of Rohingya suffering in Myanmar, and images purported to be of atrocities carried out by the Myanmar military are circulating on social media, including on WhatsApp and Facebook.

Mohammad Imam Hussein, whose mosque near the Myanmar border provides aid to hundreds of refugees, said the videos have brought the conflict home for Bangladeshis.

''They're seeing with their own eyes what is happening to them,'' he said. ''Earlier, there was no interaction between us, and I didn't have the same feeling. But now I have seen it with my own eyes. I have seen people being killed.''

That Malaysia is taking a leading role in promoting the Rohingya cause is not entirely unexpected, given that it is the largest officially Muslim nation in Southeast Asia and that it has taken in tens of thousands of Rohingya refugees.

But a rally led by Prime Minister Najib Razak in Kuala Lumpur in December to protest Myanmar's military crackdown was extraordinary in a region where leaders rarely criticize each other and countries largely mind their own business.

Mr. Najib called the military campaign ''genocide'' and called out Myanmar's de facto leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, a Nobel laureate, for not doing enough to prevent the bloodshed. ''Does she really have a Nobel Peace Prize?'' he asked.

While his motives may have been less than pure -- critics said he was trying to distract attention from allegations that he stole $1 billion in government funds and to rally voters in Malaysia's Muslim heartland ahead of coming elections -- his voice has been strong.

Malaysia, along with Saudi Arabia, is also home to Rohingya Vision, a satellite broadcaster and advocacy group that has helped circulate videos and news from Rakhine State.

Muhammad Noor, its Saudi-born managing director, says the station has 30 paid citizen journalists in Myanmar and is financed by Rohingya donors from across Southeast Asia and the Middle East. He says the station reaches at least 150,000 viewers with its app, social media channels and websites in English, Arabic and Burmese.

''We're trying to tell the story to the world that the amount of persecution is in a very extreme level,'' he said.

Another Malaysian group, the Malaysian Consultative Council for Islamic Organization, is trying to organize an aid flotilla along the lines of the ill-fated one that tried to break an Israeli blockade of Gaza in 2010. The group, hoping to draw attention to the Rohingyas' plight, says it will set sail early next month.

Whether the confluence of international attention and militarization ratchets up the pressure on Myanmar is hard to fathom. Despite her dual roles as state counselor and foreign minister, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi has little authority over the military under the power-sharing detailed in Myanmar's military-imposed Constitution. But she has so far resisted international pressure to use her position to criticize the violence, speak out for the Rohingya or even call for an independent investigation of the allegations of atrocities in Rakhine State.

Chris Lewa, director of the Arakan Project, a Rohingya rights organization, says that increased international attention may attract extremists but could also pressure the government to seek a long-term solution.

''Without pressure,'' she said, ''nothing will happen.''

Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh. About 65,000 have arrived from Myanmar since October. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALLISON JOYCE/GETTY IMAGES) (A1); Border guards in Rakhine State, Myanmar, in December. Rohingya militants attacked border posts in October, killing nine officers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NYIEN CHAN NAING/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) (A9) 

Document NYTF000020170120ed1j00032



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Russian and Turkish Forces Conduct Joint Airstrikes Against  ISIS  in Syria

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT; Ivan Nechepurenko contributed reporting from Moscow. 
807 words
19 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Russia and Turkey carried out their first joint airstrikes against Islamic State positions in Syria on Wednesday, further expanding their budding military cooperation, the Russian military said.

The Russians have conducted airstrikes in recent weeks against Islamic State fighters near the northern Syrian town of Al Bab, an intervention that appears designed to help Turkish ground forces and the Syrian militias backed by the Turks in their campaign to capture the town.

But now, the Russian Air Force has gone a step further by collaborating on missions with Turkey's Air Force, the Russian military announced.

''Today, Russian and Turkish Air Forces are carrying out their first joint air operation against the Islamic State in the suburbs of Al Bab,'' Lt. Gen. Sergei F. Rudskoi, a senior member of the Russian general staff, told journalists on Wednesday in Moscow.

The Russian military's decision to highlight its role appeared intended to curry favor with the Turks and exploit growing tensions between the departing Obama administration and President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey.

Turkish officials have objected to the Pentagon's plans to arm Syrian Kurds so they can spearhead the offensive to retake Raqqa, the capital of the Islamic State. President Obama convened his National Security Council on Tuesday to discuss the question. But there has been no indication that Mr. Obama is prepared to authorize arming the Syrian Kurds in the waning hours of his administration.

The growing military cooperation between the Russians and Turks follows top-level political consultations over Syria, including a meeting in Moscow in December among Russian, Turkish and Iranian officials; American officials were not invited.

General Rudskoi said 36 targets had been selected in advance by military officers from the two countries. Nine Russian warplanes and eight Turkish aircraft conducted the strikes, he said.

The Turkish military acknowledged in a statement that Russian warplanes had attacked Islamic State positions south of Al Bab under an agreement between Turkey and Russia, but did not discuss the role of Turkish aircraft. There was no independent verification of the Russian claim that all of the targets had been destroyed.

In recent days, the United States has also carried out airstrikes near Al Bab to help the Turkish forces that are struggling to take the town. The American strikes also seem intended to ease the tensions between the United States and Turkey. In effect, Russian and American air power is being used not just to attack the Islamic State but also to compete for influence in Ankara, the Turkish capital.

Former military and diplomatic officials said the cooperation between Turkey, a NATO ally, and Russia, the foremost threat to the NATO alliance, was worrisome.

''Turkey is going to be an increasingly unreliable ally,'' said Eric Edelman, a former American ambassador to Turkey. ''It is a worrisome development and underscores the need for a very high-level strategic dialogue with Turkey that is long overdue.''

James G. Stavridis, the retired admiral who formerly served as NATO's top military commander before becoming dean of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University, said the emerging alliance raised a host of concerns, including how much intelligence the United States military should share with the Turks.

''It will immediately raise tactical questions of intelligence sharing, de-confliction with U.S. airstrikes, and basing out of Turkey for U.S. aircraft,'' Admiral Stavridis said in an email. ''Strategically, this apparent alignment of a powerful ally with the alliance's most obvious opponent significantly increases the degree of difficulty for the new administration in terms of finding its footing as a leader within NATO.''

Pentagon officials have sought publicly to play down the mounting indications of Turkish-Russian military collaboration. Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told reporters last week that he had been assured by his Turkish counterpart that the Turks were not cooperating with the Russians.

''As you may know, I speak quite frequently with my Turkish counterpart,'' General Dunford said then. ''He's also said that the Turks at this time are not cooperating and coordinating, conducting operations in conjunction with the Russians.''

Gen. David L. Goldfein, the Air Force chief of staff, was more circumspect when asked about the Russian announcement during an appearance Wednesday at the American Enterprise Institute, a Washington policy research center. ''I am not concerned right now,'' General Goldfein said. ''But we are all watching very closely to see how this goes.''

Follow Michael R. Gordon @gordonnyt and Eric Schmitt @EricSchmittNYT on Twitter.

Lt. Gen. Sergei F. Rudskoi of the Russian general staff spoke about the strikes. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IVAN SEKRETAREV/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170119ed1j0005g



U.S.; Politics
Russians and Turks Conduct Joint Strikes on  ISIS  in Syria

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT 
814 words
19 January 2017
01:17
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —ussia and Turkey carried out their first joint airstrikes against Islamic State positions in Syria on Wednesday, further expanding their budding military cooperation, the Russian military said.

The Russians have conducted airstrikes in recent weeks against Islamic State fighters near the northern Syrian town of Al Bab, an intervention that appears designed to help Turkish ground forces and the Syrian militias backed by the Turks in their campaign to capture the town.

But now, the Russian Air Force has gone a step further by collaborating on missions with Turkey’ Air Force, the Russian military announced.

“oday, Russian and Turkish Air Forces are carrying out their first joint air operation against the Islamic State in the suburbs of Al Bab,”t. Gen. Sergei F. Rudskoi, a senior member of the Russian general staff, told journalists on Wednesday in Moscow.

The Russian military’ decision to highlight its role appeared intended to curry favor with the Turks and exploit growing tensions between the departing Obama administration and President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey.

Turkish officials have objected to the Pentagon’ plans to arm Syrian Kurds so they can spearhead the offensive to retake Raqqa, the capital of the Islamic State. President Obama convened his National Security Council on Tuesday to discuss the question. But there has been no indication that Mr. Obama is prepared to authorize arming the Syrian Kurds in the waning hours of his administration.

The growing military cooperation between the Russians and Turks follows top-level political consultations over Syria, including a meeting in Moscow in December among Russian, Turkish and Iranian officials; American officials were not invited.

General Rudskoi said 36 targets had been selected in advance by military officers from the two countries. Nine Russian warplanes and eight Turkish aircraft conducted the strikes, he said.

The Turkish military acknowledged in a statement that Russian warplanes had attacked Islamic State positions south of Al Bab under an agreement between Turkey and Russia, but did not discuss the role of Turkish aircraft. There was no independent verification of the Russian claim that all of the targets had been destroyed.

In recent days, the United States has also carried out airstrikes near Al Bab to help the Turkish forces that are struggling to take the town. The American strikes also seem intended to ease the tensions between the United States and Turkey. In effect, Russian and American air power is being used not just to attack the Islamic State but also to compete for influence in Ankara, the Turkish capital.

Former military and diplomatic officials said the cooperation between Turkey, a NATO ally, and Russia, the foremost threat to the NATO alliance, was worrisome.

“urkey is going to be an increasingly unreliable ally,”aid Eric Edelman, a former American ambassador to Turkey. “t is a worrisome development and underscores the need for a very high-level strategic dialogue with Turkey that is long overdue.”

James G. Stavridis, the retired admiral who formerly served as NATO’ top military commander before becoming dean of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University, said the emerging alliance raised a host of concerns, including how much intelligence the United States military should share with the Turks.

“t will immediately raise tactical questions of intelligence sharing, de-confliction with U.S. airstrikes, and basing out of Turkey for U.S. aircraft,”dmiral Stavridis said in an email. “trategically, this apparent alignment of a powerful ally with the alliance’ most obvious opponent significantly increases the degree of difficulty for the new administration in terms of finding its footing as a leader within NATO.”

Pentagon officials have sought publicly to play down the mounting indications of Turkish-Russian military collaboration. Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told reporters last week that he had been assured by his Turkish counterpart that the Turks were not cooperating with the Russians.

“s you may know, I speak quite frequently with my Turkish counterpart,”eneral Dunford said then. “e’ also said that the Turks at this time are not cooperating and coordinating, conducting operations in conjunction with the Russians.”

Gen. David L. Goldfein, the Air Force chief of staff, was more circumspect when asked about the Russian announcement during an appearance Wednesday at the American Enterprise Institute, a Washington policy research center. “ am not concerned right now,”eneral Goldfein said. “ut we are all watching very closely to see how this goes.”

Ivan Nechepurenko contributed reporting from Moscow.

* Obama’ Stark Options on \b ISIS\b0 : Arm Syrian Kurds or Let Trump Decide

Lt. Gen. Sergei F. Rudskoi discussed the first joint airstrikes between Russia and Turkey against Islamic State positions in Syria on Wednesday in Moscow. | Pavel Golovkin/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170119ed1j0002t



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Suspect in Attack on Club Confessed, Turkey Says

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
562 words
18 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The Uzbek man who was taken into custody on Monday and is believed to be the gunman who carried out an attack at an upscale Istanbul nightclub, killing 39 people early on New Year's Day, has confessed, the Turkish authorities said on Tuesday.

The suspect, identified as Abdulgadir Masharipov, an Uzbek citizen born in 1983, received help in the attack, done ''in the name of ISIS,'' Vasip Sahin, the governor of Istanbul, said at a news conference, referring to the Islamic State militant group, which claimed responsibility for the rampage.

''No one will get away with what they have done,'' President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said from his office in Ankara, the capital.

Mr. Masharipov, whose arrest was confirmed by Prime Minister Binali Yildirim, was detained Monday night after the police raided a residence in the Esenyurt district of Istanbul, which is home to a large number of migrants from former Soviet states in Central Asia.

He was arrested with four others, an Iraqi man and three women from countries including Egypt and another country on the African continent, the governor said.

Turkish officials said that the investigation into the New Year's attack had uncovered a network of extremists from former Soviet states. And after the attack at Istanbul's main international airport in June, which left scores dead, the three suicide bombers were identified by the Turkish authorities as citizens of Kyrgyzstan, Russia and Uzbekistan.

Turkish news organizations released photographs of the nightclub attack suspect, taken while he was in custody and showing bruises and blood on his face. But Mr. Sahin said that Mr. Masharipov had not opened fire when confronted by the police, and that officers had not used weapons while arresting him.

''He admitted his crime,'' Mr. Sahin said, adding that the suspect had been trained in Afghanistan and speaks four languages. ''His fingerprints matched,'' the governor said, although he did not elaborate.

Mr. Sahin said the interrogation, which he described as ''very new,'' was continuing but that more would be learned about who had helped Mr. Masharipov and how.

Mr. Masharipov, who used the alias Abu Mohammed Khorasani Abdulqavi, entered Turkey illegally in January 2016 ''from the eastern border,'' the governor said.

Mr. Sahin, who was standing next to the Istanbul police chief, Mustafa Caliskan, in front of Police Headquarters, said a team of about 2,000 officers and special forces had been called in to capture the assailant.

The police investigation had focused on five addresses, and Mr. Masharipov was caught at one of them, Mr. Sahin said.

The police examined 7,200 hours of video in their search for the attacker, and they raided 152 addresses, detaining 50 people in the process.

A pistol, an air gun, ammunition, two drones and $197,000 were seized during the raid on the residence where Mr. Masharipov was found.

TV footage showed a cluttered apartment with white walls and white furniture. Fingerprint powder was visible on kitchen closets and on tables.

The governor said that Mr. Masharipov's 4-year-old son, who had been reported to be with his father during the operation in Esenyurt, had not been present.

Turkish special forces officers in Istanbul on Tuesday, a day after an Uzbek suspect was arrested. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MURAD SEZER/REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020170118ed1i0006s



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Obama's Syria Options: Arm Kurds or Let Trump Decide

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,407 words
18 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- With just days left as commander in chief, President Obama is confronting a wrenching decision on whether to move ahead with plans to arm Syrian Kurdish fighters battling the Islamic State in order to launch the long-awaited assault to retake Raqqa, the terrorist group's de facto capital.

The choice before Mr. Obama has been a stark one.

One option would be forging a closer military alliance with the Syrian Kurds to maintain the momentum in the fight against the Islamic State, even though Turkey has denounced the Kurdish fighters as terrorists.

The other would be for Mr. Obama to leave the decision to the incoming Trump administration. Such a move could delay the Raqqa operation for many months and would mean that Mr. Obama would leave office without a clear path forward for seizing the most important Islamic State stronghold and its base for plotting terrorist operations against the West.

Mr. Obama convened a meeting on Tuesday of the National Security Council, which discussed the question, one of the most momentous of the United States' campaign against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

The White House declined to disclose what decision Mr. Obama had reached, but some administration officials believe it is unlikely that he will resolve the contentious issue in the waning moments of his presidency.

That such a pivotal decision has been left to Mr. Obama's final weeks in office reflects the complexity of the debate about working with the Y.P.G., as the Syrian Kurdish militia is known, as well as the caution the president has displayed about sending American forces to fight in the region.

Mr. Obama has vowed to deal the Islamic State crippling blows in Mosul, Iraq, and Raqqa before he steps down on Friday. Allied airstrikes have increased in and around Raqqa in recent weeks as thousands of Syrian Kurdish and Syrian Arab fighters encircle the city, isolating it from the resupply of arms, fighters and fuel. Last month, Mr. Obama ordered 200 more American Special Operations forces to Syria to help these local fighters advancing on Raqqa, nearly doubling the number of American troops on the ground there.

But the American military believes that Raqqa cannot be seized unless the Y.P.G. is equipped for urban warfare. It is unclear what level of support President-elect Donald J. Trump will maintain for opposition groups in Syria combating the Islamic State, especially those groups that are bitterly opposed by the Turks.

Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter stressed Raqqa's importance during a visit to Fort Campbell, Ky., in January 2016. ''The ISIL parent tumor has two centers: Raqqa in Syria and Mosul in Iraq,'' Mr. Carter said. ''That's why our campaign plan's got big arrows pointing at both Mosul and Raqqa.''

American officials requested anonymity in order to describe the administration's internal deliberations.

About 250,000 civilians are in Raqqa, and the Islamic State has fortified the city with trenches and mines and would defend it with suicide bombers. Because the Obama administration has ruled out the use of American combat troops, the United States has to rely on mobilizing local Arab forces to join battle-hardened Syrian Kurdish fighters.

''Raqqa is very difficult because unlike Iraq, we're not working with a government,'' Brett McGurk, the American envoy to the coalition that is fighting the Islamic State, said at a seminar last week. ''We're not working with an army. We have to work with local actors and organize them into a military force.''

American military officials say it is urgent to retake Raqqa because it is the capital of the Islamic State's caliphate, a sanctuary for many of its top leaders and the hub for the extremist group's plots against the West.

The Pentagon has been urging Mr. Obama to equip the Syrian Kurds, whom American commanders view as their most effective ground partner, with armored vehicles, rocket-propelled-grenade launchers, machine guns and other heavy equipment so that the American-supported Raqqa attack can begin in February.

The weaponry is needed, American military officials say, because the Iraqi push to capture Mosul has demonstrated that retaking a city occupied by Islamic State fighters, armed with suicide car bombs, is a difficult and bloody operation.

To buttress the Raqqa mission, the Pentagon is also urging that the White House authorize the use of United States Army Apache attack helicopters, which are equipped with Hellfire missiles. Apaches are supporting Iraqi troops in the fight for Mosul.

But arming the Kurds would also aggravate Mr. Obama's tense relations with Turkey's president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who has contended that the Y.P.G. is linked to the Kurdistan Workers' Party, which Turkey and the United States regard as a terrorist group.

The administration has been considering ways to ease Turkey's anxiety, such as making arrangements to monitor the weapons given to the Syrian Kurds for the Raqqa offensive and thus prevent the weapons from being used elsewhere by the Kurds. In addition, Arab forces would occupy Raqqa after the city is taken, and Kurdish fighters would be withdrawn.

The United States also recently began carrying out airstrikes near Al Bab, a town in northern Syria that Turkey has been struggling to take from the Islamic State.

But American diplomats in Ankara, the Turkish capital, have warned that providing weapons to the Y.P.G. could provoke a Turkish backlash, officials say. Not only might it cause a deep breach in the United States' relations with Mr. Erdogan, but the Turks might take actions against the Y.P.G. in northern Syria that could ultimately undermine the offensive to retake Raqqa.

Anticipating Mr. Obama's decision, the Turks have been quietly increasing the pressure by delaying approval for American air missions that are flown from the Turkish air base at Incirlik and supplies going in and out of the base. Incirlik has been a major hub for carrying out airstrikes against the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq.

Turkey's sensitivity on the issue was clear last week when the United States Central Command, which oversees military operations in the Middle East, posted a statement on Twitter by the Syrian Democratic Forces, the umbrella group that includes Syrian Kurds as well as Syrian Arab fighters, affirming that it is not part of the Kurdistan Workers' Party as ''some regional governments'' have claimed.

''Is this a joke or @CENTCOM has lost its senses,'' Ibrahim Kalin, Mr. Erdogan's spokesman, responded on Twitter.

Faced with the dilemma, some administration officials have suggested that American officials go back to the drawing board and try to cobble together a more diverse force to take Raqqa that would include Turkish Special Forces as well as Turkish-supported Syrian opposition groups. American commanders say about 20,000 troops will be needed to seize the city. By contrast, Turkey has been able to muster only about 2,000 Arab fighters in its battle to reclaim Al Bab, and that campaign has been bogged down by fierce resistance.

During a visit to Washington last month, Masrour Barzani, a top security official in the Kurdish autonomous region in Iraq, pressed American officials to work with Syrian Kurds who are separate from the Y.P.G. and are operating in Iraq, a group known as Pesh Merga of Rojava, or Roj Pesh. Aides to Mr. Barzani assert that the Roj Pesh are trained by the pesh merga, would be politically acceptable to the Turks and number about 3,300.

''Roj Pesh are the most efficient and politically diverse force,'' Mr. Barzani said. ''They can be the bridge to lessen regional tensions and a force multiplier in the campaign.''

But Pentagon officials say that the Y.P.G. has the most effective fighters, is already closing in on Raqqa, and that trying to assemble, train and equip an alternative force could be difficult and at best would take many months.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Michael R. Gordon @gordonnyt and Eric Schmitt @EricSchmittNYT on Twitter .

American Special Operations troops in Syria in May. President Obama has ordered 200 more Special Operations troops there. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DELIL SOULEIMAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170118ed1i00058



World; Middle East
Obama’ Stark Options on  ISIS : Arm Syrian Kurds or Let Trump Decide

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,453 words
18 January 2017
02:17
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —ith just days left as commander in chief, President Obama is confronting a wrenching decision on whether to move ahead with plans to arm Syrian Kurdish fighters battling the Islamic State in order to launch the long-awaited assault to retake Raqqa, the terrorist group’ de facto capital.

The choice before Mr. Obama has been a stark one.

One option would be forging a closer military alliance with the Syrian Kurds to maintain the momentum in the fight against the Islamic State, even though Turkey has denounced the Kurdish fighters as terrorists.

The other would be for Mr. Obama to leave the decision to the incoming Trump administration. Such a move could delay the Raqqa operation for many months and would mean that Mr. Obama would leave office without a clear path forward for seizing the most important Islamic State stronghold and its base for plotting terrorist operations against the West.

Mr. Obama convened a meeting on Tuesday of the National Security Council, which discussed the question, one of the most momentous of the United States’ampaign against the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL.

The White House declined to disclose what decision Mr. Obama had reached, but some administration officials believe it is unlikely that he will resolve the contentious issue in the waning moments of his presidency.

That such a pivotal decision has been left to Mr. Obama’ final weeks in office reflects the complexity of the debate about working with the Y.P.G., as the Syrian Kurdish militia is known, as well as the caution the president has displayed about sending American forces to fight in the region.

Mr. Obama has vowed to deal the Islamic State crippling blows in Mosul, Iraq, and Raqqa before he steps down on Friday. Allied airstrikes have increased in and around Raqqa in recent weeks as thousands of Syrian Kurdish and Syrian Arab fighters encircle the city, isolating it from the resupply of arms, fighters and fuel. Last month, Mr. Obama ordered 200 more American Special Operations forces to Syria to help these local fighters advancing on Raqqa, nearly doubling the number of American troops on the ground there.

But the American military believes that Raqqa cannot be seized unless the Y.P.G. is equipped for urban warfare. It is unclear what level of support President-elect Donald J. Trump will maintain for opposition groups in Syria combating the Islamic State, especially those groups that are bitterly opposed by the Turks.

Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter stressed Raqqa’ importance during a visit to Fort Campbell, Ky., in January 2016. “he ISIL parent tumor has two centers: Raqqa in Syria and Mosul in Iraq,”r. Carter said. “hat’ why our campaign plan’ got big arrows pointing at both Mosul and Raqqa.”

American officials requested anonymity in order to describe the administration’ internal deliberations.

About 250,000 civilians are in Raqqa, and the Islamic State has fortified the city with trenches and mines and would defend it with suicide bombers. Because the Obama administration has ruled out the use of American combat troops, the United States has to rely on mobilizing local Arab forces to join battle-hardened Syrian Kurdish fighters.

“aqqa is very difficult because unlike Iraq, we’e not working with a government,”Brett McGurk, the American envoy to the coalition that is fighting the Islamic State, said at a seminar last week. “e’e not working with an army. We have to work with local actors and organize them into a military force.”

American military officials say it is urgent to retake Raqqa because it is the capital of the Islamic State’ caliphate, a sanctuary for many of its top leaders and the hub for the extremist group’ plots against the West.

The Pentagon has been urging Mr. Obama to equip the Syrian Kurds, whom American commanders view as their most effective ground partner, with armored vehicles, rocket-propelled-grenade launchers, machine guns and other heavy equipment so that the American-supported Raqqa attack can begin in February.

The weaponry is needed, American military officials say, because the Iraqi push to capture Mosul has demonstrated that retaking a city occupied by Islamic State fighters, armed with suicide car bombs, is a difficult and bloody operation.

To buttress the Raqqa mission, the Pentagon is also urging that the White House authorize the use of United States Army Apache attack helicopters, which are equipped with Hellfire missiles. Apaches are supporting Iraqi troops in the fight for Mosul.

But arming the Kurds would also aggravate Mr. Obama’ tense relations with Turkey’ president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who has contended that the Y.P.G. is linked to the Kurdistan Workers’arty, which Turkey regards as a terrorist group.

The administration has been considering ways to ease Turkey’ anxiety, such as making arrangements to monitor the weapons given to the Syrian Kurds for the Raqqa offensive and thus prevent the weapons from being used elsewhere by the Kurds. In addition, Arab forces would occupy Raqqa after the city is taken, and Kurdish fighters would be withdrawn.

The United States also recently began carrying out airstrikes near Al Bab, a town in northern Syria that Turkey has been struggling to take from the Islamic State.

But American diplomats in Ankara, the Turkish capital, have warned that providing weapons to the Y.P.G. could provoke a Turkish backlash, officials say. Not only might it cause a deep breach in the United States’elations with Mr. Erodogan, but the Turks might take actions against the Y.P.G. in northern Syria that could ultimately undermine the offensive to retake Raqqa.

Anticipating Mr. Obama’ decision, the Turks have been quietly increasing the pressure by delaying approval for American air missions that are flown from the Turkish air base at Incirlik and supplies going in and out of the base. Incirlik has been a major hub for carrying out airstrikes against the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq.

Turkey’ sensitivity on the issue was clear last week when the United States Central Command, which overseas military operations in the Middle East, posted a statement on Twitter by the Syrian Democratic Forces, the umbrella group that includes Syrian Kurds as well as Syrian Arab fighters, affirming that it is not part of the Kurdistan Workers’arty as “ome regional governments”ave claimed.

“s this a joke or @CENTCOM has lost its senses,”brahim Kalin, President Erodogan’ spokesman, responded on Twitter.

Faced with the dilemma, some administration officials have suggested that American officials go back to the drawing board and try to cobble together a more diverse force to take Raqqa that would include Turkish Special Forces as well as Turkish-supported Syrian opposition groups. American commanders say about 20,000 troops will be needed to seize the city. By contrast, Turkey has been able to muster only about 2,000 Arab fighters in its battle to reclaim Al Bab, and that campaign has been bogged down by fierce resistance.

During a visit to Washington last month, Masrour Barzani, a top security official in the Kurdish autonomous region in Iraq, pressed American officials to work with Syrian Kurds who have split with the Y.P.G. and are operating in Iraq, a group known as Pesh Merga of Rojava, or Roj Pesh. Aides to Mr. Barzani assert that the Roj Pesh are trained by the pesh merga, would be politically acceptable to the Turks and number about 3,300.

“oj Pesh are the most efficient and politically diverse force,”r. Barzani said. “hey can be the bridge to lessen regional tensions and a force multiplier in the campaign.”

But Pentagon officials say that the Y.P.G. has the best and most battle-tested fighters and that trying to assemble, train and equip an alternative force could be difficult and at best would take many months.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Michael R. Gordon @gordonnyt and Eric Schmitt on @EricSchmittNYT on Twitter.

* Truck Bomb in Rebel-Held Syrian Town Kills Dozens

* A New Casualty of Syria’ War: Drinking Water in Damascus

American Special Operations troops in Raqqa Province, Syria, in May. President Obama has ordered 200 more Special Operations forces to Syria. | Delil Souleiman/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Kurdish militia members in October at a base near Raqqa, Syria, a city that is the Islamic State’ de facto capital. | Tyler Hicks/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170118ed1i000m9



Feature
magazine
Joe Biden: ‘ Wish to Hell I’ Just Kept Saying the Exact Same Thing’

By JONATHAN ALTER 
2,165 words
17 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Joe Biden’ personal compartment on the modified Boeing 757 that serves as Air Force Two had the feel of a motel manager’ office equipped with state-of-the-art communications gear. The room held a little black couch with a pullout bed he had slept on more times than he could count over the last eight years, during which he logged more than a million miles aloft. We were en route back to Wilmington, Del., from Cartagena, Colombia, in early December, and Biden was sitting in a black leather seat with a binder in his lap.

It contained the speech he had given at the Democratic National Convention in July. He told me he had been rereading it. He began reciting aloud: “f you live in neighborhoods like the one Jill and I grew up in, if you worry about your job and getting decent pay. ...”is voice accelerated. “f you worry about your children’ education, if you’e taking care of an elderly parent, there’ only one person in this race who. ...”e looked up at me and sighed. “ wish to hell I’ just kept saying the exact same thing.”

Biden was afflicted with regret. He was sorry that, on the campaign trail, he had spoken so often about Donald Trump’ unfitness for office and not enough about what Hillary Clinton would do for the middle class. He was sorry he didn’ push harder inside the White House for a middle-class tax cut. And he was still torn over his decision not to run for president, a race that he said would have been “rutal”ut that he also believed he could have won.

I spoke with Biden intermittently in the months before and after Election Day, and I had no doubt as to why he didn’ jump in. He was still corny, gabby, lovable Uncle Joe, the guy who once said: “tand up, Chuck! Let ’m see you!”o a man in a wheelchair. But nearly every speech and interview now included some moving mention of his son Beau, who died of brain cancer in 2015, and how much Biden was doing, and intended to continue to do for the rest of his life, to speed the search for cancer cures.

I saw Biden cry in Manchester, N.H., in October when holding an infant that he was told was named after Beau. I saw him near tears in West Mifflin, Pa., the weekend before the election, when he was joined onstage by the former Pittsburgh Steelers Franco Harris and Mel Blount —hich reminded him of the footballs the team owner sent to young Beau and his brother, Hunter, in the hospital after they were injured in the 1972 car accident that killed Biden’ first wife and baby girl.

On his deathbed, Beau advised his father to run, but many friends —ncluding President Obama —idn’ think he was up to it emotionally, and the vice president finally agreed. “or all that’ important to me in almost a sacred sense,”e told me mournfully, the decision was unavoidable. “he family was broken, and I was more broken than I thought I was.”ow broken? “ don’ know what I’ do if I was in a debate and someone said, ‘ou’e doing this because of your son,’ ”e told me one late November day in his West Wing office. “ might have walked over and kicked his ass.”

And yet minutes later, he was standing at his desk, fidgeting and replaying what might have been in 2016. The South Carolina primary would have given him a strong start, he said, citing his internal polls there. “ard to believe, but I was more popular with blacks than Barack was.”

Biden clearly loathesthe new president; he said during the campaign that if he and Trump were in high school, he’ “ake him behind the gym”or the way he bragged about groping women. Trump reminded him of the bullies who teased him as a child on account of his stutter, calling him “-B-Biden.”ut the politician who has long believed all politics is personal wants to keep it impersonal with Trump. “he president and I have concluded that there’ no value in making that ad hominem argument,”e told me of Obama. “t gets you nowhere.”

Biden wasn’ shocked that Hillary Clinton lost. He had noticed before the election that Trump was connecting with the people he grew up with in Pennsylvania. This shaped his thoughts on how Democrats should respond. When the subject of Trump came up aboard Air Force Two, Biden referred to a well-worn story about how, as a freshman senator, he saw Jesse Helms, the archconservative North Carolina Republican, ripping into a piece of disabilities legislation. Biden was furious about it and began attacking Helms to Mike Mansfield, the Democratic Senate majority leader. Puffing on his pipe, Mansfield asked Biden if he knew that Helms and his wife had adopted a disabled 9-year-old boy no one else would take. “uestion a man’ judgment, not his motives,”ansfield instructed.

Biden, who was invited by Helms decades later to give his eulogy, is convinced that absorbing Mansfield’ advice is what allowed him to work with Senate Republicans during the Obama years, to negotiate the approval of the New Start nuclear-arms-reduction treaty, the end of “on’ ask, don’ tell”nd the expansion of the earned-income tax credit, among other accomplishments. His approach to Trump, he said, wouldn’ be fundamentally different. “t falls in that category,”iden told me. “t’ one thing to say: ‘ think the proposal on the following is a serious mistake. I think it’ gonna do the following damage.’t’ another thing to say, ‘he guy’ a fucking idiot, and he is an egomaniac who’ a whatever.’ ”

Biden suggested he might lobby former Republican colleagues when “ircumstances generate blowback among mainstream Republicans.”e remains in the shrinking camp that believes Trump may yet step up, at least a bit, to the demands of high office. His hope is that Trump’ “ense of grandeur is so immense that he’ rather succeed than unleash these forces.”iven how many Trump voters would lose their insurance under full repeal of the Affordable Care Act, he may well back off of repealing it, Biden said. As for the rest of his own administration’ legacy, he said, “’ not prepared to bet my granddaughter’ college tuition, but it’ less likely to be undone than frayed on the edges.”

Biden’ biggest worry is that Trump, for all his bluster, could be a global bystander, unwilling to engage a messy world with anything more than chest-thumping. “he question I get everywhere is: ‘s American leadership going to continue?’ ”e told me on Air Force Two. If Trump “ust stays behind the lines —ands off —t could be very ugly. Very, very ugly.”

In July, the president of Latvia asked Biden to fly there as soon as possible and give a televised speech assuring the Baltic states that the United States would fulfill its NATO obligations and defend them against a Russian invasion. He did so, emphatically, but his promises offer little comfort post-Election Day. The prospect of Vladimir Putin fulfilling his dream of re-establishing Russian hegemony over Eastern Europe is not far from Biden’ mind. “ow if we walk away —ungary, Poland, even the Baltic states, these guys all start to hedge their bets,”e said.

Biden’ national security adviser, Colin Kahl, who was with the vice president on the plane, interjected to outline the contradictions in Trump’ emerging foreign policy. If the United States is going to be more cooperative with Russia and Bashar al-Assad’ Syria but more confrontational with Iran, Kahl asked, how will Trump handle them joining together to fight ISIS? “t’ like a Rubik’ cube trying to figure this guy out,”iden sighed. “e have no freakin’dea what he’ gonna do.”

When they were Senate colleagues, and Biden was chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, Biden thought Obama was in too much of a hurry —nd Obama found the chairman a tad condescending. But in the White House, the two men became exceptionally close. “here was never a point,”bama told me recently, “here I thought he was distancing himself from me or positioning himself. Never been a time when he wasn’ telling me something he really thought.”heir families, too, drew together. “amily has been central for us —hat’ our baseline,”bama told me. “e both feel freer to do what we think is right because if it doesn’ work out, our families will still love us.”

Biden later told friends that he thought the president was sincerely looking out for him in 2015 when he advised him not to run —hough he also felt Obama had grown fond of the bright mark he could leave on history by passing the baton from the first black president to the first female president.

The big question now is when, and how, they will re-enter the arena. Obama has already said that, unlike George W. Bush, he won’ refrain from commenting on his successor. Biden may go further. Amid discussion of resistance to Trump, he surprised me with talk of 2020, when he’l turn 78. “’l run,”he vice president deadpanned, “f I can walk.”hree days later, he informed the Washington press corps that he wasn’ joking.

Biden isn’ likely to run, but keeping the door ajar gives him a bigger voice in Democratic Party debates. The one that worries him most is over repositioning to win back Trump voters. He has little patience with Democrats who want to move either left or right. “ ‘e gotta move to the center,’‘e gotta move to those white guys,’‘e gotta move to those working-class people’r ‘e gotta double down on the social agenda.’ ”t’ a false choice, he said: “hey are totally compatible. I have never said anything to the A.C.L.U. that I wouldn’ say to the Chamber of Commerce.”

This was the vision of the Democratic Party to which Biden had dedicated his career. “Amtrak Joe”amously commuted every day from Wilmington to Washington —hree hours round-trip, for 36 years. He told me that as the train neared Baltimore, he habitually peered into the rapidly passing homes close to the tracks — flip book of middle-class families of various backgrounds who might have recognized themselves in his convention speech. “ wonder what the conversation at the dinner table is,”e told me.

Sometimes he saw his own family in the early 1960s in those houses. He imagines the families’truggles with everyday expenses: “ ‘oney, we need a new set of tires, but you gotta get another 20,000 miles out of them.’hat’ the goddamn discussion people are having! That’ their lives!”

Before the election, Biden had begun to map out what his post-vice-presidential plans would look like. Soon he would be back on Amtrak, riding to and from a foreign-policy institute bearing his name at the University of Pennsylvania and a domestic-policy center at the University of Delaware, and continuing the “ancer moonshot”— Biden-led initiative marshaling resources in government and the private sector to accelerate cancer research. In the meantime, he’l help play defense against Trump. “ven if the Democratic Party didn’ want me, I’ not walking away,”e said. “’e worked on this stuff my whole life.”

After Air Force Two touched down on the tarmac in Wilmington, I asked him about a line he liked to use before the election. “o do you still believe what your grandfather said, that God looks out for drunken Irishmen and the United States of America?”iden said he wasn’ sure about the Irishmen, but he was about the country. “ have to believe that,”e said. “here’ no sense being in this business unless you’e an optimist.”

Sign up forto get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Jonathan Alter is the author of two books about the Obama administration, “he Promise”nd “he Center Holds.”e is working on a biography of Jimmy Carter.

Biden in Washington on Dec. 14. Photograph by Erik Madigan Heck

‘t’ like a rubik’ cube trying to figure this guy out. we have no freakin’dea what he’ gonna do.’

https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/22/magazine/22biden1/22biden1-articleLarge-v3.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/22/magazine/22biden1/22biden1-jumbo-v3.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/22/magazine/22biden1/22biden1-superJumbo-v3.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/22/magazine/22biden1/22biden1-moth-v3.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/22/magazine/22biden1/22biden1-articleInline-v4.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/22/magazine/22biden1/22biden1-sfSpan-v4.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/22/magazine/22biden1/22biden1-filmstrip-v3.jpg | Biden in Washington on Dec. 14. | Erik Madigan Heck for The New York Times 

Document INHT000020170118ed1h0000h



World; Europe
Suspect in Istanbul Nightclub Attack Confesses, Officials Say

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
517 words
17 January 2017
11:17
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The Uzbek man who was taken into custody and is suspected of carrying out an attack at an upscale Istanbul nightclub, killing 39 people early on New Year’ Day, has confessed, the Turkish authorities said on Tuesday.

The suspect, identified as Abdulgadir Masharipov, an Uzbek citizen born in 1983, received help in the attack, done “n the name of \b ISIS\b0 ,”asip Sahin, the governor of Istanbul, said at a news conference, referring to the Islamic State militant group, which claimed responsibility for the rampage.

Mr. Masharipov, whose arrest was also confirmed by Prime Minister Binali Yildirim, was detained on Monday night after the police raided a residence in the Esenyurt district of Istanbul.

He was arrested with four others, an Iraqi man and three women from countries including Egypt and another country on the African continent, the governor said.

Turkish news organizations released photographs of the suspect, taken in custody, showing bruises and blood on his face, but Mr. Sahin said Mr. Masharipov had not opened fire when confronted by the police, and that they had not used weapons while arresting him.

“e admitted his crime,”aid Mr. Sahin, who added that the suspect was trained in Afghanistan, speaks four languages and was a well-trained terrorist. “is fingerprints matched,”e added, although he did not elaborate.

Mr. Sahin said the interrogation was continuing —e described it as “ery new”—nd said that more would be learned about who had helped Mr. Masharipov, and how.

Mr. Masharipov, who used the alias Abu Mohammed Khorasani Abdulqavi, entered Turkey illegally in January 2016 “rom the eastern border,”he governor said.

Mr. Sahin, who was standing next to the Istanbul police chief, Mustafa Caliskan, in front of Police Headquarters, said a team of 2000 officers and special forces had been called in to capture the assailant.

The police had been focusing on five addresses, and Mr. Masharipov was caught at one of them, Mr. Sahin said.

The police examined 7,200 hours of video footage in their search for the attacker and raided 152 different addresses, detaining 50 people along the way.

A pistol, an air gun, their magazines, two drones and $197,000 were seized during the raid on the residence where Mr. Masharipov was found.

TV footage showed a cluttered apartment with white walls and white furniture. Dust fingerprints were still visible on kitchen closets and tables.

The governor said that Mr. Masharipov’ 4-year-old son, who had been reported to be with his father during the operation in Esenyurt, had not been present.

* Suspect in Istanbul Rampage on New Year’ Is Captured, Turkey Says

* Nightclub Massacre in Istanbul Exposes Turkey’ Deepening Fault Lines

* Terrorist Attack at Nightclub in Istanbul Kills Dozens

* \b ISIS\b0  Claims Responsibility for Istanbul Nightclub Attack

Turkish special forces officers at Police Headquarters in Istanbul on Tuesday. | Murad Sezer/Reuters | The Turkish authorities say the man identified as Abdulgadir Masharipov has confessed to the New Year’ attack in Istanbul. | Turkish Police, via Depo Photos 

Document NYTFEED020170117ed1h00335



Feature
Magazine
Joe Biden: ‘ Wish to Hell I’ Just Kept Saying the Exact Same Thing’

By JONATHAN ALTER 
2,135 words
17 January 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Joe Biden’ personal compartment on the modified Boeing 757 that serves as Air Force Two had the feel of a motel manager’ office equipped with state-of-the-art communications gear. The room held a little black couch with a pullout bed he had slept on more times than he could count over the last eight years, during which he logged more than a million miles aloft. We were en route back to Wilmington, Del., from Cartagena, Colombia, in early December, and Biden was sitting in a black leather seat with a binder in his lap.

It contained the speech he had given at the Democratic National Convention in July. He told me he had been rereading it. He began reciting aloud: “f you live in neighborhoods like the one Jill and I grew up in, if you worry about your job and getting decent pay. ...”is voice accelerated. “f you worry about your children’ education, if you’e taking care of an elderly parent, there’ only one person in this race who. ...”e looked up at me and sighed. “ wish to hell I’ just kept saying the exact same thing.”

Biden was afflicted with regret. He was sorry that, on the campaign trail, he had spoken so often about Donald Trump’ unfitness for office and not enough about what Hillary Clinton would do for the middle class. He was sorry he didn’ push harder inside the White House for a middle-class tax cut. And he was still torn over his decision not to run for president, a race that he said would have been “rutal”ut that he also believed he could have won.

I spoke with Biden intermittently in the months before and after Election Day, and I had no doubt as to why he didn’ jump in. He was still corny, gabby, lovable Uncle Joe, the guy who once said: “tand up, Chuck! Let ’m see you!”o a man in a wheelchair. But nearly every speech and interview now included some moving mention of his son Beau, who died of brain cancer in 2015, and how much Biden was doing, and intended to continue to do for the rest of his life, to speed the search for cancer cures.

I saw Biden cry in Manchester, N.H., in October when holding an infant that he was told was named after Beau. I saw him near tears in West Mifflin, Pa., the weekend before the election, when he was joined onstage by the former Pittsburgh Steelers Franco Harris and Mel Blount —hich reminded him of the footballs the team owner sent to young Beau and his brother, Hunter, in the hospital after they were injured in the 1972 car accident that killed Biden’ first wife and baby girl.

On his deathbed, Beau advised his father to run, but many friends —ncluding President Obama —idn’ think he was up to it emotionally, and the vice president finally agreed. “or all that’ important to me in almost a sacred sense,”e told me mournfully, the decision was unavoidable. “he family was broken, and I was more broken than I thought I was.”ow broken? “ don’ know what I’ do if I was in a debate and someone said, ‘ou’e doing this because of your son,’ ”e told me one late November day in his West Wing office. “ might have walked over and kicked his ass.”

And yet minutes later, he was standing at his desk, fidgeting and replaying what might have been in 2016. The South Carolina primary would have given him a strong start, he said, citing his internal polls there. “ard to believe, but I was more popular with blacks than Barack was.”

Biden clearly loathes the new president; he said during the campaign that if he and Trump were in high school, he’ “ake him behind the gym”or the way he bragged about groping women. Trump reminded him of the bullies who teased him as a child on account of his stutter, calling him “-B-Biden.”ut the politician who has long believed all politics is personal wants to keep it impersonal with Trump. “he president and I have concluded that there’ no value in making that ad hominem argument,”e told me of Obama. “t gets you nowhere.”

Biden wasn’ shocked that Hillary Clinton lost. He had noticed before the election that Trump was connecting with the people he grew up with in Pennsylvania. This shaped his thoughts on how Democrats should respond. When the subject of Trump came up aboard Air Force Two, Biden referred to a well-worn story about how, as a freshman senator, he saw Jesse Helms, the archconservative North Carolina Republican, ripping into a piece of disabilities legislation. Biden was furious about it and began attacking Helms to Mike Mansfield, the Democratic Senate majority leader. Puffing on his pipe, Mansfield asked Biden if he knew that Helms and his wife had adopted a disabled 9-year-old boy no one else would take. “uestion a man’ judgment, not his motives,”ansfield instructed.

Biden, who was invited by Helms decades later to give his eulogy, is convinced that absorbing Mansfield’ advice is what allowed him to work with Senate Republicans during the Obama years, to negotiate the approval of the New Start nuclear-arms-reduction treaty, the end of “on’ ask, don’ tell”nd the expansion of the earned-income tax credit, among other accomplishments. His approach to Trump, he said, wouldn’ be fundamentally different. “t falls in that category,”iden told me. “t’ one thing to say: ‘ think the proposal on the following is a serious mistake. I think it’ gonna do the following damage.’t’ another thing to say, ‘he guy’ a fucking idiot, and he is an egomaniac who’ a whatever.’ ”

Biden suggested he might lobby former Republican colleagues when “ircumstances generate blowback among mainstream Republicans.”e remains in the shrinking camp that believes Trump may yet step up, at least a bit, to the demands of high office. His hope is that Trump’ “ense of grandeur is so immense that he’ rather succeed than unleash these forces.”iven how many Trump voters would lose their insurance under full repeal of the Affordable Care Act, he may well back off of repealing it, Biden said. As for the rest of his own administration’ legacy, he said, “’ not prepared to bet my granddaughter’ college tuition, but it’ less likely to be undone than frayed on the edges.”

Biden’ biggest worry is that Trump, for all his bluster, could be a global bystander, unwilling to engage a messy world with anything more than chest-thumping. “he question I get everywhere is: ‘s American leadership going to continue?’ ”e told me on Air Force Two. If Trump “ust stays behind the lines —ands off —t could be very ugly. Very, very ugly.”

In July, the president of Latvia asked Biden to fly there as soon as possible and give a televised speech assuring the Baltic states that the United States would fulfill its NATO obligations and defend them against a Russian invasion. He did so, emphatically, but his promises offer little comfort post-Election Day. The prospect of Vladimir Putin fulfilling his dream of re-establishing Russian hegemony over Eastern Europe is not far from Biden’ mind. “ow if we walk away —ungary, Poland, even the Baltic states, these guys all start to hedge their bets,”e said.

Biden’ national security adviser, Colin Kahl, who was with the vice president on the plane, interjected to outline the contradictions in Trump’ emerging foreign policy. If the United States is going to be more cooperative with Russia and Bashar al-Assad’ Syria but more confrontational with Iran, Kahl asked, how will Trump handle them joining together to fight ISIS? “t’ like a Rubik’ cube trying to figure this guy out,”iden sighed. “e have no freakin’dea what he’ gonna do.”

When they were Senate colleagues, and Biden was chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, Biden thought Obama was in too much of a hurry —nd Obama found the chairman a tad condescending. But in the White House, the two men became exceptionally close. “here was never a point,”bama told me recently, “here I thought he was distancing himself from me or positioning himself. Never been a time when he wasn’ telling me something he really thought.”heir families, too, drew together. “amily has been central for us —hat’ our baseline,”bama told me. “e both feel freer to do what we think is right because if it doesn’ work out, our families will still love us.”

Biden later told friends that he thought the president was sincerely looking out for him in 2015 when he advised him not to run —hough he also felt Obama had grown fond of the bright mark he could leave on history by passing the baton from the first black president to the first female president.

The big question now is when, and how, they will re-enter the arena. Obama has already said that, unlike George W. Bush, he won’ refrain from commenting on his successor. Biden may go further. Amid discussion of resistance to Trump, he surprised me with talk of 2020, when he’l turn 78. “’l run,”he vice president deadpanned, “f I can walk.”hree days later, he informed the Washington press corps that he wasn’ joking.

Biden isn’ likely to run, but keeping the door ajar gives him a bigger voice in Democratic Party debates. The one that worries him most is over repositioning to win back Trump voters. He has little patience with Democrats who want to move either left or right. “ ‘e gotta move to the center,’‘e gotta move to those white guys,’‘e gotta move to those working-class people’r ‘e gotta double down on the social agenda.’ ”t’ a false choice, he said: “hey are totally compatible. I have never said anything to the A.C.L.U. that I wouldn’ say to the Chamber of Commerce.”

This was the vision of the Democratic Party to which Biden had dedicated his career. “Amtrak Joe”amously commuted every day from Wilmington to Washington —hree hours round-trip, for 36 years. He told me that as the train neared Baltimore, he habitually peered into the rapidly passing homes close to the tracks — flip book of middle-class families of various backgrounds who might have recognized themselves in his convention speech. “ wonder what the conversation at the dinner table is,”e told me.

Sometimes he saw his own family in the early 1960s in those houses. He imagines the families’truggles with everyday expenses: “ ‘oney, we need a new set of tires, but you gotta get another 20,000 miles out of them.’hat’ the goddamn discussion people are having! That’ their lives!”

Before the election, Biden had begun to map out what his post-vice-presidential plans would look like. Soon he would be back on Amtrak, riding to and from a foreign-policy institute bearing his name at the University of Pennsylvania and a domestic-policy center at the University of Delaware, and continuing the “ancer moonshot”— Biden-led initiative marshaling resources in government and the private sector to accelerate cancer research. In the meantime, he’l help play defense against Trump. “ven if the Democratic Party didn’ want me, I’ not walking away,”e said. “’e worked on this stuff my whole life.”

After Air Force Two touched down on the tarmac in Wilmington, I asked him about a line he liked to use before the election. “o do you still believe what your grandfather said, that God looks out for drunken Irishmen and the United States of America?”iden said he wasn’ sure about the Irishmen, but he was about the country. “ have to believe that,”e said. “here’ no sense being in this business unless you’e an optimist.”

Sign up for  our newsletter  to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Jonathan Alter is the author of two books about the Obama administration, “he Promise”nd “he Center Holds.”e is working on a biography of Jimmy Carter.

Biden in Washington on Dec. 14. | Erik Madigan Heck for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170117ed1h002jr



CULTURED TRAVELER
Travel Desk; SECTTR
Ancient History Along the Nile

By PATRICK SCOTT 
1,378 words
15 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
12
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The engine room started rumbling about 3 a.m. the first night of our four-day Nile River cruise, setting the mirror knocking against the wall and stirring me from sleep. The shaky start to our first-ever cruise was continuing.

My wife, Susan, and I and our two daughters, Jenna and Michaela, both in their 20s, are not an organized-trip type of a family, and we hadn't done our homework before arriving in Aswan, about 540 miles south of Cairo, to start the voyage north to Luxor.

After checking in at noon we were surprised to discover that we were not actually cruising until the middle of the night. We had boarded what was essentially a moored hotel, sandwiched between identical four-story boats -- one of which was blocking a river view from our tight cabin.

Instead of airy nautical déor, our 77-cabin boat was fitted with the dark wood, coffee-colored carpets and red and purple fabrics you might find in a private library. And on our outing that first day to the Philae Temple of the goddess Isis, my image of strolling in solitude amid its colonnades was upended as we arrived on the island with two large groups of Egyptian tourists.

Later, as I lay in bed, something else distracted me. Outside the sliding glass door the moon was a white circle, low on the horizon, racing along as if to keep up with the boat. It seemed to barrel through the palm trees and mud-brick houses that dotted the hushed riverbank, casting a white beam on the water. It was magical, and soon it was gone, fading in the haze of daybreak.

Life, especially in Egypt, can be confounding and exasperating, then suddenly filled with enchantment. That contrast pretty much summed up our Nile cruise.

We had a vague idea of what to expect from the glowing reviews from our friends who had taken such cruises. Susan and I moved to Egypt in 2015, and we knew we would be visiting spectacular ancient temples like Karnak. We also knew we would be starting out in Upper Egypt, even though it's in the south, because the river flows north to Lower Egypt, where it empties into the Mediterranean. That twist of geography also meant that our 130-mile ride would be against the wind, which explained the strong breeze on the upper deck on the second day of our trip. But at least we were moving. The engines purred, and the teak wood of the hallways, lounges and cabins seemed appropriate now.

It's incredibly soothing, gliding along this storied river, the wide ribbon of gray-green water flanked by tropics on the riverbanks and desert mountains in the distance. You feel a connection with the past as the wind fills the sails of feluccas that have glided the river for centuries, as the call to prayer echoes from minarets spiking up from lush farmland and brown villages.

We and a couple from Canada were the only North Americans on board, a reflection of the steep drop-off in tourism since Egypt's 2011 uprising. Most of the 50 passengers were from Germany, with a few from France, Italy and Turkey. Many of them were in their 60s and 70s, chatting on deck, or sunning near the small pool.

We booked the late-February cruise on the Steigenberger Minerva through the tour operator SEEgypt and the World Travel, paying $450 a person, not including flights, drinks or tips. And there were plenty of tips -- for the staff and our guide, drivers and the turbaned attendants at monuments who led us to hidden hieroglyphics and posed for pictures.

Our itinerary included a motorboat ride to Philae, begun by a pharaoh in the fourth century B.C. and abandoned by pagans in the sixth century A.D. As we meandered through its courtyard, pylons and sanctuary with our guide, Ahmed A. Kader, an Egyptologist, it became clear that this trip was going to be filled with a bewildering array of dynasties and deities. I did commit to memory a god we would be running into a lot -- Horus, the son of Isis and Osiris, often depicted as falcon-headed. And I took note of the menus etched in the stone doorway of the pylon, with Mr. Kader explaining that the five vessels held the ancient Egyptians' beverages of choice -- milk, water, honey, wine and beer. Alas, there was no bar at the temple.

As we traveled downriver the next day, stopping at temples of the crocodile god Sobek and Horus the hawk at Kom Ombo and Edfu, it became somewhat clear how centuries of raids, desecration and time had turned once beautifully adorned monuments into ruins. From countless walls and columns, vandals had hacked away the heads and legs of the gods.

''We don't know who or when,'' said Mr. Kader, adding there was evidence of mutilation by early Christians and Muslims.

We sailed to Luxor as a brilliant sunset painted the sky and Susan tried to read in our cabin. ''It's just too hard to focus,'' she said from an armchair near the open glass door that framed passing scenes of fishermen in rowboats, a little girl with a donkey waving hello, water buffaloes lolling on the riverbank. ''It's probably been like that for hundreds of years, and they don't care about me being on this big fancy boat.''

After sunset, as the boat emerged from a lock south of Luxor, we looked two stories down and saw a powder-blue rowboat tethered to the ship. The white-robed pilot spread out a prayer rug on the back. He steadied himself as he stood and folded his arms over his chest, bowed, knelt and touched his forehead to the mat. He repeated the ritual, the boat hopping along, his djellaba fluttering in the wind.

Dinner was at 7:30. The low-ceilinged dining room had white tablecloths and cushy purple armchairs, and at each meal we circled the buffet island selecting duck or Florentine fish, couscous or rice, stuffed zucchini or mixed vegetables. The food was good and the staff attentive. And the cleaners were creative, making a crocodile or a monkey out of our bathroom towels daily and posing them in our cabins.

The third day was a spectacle of underground colors. After seeing faint pigments on columns and walls of temples, we descended the tombs of the Valley of the Kings into shafts and chambers blazoned with orange bodies standing in profile with blue heads of lions or rams, and hieroglyphics painted in gold, silver, blue, green, red and yellow. Scores of the kings like Tutankhamen and multiple Ramses were buried in the arid hills of Luxor. Susan was mesmerized by the detail, thinking how unreal it was to be standing before images she had seen only on pages.

The final day, we entered the most grandiose of the temples, Karnak in Luxor. Mr. Kader said the immense complex of pylons, columns, colossi and obelisks was patched together by pharaohs over more than 1,500 years. He emphasized that its entrances were perfectly aligned with the rising and setting sun of the winter and summer solstices, proclaiming their intimate knowledge and worship of the life-giving star.

Most impressive were 134 massive columns topped with flying-saucer-like capitals. My mind flipped through stills of a tuxedoed James Bond pursuing a villain around the sandstone pillars, and flickered with imagined scenes of Ramses II striding the stone blocks more than 3,000 years ago.

Even the universe of gods and symbols seemed to come into focus. Entering a dim sanctuary, I looked up and saw fragments of blue streaked with light crosses and recognized the pattern from a tomb the day before. ''Hey, the same stars as in the Valley of the Kings,'' I said.

''Yes,'' Mr. Kader said, ''but they have a different meaning.''

Naturally.

The writer's family, in the center foreground, at the Temple of Hatshepsut in Luxor, one of many ancient sites visited during a cruise on the Steigenberger Minerva. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PATRICK SCOTT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170115ed1f0003i



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
For Trump, a pivotal Russian test

By ROGER COHEN 
858 words
14 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
19
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

There's a mood of confidence in Moscow bordering on triumphalism. Russia is dictating the grim outcome in Syria. It has annexed with impunity part of Ukraine and set limits on the country's Westernizing ambitions. It has influenced through hacking the outcome of the American election. It has fostered the fracture of the European Union. All this from a nation President Obama dismissed in 2014 as a mere ''regional power'' acting ''not out of strength but out of weakness.''

In addition, whether or not Donald Trump was ever lured into some Moscow honey trap (the oldest trick in town for Vladimir Putin's intelligence services), Russia has reason to regard with satisfaction the coming presidency. Trump has called Putin ''very smart'' and ''very much of a leader'' (more than Obama); he has cheered on a British exit from the European Union; he has signaled deep skepticism of NATO; he has, in short, intimated that he may be ready to be complicit with Putin in the dismemberment of the Western alliance.

America's European allies are in a state of high anxiety. For the first time in decades there seems to be a possibility that the White House will deal with Moscow at Europe's expense. The last thing Europe needs at a time of huge internal pressures, and in the year of the French and German elections, is a crisis in trans-Atlantic relations, or an American president who is openly dismissive of the European integration that brought peace to a war-racked continent.

''There have never been so many uncertainties about the future of the trans-Atlantic bond,'' Wolfgang Ischinger, the chairman of the Munich Security Conference, told me.

No more important challenge awaits Trump than clarifying where he stands on Putin's threat to the West. Hurtling into some macho love fest with Vlad based on the vague shared aim of smashing ISIS would be calamitous. Trump said that if Putin likes him, ''That's called an asset, not a liability.'' Wrong. It's a liability if Trump is so susceptible to being liked he forgets to be tough.

Trump must make clear soon after Jan. 20 that the United States stands by its NATO allies in the Baltics and that Article 5 of the NATO treaty guaranteeing collective defense is sacrosanct. Trump must leave no doubt that sanctions imposed on Russia for the annexation of Crimea and for interference in the American election will stand. He must warn Putin against attempts, in a reprise of the American operation, to sway the French and German elections through hacking and fake news.

Trump has gushed in support of the British nationalist bigot Nigel Farage and Brexit. It's important that he not compound this error with backing for the French anti-E.U. rightist Marine Le Pen, who was at Trump Tower on Thursday, an ominous signal even if she did not see the president-elect. The French election is set for April 23. Putin wants nothing more than for Le Pen to win -- still a long shot, but then so was Trump. Brexit plus Le Pen would leave the European Union in tatters.

''Putin believes the way to restore Russia's great power status is at the expense of an American-led order, particularly in Europe, but also in the Middle East,'' William Burns, a former deputy secretary of state and the president of the Carnegie Endowment, told me. ''Trump must recognize this without any illusions.''

I don't know if he can. Dispensing with illusions means curtailing impulsiveness and the gut instincts that constitute Trump's worldview, such as it is. Trump is drawn to Putin's authoritarianism, toughness and embodiment of white Christian resolve against threatening (read Muslim) hordes. He needs to get over these inclinations fast and get on with defending the free world.

There are encouraging signs: James Mattis, the retired general who is Trump's nominee for defense secretary, said during confirmation hearings that Putin ''is trying to break the North Atlantic alliance.'' Rex Tillerson, the nominee for secretary of state, said, ''Our NATO allies are right to be alarmed at a resurgent Russia.''

For now, however, Trump shows no indication of any such alarm. There is also no sign, a week from the inauguration, of any coordination between the president-elect, Mattis and Tillerson. Is anyone in charge here?

Trump's approach to Russia is ''a travesty'' and has ''raised more questions about our leadership than at any time since the 1920s,'' Nicholas Burns, a Harvard professor, told me. More alpha-dog Trump-Putin connivance will endanger the world.

It is said that a century ago, Czar Nicholas II of Russia wrote in his diary, ''The year 1916 was cursed; 1917 will surely be better!'' Illusion is the mother of disaster, as Trump will learn if he does not change course on Russia.

You can follow me on Twitter (@NYTimesCohen) or join me on Facebook.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170114ed1e0003u



OP-ED CONTRIBUTORS
OpEd; SECT
Twitter must block  ISIS 

By ANNE CAMERON CAIN and BEATRIZ GONZALEZ 
953 words
14 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Like many Americans, the two of us have strong reasons to hope that 2017 is better than recent years. On Nov. 13, 2015, Beatriz's daughter, Nohemi, was killed in the Paris terror attacks by an Islamic State cell operating out of Brussels. On March 22, 2016, Cameron's husband, Alexander, and her sister-in-law, Sascha, were murdered at the Brussels Airport by terrorists from the same cell. One hundred and fifty-nine others also died in those attacks, and more than 600 people were injured.

The months since have been anguishing for us, and it is tempting to assign blame -- to authorities who failed to heed warnings about suspected terrorists, to government policies that prevented effective surveillance and interdiction of the planners, and of course to the Islamic State terrorists who murdered our loved ones. But our primary motivation in taking action is not to blame others. We want to make it less likely that families will suffer similar anguish in the future.

It is for this reason that on Jan. 9 we filed a federal civil lawsuit in the Southern District of New York against Twitter for providing support and resources to the Islamic State, leading to the murders of Nohemi, Alexander and Sascha.

In the aftermath of Sept. 11, 2001, Congress passed antiterrorism legislation prohibiting any entity or person connected with the United States from providing ''material support or resources'' to designated foreign terrorist organizations. Typically we think of such entities as those that supply funds, launder money or refine oil, but the law should also apply to entities that provide services, resources and platforms for communications, including Twitter.

This is not a decision we made lightly. We are Twitter users. It is one of the most effective platforms to communicate a message instantly, globally and with immediate impact.

But it is also one of the platforms most preferred by the Islamic State.

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS, and its supporters have used Twitter for recruiting, planning, issuing threats and taking credit for their attacks. Simply put, the Islamic State uses Twitter as a tool of terrorism. It should be denied access to this weapon.

''If you want to talk to a terrorist, you don't need to send an email to anybody,'' the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, said shortly after the Paris attacks. ''You just need to follow that terrorist on Twitter, and then maybe engage in Twitter direct messaging with that terrorist.'' He added, ''it works as a way to crowdsource terrorism, to sell murder.''

Government officials have criticized Twitter for allowing terrorists to access the platform. Congressman Ted Poe, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Terrorism, nonproliferation and trade, complained in August 2012 about Twitter's not shutting down terrorist accounts and argued that terrorists using Twitter ''is a violation of U.S. law.'' In September of that year, Mr. Poe and several other members of Congress wrote to the F.B.I. director asking that he demand that Twitter block accounts of various terrorist groups.

Twitter has long promoted the importance of free and open discourse. In June 2014, in a CNN report, a co-founder, Biz Stone, said, ''If you want to create a platform that allows for freedom of expression for hundreds of millions of people around the world, you really have to take the good with the bad.''

In November 2014, Mother Jones quoted an unnamed Twitter official saying ''One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter.''

Yet as the Mother Jones article pointed out, Twitter users ''may not impersonate others, publish copyrighted material without consent, release private information about others, or issue specific violent threats.''

In a February 2016 statement, Twitter acknowledged that the terrorist threat was changing and said it was adapting to the changes. The company announced that it had suspended more than 125,000 accounts since mid-2015 ''for threatening or promoting terrorist acts'' and enlarged the teams that review reports related to terrorism. When pertinent, Twitter also says it cooperates with law-enforcement agencies and works with organizations to combat extremist content online. In August, Twitter said it suspended an additional 235,000 accounts associated with terrorism.

But we believe that Twitter doesn't do enough to proactively monitor, identify and remove terrorist-related accounts and hasn't made an effective or prolonged effort to ensure that the accounts are not re-established. In short, Twitter's actions are too little, too late.

Hany Farid, the chairman of the computer science department at Dartmouth College and senior adviser at the Counter Extremism Project, has suggested one way Twitter could do more. He has developed software that can block terror-related posts on the internet. It could be used to create a database of known extremist content and prevent future uploads of the material on social media.

We both used social media platforms, including Twitter, to frantically search for our loved ones in the hours following the attacks. We know that our lawsuit will not diminish the power of social media platforms, but if our taking a stand diminishes the ability of the Islamic State and its demonic brethren to carry out future murderous campaigns, then perhaps we will have spared others the fate of Nohemi, Alexander and Sascha.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Anne Cameron Cain is a former executive associate at the Asia Society in New York. Beatriz Gonzalez is a small-business owner residing in California.

A photograph posted on Twitter in 2014 purporting to show a suicide bombing. 

Document NYTF000020170114ed1e0003l



Op-Ed Columnist
opinion
Trump’ Pivotal Russian Test

By ROGER COHEN 
847 words
13 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

There’ a mood of confidence in Moscow bordering on triumphalism. Russia is dictating the grim outcome in Syria. It has annexed with impunity part of Ukraine and set limits on the country’ Westernizing ambitions. It has influenced through hacking the outcome of the American election. It has fostered the fracture of the European Union. All this from a nation President Obama dismissed in 2014 as a mere “egional power”cting “ot out of strength but out of weakness.”

In addition, whether or not was ever lured into some Moscow honey trap (the oldest trick in town for Vladimir Putin’ intelligence services), Russia has reason to regard with satisfaction the coming presidency. Trump has called Putin “”nd “”more than Obama); he has cheered on a British exit from the European Union; he has signaled deep skepticism of ; he has, in short, intimated that he may be ready to be complicit with Putin in the dismemberment of the Western alliance.

America’ European allies are in a state of high anxiety. For the first time in decades there seems to be a possibility that the White House will deal with Moscow at Europe’ expense. The last thing Europe needs at a time of huge internal pressures, and in the year of the French and German , is a crisis in trans-Atlantic relations, or an American president who is openly dismissive of the European integration that brought peace to a war-racked continent.

“here have never been so many uncertainties about the future of the trans-Atlantic bond,”olfgang Ischinger, the chairman of the Munich Security Conference, told me.

No more important challenge awaits Trump than clarifying where he stands on Putin’ threat to the West. Hurtling into some macho love fest with Vlad based on the vague shared aim of smashing ISIS would be calamitous. Trump said that if Putin likes him, “”rong. It’ a liability if Trump is so susceptible to being liked he forgets to be tough.

Trump must make clear soon after Jan. 20 that the United States stands by its NATO allies in the Baltics and that Article 5 of the NATO treaty guaranteeing collective defense is sacrosanct. Trump must leave no doubt that sanctions imposed on Russia for the annexation of Crimea and for interference in the American election will stand. He must warn Putin against attempts, in a reprise of the American operation, to sway the French and German elections through hacking and fake news.

Trump has gushed in support of the British nationalist bigot Nigel Farage and . It’ important that he not compound this error with backing for the French anti-E.U. rightist Marine Le Pen, who was at Trump Tower on Thursday, an ominous signal even if she did not see the president-elect. The French election is set for April 23. Putin wants nothing more than for Le Pen to win —till a long shot, but then so was Trump. Brexit plus Le Pen would leave the European Union in tatters.

“utin believes the way to restore Russia’ great power status is at the expense of an American-led order, particularly in Europe, but also in the Middle East,”William Burns, a former deputy secretary of state and the president of the Carnegie Endowment, told me. “rump must recognize this without any illusions.”

I don’ know if he can. Dispensing with illusions means curtailing impulsiveness and the gut instincts that constitute Trump’ worldview, such as it is. Trump is drawn to Putin’ authoritarianism, toughness and embodiment of white Christian resolve against threatening (read Muslim) hordes. He needs to get over these inclinations fast and get on with defending the free world.

There are encouraging signs: James Mattis, the retired general who is Trump’ nominee for defense secretary, said during confirmation hearings that Putin “”Rex Tillerson, the nominee for secretary of state, , “ur NATO allies are right to be alarmed at a resurgent Russia.”

For now, however, Trump shows no indication of any such alarm. There is also no sign, a week from the inauguration, of any coordination between the president-elect, Mattis and Tillerson. Is anyone in charge here?

Trump’ approach to Russia is “ travesty”nd has “aised more questions about our leadership than at any time since the 1920s,”icholas Burns, a Harvard professor, told me. More alpha-dog Trump-Putin connivance will endanger the world.

It is said that a century ago, Czar Nicholas II of Russia wrote in his diary, “he year 1916 was cursed; 1917 will surely be better!”llusion is the mother of disaster, as Trump will learn if he does not change course on Russia.

You can follow me on ) or join me on .

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on and , and sign up for the .

https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/15/opinion/sunday/14cohen1-inyt/14cohen1-inyt-articleLarge.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/15/opinion/sunday/14cohen1-inyt/14cohen1-inyt-jumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/15/opinion/sunday/14cohen1-inyt/14cohen1-inyt-superJumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/15/opinion/sunday/14cohen1-inyt/14cohen1-inyt-moth.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/15/opinion/sunday/14cohen1-inyt/14cohen1-inyt-articleInline.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/15/opinion/sunday/14cohen1-inyt/14cohen1-inyt-sfSpan.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/15/opinion/sunday/14cohen1-inyt/14cohen1-inyt-filmstrip.jpg | A journalist holds a poster with portraits of President Vladimir Putin, Marine Le Pen and Donald Trump prior to Putin’ annual news conference in Moscow last month. | Pavel Golovkin/Associated Press 

Document INHT000020170113ed1d0000w



Film Club
The Learning Network
Teaching With: ‘he Price of Certainty’

By MICHAEL GONCHAR 
634 words
13 January 2017
11:30
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Note: Teachers should preview the film above to make sure it is suitable for their students.

This short documentary explores the natural human need to find certainty during uncertain times, and how embracing that certainty can sometimes be a dangerous thing. It can lead us to make judgments regardless of facts. It can cause us to close our minds to new information.

How does this film relate to historical events? How can it relate to our world today? How might it connect with our own decision-making?

Students

1. Watch the seven-minute film above. While you watch, you might take notes using our Film Club Double-Entry Journal (PDF) to help you remember specific moments.

2. After watching, think about these questions:

•hat moments in the film stood out for you? Why?

•ere there any surprises? Anything that challenged what you know —r thought you knew?

•hat messages, emotions or ideas will you take away from this film? Why?

3. Next, join the conversation by clicking on the comment button and posting in the box that opens on the right. (Students 13 and older are invited to comment, although teachers of younger students are welcome to post what their students have to say.)

4. After you have posted, try reading back to see what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting another comment. Use the “eply”utton or the @ symbol to address that student directly.

5. To learn more, read the filmmaker’ explanation here. It begins:

It’ alarming to see how polarized politics have become in the United States. The wider the gulf grows, the more people seem to be certain that the other side is wrong. Certainty can be a dangerous thing.

Two years ago, I met the social psychologist Arie Kruglanski while researching a documentary about extremism. Dr. Kruglanski, a professor at the University of Maryland, studies what motivates people to join terrorist groups like ISIS. My producing partner, Eric Strauss, and I had fascinating conversations with Dr. Kruglanski about the psychology of binary thinking, and decided to make a short film about his work instead.

Dr. Kruglanski is best known for his theory of “ognitive closure,” term he coined in 1989 to describe how we make decisions. “losure”s the moment that you make a decision or form a judgment. You literally close your mind to new information.

If you have high “eed for closure,”ou tend to make decisions quickly and see the world in black and white. If you have a low need for closure, you tolerate ambiguity, but often have difficulty making decisions. All of us fall naturally somewhere on this spectrum.

But during times of fear and anxiety —ike, for example, right now —verybody’ need for closure increases. We tend to make judgments more quickly, regardless of the facts. We’e also drawn to leaders who are decisive and paint solutions in simple terms. After the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, Dr. Kruglanski and his team of researchers found that as the color-coded terrorism threat system increased, support for President George W. Bush went up accordingly. The more uncertain our world seems, the more we compensate by seeking out certainty.

Dr. Kruglanski has spent his career studying the consequences of this psychology. This film is an effort to impart some of his wisdom as we navigate these uncertain times.

_________

More?

•ee all the films in this series.

•ead our list of practical teaching ideas, along with responses from students and teachers, for how you can use these documentaries in the classroom.

•ur next Film Club will take place on Friday, Jan. 20.

There's more to what you believe than you think. | By DANIELE ANASTASION 

Document NYTFEED020170113ed1d003ux



National Desk; SECTA
Defense Pick Strikes a Far Harsher Tone Than Trump on Russia

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and HELENE COOPER 
950 words
13 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
17
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- James N. Mattis, the retired Marine Corps general, told Congress on Thursday that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia was trying to ''break the North Atlantic alliance,'' staking out a tougher stance on Russia during a confirmation hearing for defense secretary than his prospective commander in chief did on the campaign trail.

''I'm all for engagement, but we also have to recognize reality,'' General Mattis told the Senate Armed Services Committee. ''There's a decreasing number of areas where we can engage cooperatively and increasing numbers of areas where we're going to have to confront Russia.''

In a three-hour hearing, General Mattis argued for expanding the armed forces, improving the military's readiness to go into battle on short notice and reinvigorating the North Atlantic Treaty Organization by maintaining a permanent armed American presence in Baltic nations to deter a Russian attack, among other steps.

''My view is that nations with allies thrive and nations without allies don't,'' General Mattis said.

Those remarks were a striking contrast to comments by President-elect Donald J. Trump during the campaign that American support for the alliance should be conditional on financial contributions by its members.

After the hearing, General Mattis took a major step toward confirmation when the Republican-led Senate decisively approved a waiver that would permit him to become defense secretary, by a vote of 81 to 17. Separately, the House Armed Services Committee narrowly backed a waiver for him, 34 to 28 along party lines.

Military officers are barred by law from serving as defense secretary unless they have been retired for seven years; General Mattis left active duty in May 2013. His supporters hope that Mr. Trump will sign legislation enabling him to begin service as the Pentagon chief on the new president's first day in office so that his nomination and confirmation can quickly follow.

In his testimony on Thursday, General Mattis won over most of the Senate panel's Democrats as they seemed to invest in him their hopes that he will rein in some of Mr. Trump's more impetuous national security impulses. In return, General Mattis gave them plenty of reason for hope.

In addition to his remarks skeptical of Russia and supportive of NATO, General Mattis tacked to the left of President-elect Trump and most of the Republicans in Congress on whether to keep the agreement constraining Iran's nuclear program. Mr. Trump has said that his top priority is to ''dismantle the disastrous deal with Iran.'' But General Mattis urged the United States to take steps to rigorously enforce it.

''I think it is an imperfect arms control agreement -- it's not a friendship treaty,'' he said. ''But when America gives her word, we have to live up to it and work with our allies.''

General Mattis also said he had no intention of revisiting Obama administration decisions on social issues at the Defense Department, including the opening of combat roles to women or allowing openly gay men and women to serve.

''I believe that military service is a touchstone for patriots of whatever stripe,'' he said. ''I've never cared much about two consenting adults and who they go to bed with.''

Trying to reassure lawmakers that he would not be too quick to urge the use of military force, General Mattis said the nickname he had been given, ''Mad Dog,'' was an invention of the news media, ignoring the fact that Mr. Trump seemed to use it at every opportunity. The general's battlefield call sign was ''Chaos.''

But it was also clear that General Mattis favors a more assertive response to Iran, which he described in a written submission to the Senate committee as the ''biggest destabilizing force in the Middle East.''

General Mattis did not say how many American troops should be kept in Iraq, but he asserted that the United States needed to maintain its influence there long after Mosul is retaken from the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, to ensure that Iraq ''does not become a rump state of the regime in Tehran.''

The United States strategy for taking Raqqa, Syria, the capital of the Islamic State, he said, ''needs to be reviewed and perhaps energized on a more aggressive timeline.''

Some notable Democrats were persuaded by General Mattis's independent streak, fluency with military issues and repeated promises to uphold the principle of civilian control and consult Congress.

Senators Jack Reed of Rhode Island, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Armed Services Committee, and Tim Kaine of Virginia, the former Democratic candidate for vice president and a committee member, were among the lawmakers who voted for a waiver.

Three Democrats on the committee voted against amending the law: Senators Kirsten E. Gillibrand of New York, Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts.

Ms. Warren's vote was somewhat surprising as she devoted her question time to urging General Mattis to consider channeling more military spending to research laboratories in Massachusetts and thanking him for his assurances that he would provide the new president with his candid advice.

''Under what circumstances will you advocate for your views forcefully and frankly?'' Ms. Warren asked.

''On every circumstance, senator,'' he replied.

''I am very glad to hear that,'' she said. ''Thank you.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

James N. Mattis, President-elect Donald J. Trump's choice for defense secretary, arriving for a confirmation hearing on Thursday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170113ed1d00063



Washington; SECT
Donald Trump's News Conference: Full Transcript and Video

11,141 words
12 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The following is a complete transcript of a news conference that President-elect Donald J. Trump held in New York on Wednesday, as prepared by the Federal News Service.

For updates and analysis of the conference, follow our transition briefing.

SEAN SPICER: Morning. Thanks for being here (inaudible) days away from the inauguration of the next president and vice president of the United States. It's an opportunity to be here today to allow the president-elect to take your questions.

After the president-elect makes some remarks, he will introduce Ms. Sheri Dillon, a prominent attorney in Washington, D.C., with the prestigious firm of Morgan Lewis who will -- who structured the agreements pursuant to the president's business arrangements and she will give brief remarks.

Before we start, I want to bring your attention to a few points on the report that was published in BuzzFeed last night. It's frankly outrageous and highly irresponsible for a left-wing blog that was openly hostile to the president-elect's campaign to drop highly salacious and flat-out false information on the internet just days before he takes the oath of office.

According to BuzzFeed's own editor, there are some serious reasons to doubt the allegations in the report. The executive editor of The New York Times also dismissed the report by saying it was, quote, ''Totally unsubstantiated, echoing the concerns that many other reporters expressed on the internet.''

SPICER: The fact that BuzzFeed and CNN made the decision to run with this unsubstantiated claim is a sad and pathetic attempt to get clicks. The report is not an intelligence report, plain and simple. One issue that the report talked about was the relationship of three individuals associated with the campaign. These three individuals; Paul Manafort, Michael Cohen and Carter Page.

Carter Page is an individual who the president-elect does not know and was put on notice months ago by the campaign. Paul Manafort has adamantly denied any of this involvement and Michael Cohen, who is said to have visited Prague in August and September did not leave or enter the United States during this time. We asked him to produce his passport to confirm his whereabouts on the dates in question and there was no doubt that he was not in Prague.

In fact, Mr. Cohen has never been in Prague. A new report actually suggests that Michael Cohen was at -- at the University of Southern California with his son at a baseball game. One report now suggested apparently it's another Michael Cohen. For all the talk lately about fake news, this political witch hunt by some in the media is based on some of the most flimsy reporting and is frankly shameful and disgraceful.

With that, it is my honor to introduce the next vice president of the United States, Mike Pence.

(APPLAUSE)

PENCE: We are nine days away from the inauguration of the 45th president of the United States of America.

(APPLAUSE)

I am profoundly honored and humbled that I will take the oath of office to serve as vice president of the United States nine days from today, but I'm even more honored to stand shoulder to shoulder with a new president who will make America great again.

(APPLAUSE)

Now, the president-elect's leadership and his energy during the campaign was impressive. But as the chairman of the transition effort, I can assure the American people that his energy and his vision during the course of this transition has been even more inspiring. To see the way he has brought together men and women of extraordinary capability at a historic pace in this cabinet.

Nineteen of the 21 cabinet officials have been announced, nine committee hearings already scheduled, seven more soon to go on the books in the next several days and it is a -- it is a compilation of men and women with an unprecedented caliber of leadership and background to help this administration move our nation forward. Perhaps that's why there's been such a concerted effort by some in the mainstream media to delegitimize this election and to demean our incoming administration.

You know, I have long been a supporter of a free and independent press and I always will be. But with freedom comes responsibility. And the irresponsible decision of a few news organizations to run with a false and unsubstantiated report, when most news organizations resisted the temptation to propagate this fake news, can only be attributed to media bias and attempt to demean the president-elect and our incoming administration and the American people are sick and tired of it.

(APPLAUSE)

But today, we'll get back to real news, to real facts and the real progress our incoming president has already made in reviving the American economy and assembling a team that will make America great again. And we'll hear from the president-elect about issues that are of paramount importance to the American people today.

So, it is my honor to introduce to all of you, my friend and the president-elect of the United States of America, Donald Trump.

(APPLAUSE)

TRUMP: Thank you very much.

It's very familiar territory, news conferences, because we used to give them on an almost daily basis. I think we probably maybe won the nomination because of news conferences and it's good to be with you.

TRUMP: We stopped giving them because we were getting quite a bit of inaccurate news, but I do have to say that -- and I must say that I want to thank a lot of the news organizations here today because they looked at that nonsense that was released by maybe the intelligence agencies? Who knows, but maybe the intelligence agencies which would be a tremendous blot on their record if they in fact did that. A tremendous blot, because a thing like that should have never been written, it should never have been had and it should certainly never been released.

But I want to thank a lot of the news organizations for some of whom have not treated me very well over the years -- a couple in particular -- and they came out so strongly against that fake news and the fact that it was written about by primarily one group and one television station.

So, I just want to compliment many of the people in the room. I have great respect for the news and great respect for freedom of the press and all of that. But I will tell you, there were some news organizations with all that was just said that were so professional -- so incredibly professional, that I've just gone up a notch as to what I think of you. OK?

All right. We've had some great news over the last couple of weeks. I've been quite active, I guess you could say, in an economic way for the country. A lot of car companies are going to be moving in, we have other companies -- big news is going to be announced over the next couple of weeks about companies that are getting building in the Midwest.

You saw yesterday Fiat Chrysler; big, big factory going to be built in this country as opposed to another country. Ford just announced that they stopped plans for a billion dollar plant in Mexico and they're going to be moving into Michigan and expanding, very substantially, an existing plant.

I appreciate that from Ford. I appreciate it very much from Fiat Chrysler. I hope that General Motors will be following and I think they will be. I think a lot of people will be following. I think a lot of industries are going to be coming back.

We've got to get our drug industry back. Our drug industry has been disastrous. They're leaving left and right. They supply our drugs, but they don't make them here, to a large extent. And the other thing we have to do is create new bidding procedures for the drug industry because they're getting away with murder.

Pharma, pharma has a lot of lobbies and a lot of lobbyists and a lot of power and there's very little bidding on drugs. We're the largest buyer of drugs in the world and yet we don't bid properly and we're going to start bidding and we're going to save billions of dollars over a period of time.

And we're going to do that with a lot of other industries. I'm very much involved with the generals and admirals on the airplane, the F-35, you've been reading about it. And it's way, way behind schedule and many, many billions of dollars over budget. I don't like that. And the admirals have been fantastic, the generals have been fantastic. I've really gotten to know them well. And we're going to do some big things on the F-35 program, and perhaps the F-18 program. And we're going to get those costs way down and we're going to get the plane to be even better. And we're going to have some competition and it's going to be a beautiful thing.

So, we've been very, very much involved, and other things. We had Jack Ma, we had so many incredible people coming here. There are no -- they're going to do tremendous things -- tremendous things in this country. And they're very excited.

And I will say, if the election didn't turn out the way it turned out, they would not be here. They would not be in my office. They would not be in anybody else's office. They'd be building and doing things in other countries. So, there's a great spirit going on right now. A spirit that many people have told me they've never seen before, ever.

We're going to create jobs. I said that I will be the greatest jobs producer that God ever created. And I mean that, I really -- I'm going to work very hard on that. We need certain amounts of other things, including a little bit of luck, but I think we're going to do a real job. And I'm very proud of what we've done.

And we haven't even gotten there yet. I look very much forward to the inauguration. It's going to be a beautiful event. We have great talent, tremendous talent. And we have the -- all of the bands -- or most of the bands are from the different -- from the different segments of the military. And I've heard some of these bands over the years, they're incredible.

We're going to have a very, very elegant day. The 20th is going to be something that will be very, very special; very beautiful. And I think we're going to have massive crowds because we have a movement.

TRUMP: It's a movement like the world has never seen before. It's a movement that a lot of people didn't expect. And even the polls -- although some of them did get it right, but many of them didn't. And that was a beautiful scene on November 8th as those states started to pour in.

And we focused very hard in those states and they really reciprocated. And those states are gonna have a lot of jobs and they're gonna have a lot of security. They're going to have a lot of good news for their veterans.

And by the way, speaking of veterans, I appointed today the head secretary of the Veterans Administration, David Shulkin. And we'll do a news release in a little while. Tell you about David, he's fantastic -- he's fantastic. He will do a truly great job.

One of the commitments I made is that we're gonna straighten out the whole situation for our veterans. Our veterans have been treated horribly. They're waiting in line for 15, 16, 17 days, cases where they go in and they have a minor early-stage form of cancer and they can't see a doctor. By the time they get to the doctor, they're terminal. Not gonna happen, it's not gonna happen.

So, David is going to do a fantastic job. We're going to be talking to a few people also to help David. And we have some of the great hospitals of the world going to align themselves with us on the Veterans Administration, like the Cleveland Clinic, like the Mayo Clinic, a few more than we have. And we're gonna set up a -- a group.

These are hospitals that have been the top of the line, the absolute top of the line. And they're going to get together with their great doctors -- Dr. Toby Cosgrove, as you know from the Cleveland Clinic, has been very involved.

Ike Perlmutter has been very, very involved, one of the great men of business. And we're gonna straighten out the V.A. for our veterans. I've been promising that for a long time and it's something I feel very, very strongly.

So, you'll get the information on David. And I think you'll be very impressed with the job he does. We looked long and hard. We interviewed at least 100 people, some good, some not so good. But we had a lot of talent. And we think this election will be something that will, with time -- with time, straighten it out and straighten it out for good 'cause our veterans have been treated very unfairly.

OK, questions? Yes, John (ph)?

QUESTION: (Inaudible) so much.

TRUMP: Thank you.

QUESTION: Appreciate it.

A couple of aspects of the intelligence briefing that you received on Friday that we're looking for further clarification on.

TRUMP: Sure.

QUESTION: First of all, did the heads of the intelligence agencies provide you with the two-page summary of these unsubstantiated allegations? And secondly to that, on the broader picture, do you accept their opinion that Vladimir Putin ordered the hack of the DNC and the attempted hack of the RNC?

And if you do, how will that color your attempts to build a relationship with a leader who has been accused of committing an act of espionage against the United States?

TRUMP: OK, first of all, these readings as you know are confidential, classified. So, I'm not allowed to talk about what went on in a meeting.

And -- but we had many witnesses in that meeting, many of them with us. And I will say, again, I think it's a disgrace that information would be let out.

I saw the information; I read the information outside of that meeting. It's all fake news. It's phony stuff. It didn't happen. And it was gotten by opponents of ours, as you know, because you reported it and so did many of the other people. It was a group of opponents that got together -- sick people -- and they put that crap together.

So, I will tell you that not within the meeting, but outside of the meeting, somebody released it. It should have never been -- number one, shouldn't have even entered paper. But it should have never have been released. But I read what was released and I think it's a disgrace. I think it's an absolute disgrace.

As far as hacking, I think it was Russia. But I think we also get hacked by other countries and other people. And I -- I can say that you know when -- when we lost 22 million names and everything else that was hacked recently, they didn't make a big deal out of that. That was something that was extraordinary. That was probably China.

We had -- we had much hacking going on. And one of the things we're gonna do, we have some of the greatest computer minds anywhere in the world that we've assembled. You saw just a sample of it two weeks ago up here where we had the six top people in the world -- they were never in the same room together as a group. And we're gonna put those minds together and we're going to form a defense.

TRUMP: And I have to say this also, the Democratic National Committee was totally open to be hacked. They did a very poor job. They could've had hacking defense, which we had.

And I will give Reince Priebus credit, because when Reince saw what was happening in the world and with this country, he went out and went to various firms and ordered a very, very strong hacking defense.

And they tried to hack the Republican National Committee and they were unable to break through.

We have to do that for our country. It's very important.

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: ... just to the last part of that question (inaudible) how could all of this potentially color your attempts to build a better relationship with President Putin?

TRUMP: Well, you know, President Putin and Russia put out a statement today that this fake news was indeed fake news. They said it totally never happened.

Now, somebody would say, ''Oh, of course he's gonna say that.''

I respected the fact that he said that.

And I -- I'll be honest, I think if he did have something, they would've released it; they would've been glad to release it.

I think, frankly, had they broken into the Republican National Committee, I think they would've released it just like they did about Hillary and all of the horrible things that her people, like Mr. Podesta, said about her. I mean what he said about her was horrible.

If somebody said about me, what Podesta said about Hillary, I was the boss, I would've fired him immediately or that person. Because what he said about her was horrible.

But remember this: We talk about the hacking and hacking's bad and it shouldn't be done. But look at the things that were hacked, look at what was learned from that hacking.

That Hillary Clinton got the questions to the debate and didn't report it? That's a horrible thing. That's a horrible thing.

Can you imagine that if Donald Trump got the questions to the debate -- it would've been the biggest story in the history of stories. And they would've said immediately, ''You have to get out of the race.'' Nobody even talked about it. It's a very terrible thing.

Yeah?

QUESTION: Can I ask you a question, sir?

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: Thank you, Mr. President-elect.

On that intelligence report, the second part of their conclusion was that Vladimir Putin ordered it because he aspired to help you in the election.

Do you accept that part of the finding? And will you undo what President Obama did to punish the Russians for this or will you keep it in place?

TRUMP: Well, if -- if Putin likes Donald Trump, I consider that an asset, not a liability, because we have a horrible relationship with Russia. Russia can help us fight ISIS, which, by the way, is, number one, tricky. I mean if you look, this administration created ISIS by leaving at the wrong time. The void was created, ISIS was formed.

If Putin likes Donald Trump, guess what, folks? That's called an asset, not a liability.

Now, I don't know that I'm gonna get along with Vladimir Putin. I hope I do. But there's a good chance I won't. And if I don't, do you honestly believe that Hillary would be tougher on Putin than me? Does anybody in this room really believe that? Give me a break.

OK?

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: ... President Obama...

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: ... make clear whether during your visits to either Moscow or St. Petersburg, you engaged in conduct that you now regret and that a reasonable...

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: Would a reasonable observer say that you are potentially vulnerable to blackmail by Russia or by its intelligence agencies?

TRUMP: Lemme just tell you what I do.

When I leave our country, I'm a very high-profile person, would you say?

I am extremely careful. I'm surrounded by bodyguards. I'm surrounded by people.

And I always tell them -- anywhere, but I always tell them if I'm leaving this country, ''Be very careful, because in your hotel rooms and no matter where you go, you're gonna probably have cameras.'' I'm not referring just to Russia, but I would certainly put them in that category.

And number one, ''I hope you're gonna be good anyway. But in those rooms, you have cameras in the strangest places. Cameras that are so small with modern technology, you can't see them and you won't know. You better be careful, or you'll be watching yourself on nightly television.''

I tell this to people all the time.

I was in Russia years ago, with the Miss Universe contest, which did very well -- Moscow, the Moscow area did very, very well.

And I told many people, ''Be careful, because you don't wanna see yourself on television. Cameras all over the place.''

And again, not just Russia, all over.

Does anyone really believe that story?

I'm also very much of a germaphobe, by the way, believe me.

(LAUGHTER)

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: ... how you plan to disentangle yourself from your business. But first, I have to follow-up on some of these Russian remarks.

Based on your comments here today, do you believe the hacking was justified? Does Russia have any leverage over you, financial or otherwise? And if not, will you release your tax returns to prove it?

TRUMP: So I tweeted out that I have no dealings with Russia. I have no deals that could happen in Russia, because we've stayed away. And I have no loans with Russia.

As a real estate developer, I have very, very little debt. I have assets that are -- and now people have found out how big the company is, I have very little debt -- I have very low debt. But I have no loans with Russia at all.

And I thought that was important to put out. I certified that. So I have no deals, I have no loans and I have no dealings. We could make deals in Russia very easily if we wanted to, I just don't want to because I think that would be a conflict. So I have no loans, no dealings, and no current pending deals.

Now, I have to say one other thing. Over the weekend, I was offered $2 billion to do a deal in Dubai with a very, very, very amazing man, a great, great developer from the Middle East, Hussein Damack, a friend of mine, great guy. And I was offered $2 billion to do a deal in Dubai -- a number of deals and I turned it down.

I didn't have to turn it down, because as you know, I have a no-conflict situation because I'm president, which is -- I didn't know about that until about three months ago, but it's a nice thing to have. But I don't want to take advantage of something. I have something that others don't have, Vice President Pence also has it. I don't think he'll need it, I have a feeling he's not going to need it.

But I have a no conflict of interest provision as president. It was many, many years old, this is for presidents. Because they don't want presidents getting -- I understand they don't want presidents getting tangled up in minutia; they want a president to run the country. So I could actually run my business, I could actually run my business and run government at the same time.

I don't like the way that looks, but I would be able to do that if I wanted to. I would be the only one to be able to do that. You can't do that in any other capacity. But as president, I could run the Trump organization, great, great company, and I could run the company -- the country. I'd do a very good job, but I don't want to do that.

Now, all of these papers that you see here -- yes, go ahead.

QUESTION: (inaudible) do you believe the hacking was justified? And will you release your tax returns to prove what you're saying about no deals in Russia?

TRUMP: I'm not releasing the tax returns because as you know, they're under audit.

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: ... since the '70's has had a required audit from the IRS, the last place to release them, but as president sir...

TRUMP: You know, the only one that cares about my tax returns are the reporters, OK? They're the only who ask.

QUESTION: You don't think the American public is concerned about it?

TRUMP: No I don't think so. I won, when I became president. No, I don't think they care at all. I don't think they care at all.

(APPLAUSE)

TRUMP: I think you care -- I think you care. First of all, you learn very little to a tax return. What you should go down to federal elections and take a look at the numbers. And actually, people have learned a lot about my company and now they realize, my company is much bigger, much more powerful than they ever thought. We're in many, many countries, and I'm very proud of it.

And what I'm going to be doing is my two sons, who are right here, Don and Eric, are going to be running the company. They are going to be running it in a very professional manner. They're not going to discuss it with me. Again, I don't have to do this. They're not going to discuss it with me. And with that, I'm going to bring up Sheri Dillon, and she's going to go -- these papers are just some of the many documents that I've signed turning over complete and total control to my sons.

(CROSSTALK)

DILLON: Good morning. It's my honor and privilege to be here today at President-elect Trump's request.

He's asked me, as you just heard, to speak about the conflicts of interest and the steps he's taking. As you know, the business empire built by President-elect Trump over the years is massive, not dissimilar to the fortunes of Nelson Rockefeller when he became vice president. But at that time, no one was so concerned.

President-elect Trump wants the American public to rest assured that all of his efforts are directed to pursuing the people's business and not his own. To that end, as he explained a few moments ago, he directed me and my colleagues at the law firm Morgan Lewis and Bockius to design a structure for his business empire that will completely isolate him from the management of the company.

He further instructed that we build in protections that will assure the American people the decisions he makes and the actions that he takes as president are for their benefit and not to support his financial interests.

DILLON: As he said, he's voluntarily taking this on. The conflicts of interest laws simply do not apply to the president or the vice president and they are not required to separate themselves from their financial assets. The primary conflicts of interest statutes and some have questioned it, is Section 18 USC 208 and it's simply inapplicable by its terms. And this is not just our interpretation. It's Congress itself who have made this clear in 1989 when it amended Section 18 USC 202 to state that, except as otherwise provided, the terms office and employee in section 208 shall not include the president.

Even so, President-elect Trump wants there to be no doubt in the minds of the American public that he is completely isolating himself from his business interests. He instructed us to take all steps realistically possible to make it clear that he is not exploiting the office of the presidency for his personal benefit. He also sought the guidance of individuals who are familiar with and have worked extensively in the fields of government ethics and constitutional law.

Critical to the Morgan Lewis team is Fred Fielding, standing here to our side and with us today and many of you have known him. He has served several presidents over the years including serving as counsel to Presidents Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush as well as serving on President George H.W. Bush's Commission on Federal Ethics Law Reform and he also held the position of vice chair of the Ethics Resource Center.

Mr. Fielding has been extensively involved with and approved this plan. He's here today to support the plan and he will continue to provide guidance as the plan is implemented and as Eric, Don, along with others, take over management of the Trump organization.

I'm gonna detail some of the extraordinary steps now that the president-elect is taking. First, President-elect Trump's investments and business assets commonly known as the -- as the Trump Organization, comprising hundreds of entities which, again, if you all go and take a look at his financial disclosure statement, the pages and pages and pages of entities have all been or will be conveyed to a trust prior to January 20th. Here is just some of the paperwork that's taking care of those actions.

Second, through the trust agreement, he has relinquished leadership and management of the Trump Organization to his sons Don and Eric and a longtime Trump executive, Allen Weisselberg. Together, Don, Eric and Allen will have the authority to manage the Trump Organization and will make decisions for the duration of the presidency without any involvement whatsoever by President-elect Trump.

Further, at the president-elect's direction, the trust agreement provides -- that to ensure the Trump Organization continues to operate in accordance with the highest and legal ethics standards, an ethics adviser will be appointed to the management team. The written approval of the ethics adviser will be required for new deals, actions, and transactions that could potentially raise ethics or conflicts of interest concerns.

President-elect Trump as well as Don, Eric and Allen are committed to ensuring that the activities of the Trump organization are beyond reproach and cannot be perceived to be exploitive of the office of the presidency. President-elect Trump will resign from all officer and other positions he holds with the Trump Organization entities.

Further, in addition, his daughter Ivanka will have no further involvement with or management authority whatsoever with the Trump Organization. As she and Jared move their family to D.C., Ivanka will focused on settling her children into their new homes and their new schools.

The president-elect has also already disposed of all of his investments in publicly traded or easily liquidated investments. As a result, the trust will have two types of assets; first, it will hold liquid assets. Cash, cash equivalents and treasuries and perhaps some positions in a government approved diversified portfolio, one that is consistent with the regulations from the Office of Government Ethics.

Second, the trust is going to hold his preexisting illiquid, but very valuable business assets, the ones that everyone here is familiar with. Trump owned, operated and branded golf clubs, commercial rental property, resorts, hotels, rights to royalties from preexisting licenses of Trump-Marks Productions and Goods. Things like Trump Tower, Mar-a-Lago, all of his other business assets, 40 Wall Street will all be in the trust.

Through instructions in the trust agreement, President-elect trust -- President-elect Trump first ordered that all pending deals be terminated. This impacted more than 30 deals, many of which were set to close by the end of 2016. As you can well imagine, that caused an immediate financial loss of millions of dollars, not just for President-elect Trump, but also for Don, Ivanka and Eric.

DILLON: The trust agreement as directed by President Trump imposes severe restrictions on new deals. No new foreign deals will be made whatsoever during the duration of President Trump's presidency. New domestic deals will be allowed, but they will go through a vigorous vetting process.

The president-elect will have no role in deciding whether the Trump Organization engages in any new deal and he will only know of a deal if he reads it in the paper or sees it on TV. Because any new deal could -- and I emphasize could -- be perceived as causing a conflict or as exploiting the office of the presidency, new deals must be vetted with the ethics adviser, whose role will be to analyze any potential transactions for conflicts and ethics issues.

The ethics adviser will be a recognized expert in the field of government experts. Again, his role will be to scrutinize the new deals and the actions, and any new deal must receive written approval.

To further reinforce the wall that we are building between President-elect Trump and the Trump Organization, President-elect Trump has ordered, through his trust agreement, to sharply limit his information rights. Reports will only be available and reflect profit and loss on the company as a whole. There will be no separate business by business accounting.

Another step that President-elect Trump has taken is he created a new position at the Trump Organization; the position of chief compliance counsel, whose responsibility will be to ensure that the Trump businesses, again, are operating at the highest levels of integrity and not taking any actions that could be perceived as exploiting the office of the presidency.

He has also directed that no communications of the Trump Organization, including social media accounts, will reference or be tied to President-elect Trump's role as president of the United States or the office of the presidency.

In sum, all of these actions -- complete relinquishment of management, no foreign deals, ethics adviser approval of deals, sharply limited information rights -- will sever President-elect Trump's presidency from the Trump Organization.

Some have asked questions. Why not divest? Why not just sell everything? Form of blind trust. And I'd like to turn to addressing some of those questions now.

Selling, first and foremost, would not eliminate possibilities of conflicts of interest. In fact, it would exacerbate them. The Trump brand is key to the value of the Trump Organization's assets. If President-elect Trump sold his brand, he would be entitled to royalties for the use of it, and this would result in the trust retaining an interest in the brand without the ability to assure that it does not exploit the office of the presidency.

Further, whatever price was paid would be subject to criticism and scrutiny. Was it too high, is there pay for play, was it too much pay to curry favor with the president-elect. And selling his assets without the rights to the brand would greatly diminish the value of the assets and create a fire sale.

President-elect Trump should not be expected to destroy the company he built. This plan offers a suitable alternative to address the concerns of the American people, and selling the entire Trump Organization isn't even feasible.

Some people have suggested that the president-elect sell the business to his adult children. This would require massive third-party debt sourced with multiple lenders, whose motives and willingness to participate would be questioned and undoubtedly investigated. And if the president-elect were to finance the sale himself, he would retain the financial interests in the assets that he owns now.

Some people have suggested that the Trump -- that President-elect Trump could bundle the assets and turn the Trump Organization into a public company. Anyone who has ever gone through this extraordinarily cumbersome and complicated process knows that it is a non-starter. It is not realistic and it would be inappropriate for the Trump Organization.

Some people have suggested a blind trust, but you cannot have a totally blind trust with operating businesses. President Trump can't unknow he owns Trump Tower and the press will make sure that any new developments at the Trump Organization are well publicized.DILLON: Further, it would be impossible to find an institutional trustee that would be competent to run the Trump Organization. The approach that he is taking allows Don and Eric to preserve this great company and its iconic assets. And this approach is best from a conflicts and ethics perspective. It creates a complete separation from President-elect Trump -- it separates him and prevents him from participating in the business and poses strict limits on what the trustees can do and requires the assent of any ethics adviser to a new deal.

I'm going to turn to one last topic today that has been of interest lately called emoluments. That's a word I think we've all become familiar with and perhaps had not heard before.

And we're gonna describe some other actions that President-elect Trump is taking to avoid even the appearance of a conflict.

Emoluments comes from the Constitution. The Constitution says ''officials may not accept gifts, titles of nobility, or emoluments from foreign governments with respect to their office, and that no benefit should be derived by holding in office.''

The so-called Emoluments Clause has never been interpreted, however, to apply to fair value exchanges that have absolutely nothing to do with an office holder.

No one would have thought when the Constitution was written that paying your hotel bill was an emolument. Instead, it would have been thought of as a value-for-value exchange; not a gift, not a title, and not an emolument.

But since President-elect Trump has been elected, some people want to define emoluments to cover routine business transactions like paying for hotel rooms. They suggest that the Constitution prohibits the businesses from even arm's-length transactions that the president-elect has absolutely nothing to do with and isn't even aware of.

These people are wrong. This is not what the Constitution says. Paying for a hotel room is not a gift or a present and it has nothing to do with an office. It's not an emolument.

The Constitution does not require President-elect Trump to do anything here. But, just like with conflicts of interests, he wants to do more than what the Constitution requires.

So, President-elect Trump has decided, and we are announcing today, that he is going to voluntarily donate all profits from foreign government payments made to his hotel to the United States Treasury. This way, it is the American people who will profit.

In sum, I and president-elect's (sic) other advisers at Morgan Lewis have determined the approach we've outlined today will avoid potential conflicts of interests or concerns regarding exploitation of the office of the presidency without imposing unnecessary and unreasonable loses on the president-elect and his family.

We believe this structure and these steps will serve to accomplish the president-elect's desire to be isolated from his business interests and give the American people confidence that his sole business and interest is in making America great again, bringing back jobs to this country, securing our borders and rebuilding our infrastructure.

The American people were well -- well aware of President-elect Trump's business empire and financial interests when they voted. Many people voted for him precisely because of his business success.

President-elect Trump wants to bring this success to all Americans. Thank you.

(APPLAUSE)

(CROSSTALK)

DILLON: You're welcome. My pleasure. Yes (ph). Don't want to lose your note. Thank you.

TRUMP: Thank you very much. Here you go, you (ph).

DILLON: Thank you.

QUESTION: Mr. Trump? Thank you. Mr. Trump, (inaudible) from America News.

What is your response to your critics that say not only you, but also your Cabinet is filled with conflicts of interest?

And do you plan to set an example in the future to make sure that your -- your Cabinet and everyone throughout your administration...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: I -- I really think that when you watch what's going on with what's happening in -- I was just watching, as an example, Rex Tillerson. I think it's brilliant what he's doing and what he's saying.

I watched yesterday, as you know, our great senator, who is going to be a great attorney general. And he was brilliant. And what people don't know is that he was a great prosecutor and attorney general in Alabama. And he was brilliant yesterday.

So, I really think that they are -- I think we have one of the great Cabinets ever put together. And we've been hearing that from so many people. People are so happy.

You know, in the case of Rex, he ran incredibly Exxon Mobil. When there was a find, he would get it. When they needed something, he would be there.

A friend of mine who's very, very substantial in the oil business, Harold Hamm -- big supporter -- he said there's nobody in the business like Rex Tillerson.

And that's what we want. That's what I want to bring to government.

I want to bring the greatest people into government, because we're way behind. We don't make good deals any more. I say it all the time in speeches. We don't make good deals anymore; we make bad deals. Our trade deals are a disaster.TRUMP: We have hundreds of billions of dollars of losses on a yearly basis -- hundreds of billions with China on trade and trade imbalance, with Japan, with Mexico, with just about everybody. We don't make good deals anymore.

So we need people that are smart, we need people that are successful and they got successful because generally speaking, they're smart. And that's what I'd put, I'm very proud of the Cabinet, I think they're doing very well.

It's very interesting how it's going, but it's -- I think they're doing very, very well.

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: ... a quick follow-up on -- on Russia, sir.

QUESTION: Thank you, Mr. President-elect. I wanted to ask a few questions on Obamacare?

TRUMP: Yeah.

QUESTION: Can you be specific on what guidance you're giving congressional Republicans on the timeline for repeal and replace, whether it needs to be simultaneous or...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Finally, Obamacare, I thought it was never gonna be asked.

QUESTION: (OFF-MIKE) though if you have outlined a plan for what you want the replace package to look like, would it guarantee coverage for those who have gotten health insurance through the current Obamacare law?

TRUMP: You're gonna be very, very proud, as not only the media and reporters, you're gonna be very proud of what we put forth having to do with health care. Obamacare is a complete and total disaster.

They can say what they want, they can guide you anyway they wanna guide you. In some cases, they guide you incorrectly. In most cases, you realize what's happened, it's imploding as we sit.

Some states have over a hundred percent increase and '17 and I said this two years ago, '17 is going to be the bad year. It's going to be catastrophic. Frankly, we could sit back and it was a thought from a political standpoint, but it wouldn't be fair to the people.

We could sit back and wait and watch and criticize and we could be a Chuck Schumer and sit back and criticize it and people would come, they would come, begging to us please, we have to do something about Obamacare. We don't wanna own it, we don't wanna own it politically. They own it right now.

So the easiest thing would be to let it implode in '17 and believe me, we'd get pretty much whatever we wanted, but it would take a long time. We're going to be submitting, as soon as our secretary's approved, almost simultaneously, shortly thereafter, a plan.

It'll be repeal and replace. It will be essentially, simultaneously. It will be various segments, you understand, but will most likely be on the same day or the same week, but probably, the same day, could be the same hour.

So we're gonna do repeal and replace, very complicated stuff. And we're gonna get a health bill passed, we're gonna get health care taken care of in this country. You have deductibles that are so high, that after people go broke paying their premiums which are going through the roof, the health care can't even be used by them because their deductibles bills are so high.

Obamacare is the Democrats problem. We are gonna take the problem off the shelves for them. We're doing them a tremendous service by doing it. We could sit back and let them hang with it. We are doing the Democrats a great service.

So as soon as our secretary is approved and gets into the office, we'll be filing a plan. And it was actually, pretty accurately reported today, The New York Times. And the plan will be repeal and replace Obamacare.

We're going to have a health care that is far less expensive and far better. OK.

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: President-elect, can we just ask you -- sir, sir...

QUESTION: President-elect Trump...

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: Mr. President -- which one?

TRUMP: I was going right here.

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: President-elect Trump, Jon Steinberg (ph) from Cheddar. When you look at all the meetings that you've had with Carrier, SoftBank and Alibaba, do you conceive of making this a program, maybe sitting inside of commerce?

And then my follow-up question to that, is how soon will we see the program on capital repatriation and corporate tax cuts?

TRUMP: Well, if I can save jobs, for instance I was doing individual companies and people said well, that's only one company, like we did a good job with Carrier. And I wanna thank United Technologies which owns Carrier, but we saved close to a thousand jobs.

And they were gone and Mike Pence and his staff really helped us, a lot. But those were -- that was a tough one because they announced a year and a half before that they were leaving so it's always tough when they're building a plan, just a little tougher than before they start or before they make an announcement.TRUMP: So I wanna thank United Technologies. But we've been meeting with a lot of companies. But what really is happening, is the word is now out, that when you want to move your plant to Mexico or some other place, and you want to fire all of your workers from Michigan and Ohio and all these places that I won, for good reason, it's not going to happen that way anymore.

You want to move your plant and you think, as an example, you're going to build that plant in Mexico and you're going to make your air conditioners or your cars or whatever you're making, and you're going to sell it through what will be a very, very strong border -- not a weak border like it is -- we don't even have a border. It's an open sieve.

But you're going to sell through a very strong border -- not going to happen. You're going to pay a very large border tax. So if you want to move to another country and if you want to fire all of our great American workers that got you there in the first place, you can move from Michigan to Tennessee and to North Carolina and South Carolina. You can move from South Carolina back to Michigan.

You can do anywhere -- you've got a lot of states at play; a lot of competition. So it's not like, oh, gee, I'm taking the competition away. You've got a lot of places you can move. And I don't care, as along as it's within the United States, the borders of the United States.

There will be a major border tax on these companies that are leaving and getting away with murder. And if our politicians had what it takes, they would have done this years ago. And you'd have millions more workers right now in the United States that are -- 96 million really wanting a job and they can't get. You know that story. The real number -- that's the real number.

So, that's the way it is. OK. Go ahead.

QUESTION: President-elect, I have a question about the Supreme Court and border security. But I also wanted to ask you about something you said on Twitter this morning. Are we living in Nazi Germany? What were you driving at there? Do you have a problem with the intelligence community?

And on the Supreme Court, what's your timeline? You said a while ago you were down to four. Have you conducted those interviews yet? What's your timeline for nominating?

And on the border fence, it now appears clear U.S. taxpayers will have to pay for it up front. What is your plan to...

TRUMP: That's not clear at all. OK.

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: ... to get Mexico to pay for it?

TRUMP: I've got it. Do you have any more?

(LAUGHTER)

On the fence -- it's not a fence. It's a wall. You just misreported it. We're going to build a wall. I could wait about a year-and-a-half until we finish our negotiations with Mexico, which will start immediately after we get to office, but I don't want to wait. Mike Pence is leading an effort to get final approvals through various agencies and through Congress for the wall to begin.

I don't feel like waiting a year or a year-and-a-half. We're going to start building. Mexico in some form, and there are many different forms, will reimburse us and they will reimburse us for the cost of the wall. That will happen, whether it's a tax or whether it's a payment -- probably less likely that it's a payment. But it will happen.

So, remember this, OK? I would say we are going to build a wall and people would go crazy. I would then say, who is going to pay for the wall? And people would all scream out -- 25,000, 30,000 people, because nobody has ever had crowds like Trump has had. You know that. You don't like to report that, but that's OK.

OK, now he agrees. Finally, he agrees.

But I say who is going to pay for the wall? And they will scream out, ''Mexico.''

Now, reports went out last week -- oh, Mexico is not going to pay for the wall because of a reimbursement. What's the difference? I want to get the wall started. I don't want to wait a year-and-a-half until I make my deal with Mexico. And we probably will have a deal sooner than that.

And by the way, Mexico has been so nice, so nice. I respect the government of Mexico. I respect the people of Mexico. I love the people of Mexico. I have many people from Mexico working for me. They're phenomenal people.

The government of Mexico is terrific. I don't blame them for what's happened. I don't blame them for taking advantage of the United States. I wish our politicians were so smart. Mexico has taken advantage of the United States. I don't blame the representatives and various presidents, et cetera, of Mexico. What I say is we shouldn't have allowed that to happen. It's not going to happen anymore.

So, in order to get the wall started, Mexico will pay for the wall, but it will be reimbursed. OK?

Supreme Court judge. So, as you know, I have a list of 20. I've gone through them. We've met with numerous candidates. They're outstanding in every case. They were largely recommended and highly recommended by Federalist Society. Jim DeMint was also very much involved, and his group, which is fantastic, and he's a fantastic guy.TRUMP: So between Leo and Jim DeMint and some senators and some congresspeople, we have a great group of people. I'll be making the decision on who we will put up for justice of the United States Supreme Court, a replacement for the great, great Justice Scalia. That will be probably within two weeks of the 20th. So within about two weeks, probably the second week. I consider the first day because we'll also be doing some -- some pretty good signings and I think what we'll do is we'll wait until Monday.

That will be our really first business day as opposed to doing it on Friday, because on Friday, people are going to have a very good time at the inauguration, and then Saturday, as you know, we're having a big church service and lots of good things are happening. So our first day -- and you'll all be invited to the signings, but we'll be doing some pretty good signings on Monday and Tuesday and Wednesday and Thursday and Friday, and then also the next week. And you're all invited.

But on the Supreme Court, I'll be making that decision, and it will be a decision which I very strongly believe in. I think it's one of the reasons I got elected. I think the people of this country did not want to see what was happening with the Supreme Court, so I think it was a very, very big decision as to why I was elected.

QUESTION: The tweet that you had this morning about are we living in Nazi Germany, what were you driving at there? What are you trying to tell the American public?

TRUMP: I think it was disgraceful -- disgraceful that the intelligence agencies allowed any information that turned out to be so false and fake out. I think it's a disgrace, and I say that -- and I say that, and that's something that Nazi Germany would have done and did do. I think it's a disgrace that information that was false and fake and never happened got released to the public.

As far as Buzzfeed, which is a failing pile of garbage, writing it, I think they're going to suffer the consequences. They already are. And as far as CNN going out of their way to build it up -- and by the way, we just found out I was coming down. Michael Cohen -- I was being -- Michael Cohen is a very talented lawyer. He's a good lawyer in my firm. It was just reported that it wasn't this Michael Cohen they we're talking about. So all night long it's Michael Cohen.

I said, ''I want to see your passport.'' He brings his passport to my office. I say, hey, wait a minute. He didn't leave the country. He wasn't out of the country. They had Michael Cohen of the Trump Organization was in Prague. It turned out to be a different Michael Cohen. It's a disgrace what took place. It's a disgrace and I think they ought to apologize to start with Michael Cohen.

QUESTION: Since you're attacking us, can you give us a question? Mr. President-elect --

TRUMP: Go ahead.

QUESTION: Mr. President-elect, since you are attacking our news organization...

TRUMP: Not you.

QUESTION: Can you give us a chance?

TRUMP: Your organization is terrible.

QUESTION: You are attacking our news organization, can you give us a chance to ask a question, sir? Sir, can you...

TRUMP: Quiet.

QUESTION: Mr. President-elect, can you say...

TRUMP: He's asking a question, don't be rude. Don't be rude.

QUESTION: Can you give us a question since you're attacking us? Can you give us a question?

TRUMP: Don't be rude. No, I'm not going to give you a question. I'm not going to give you a question.

QUESTION: Can you state...

TRUMP: You are fake news. Go ahead.

QUESTION: Sir, can you state categorically that nobody -- no, Mr. President-elect, that's not appropriate.

TRUMP: Go ahead.

(APPLAUSE)

QUESTION: Do you think President Obama went too far with the sanctions he put on Russia after the hacking?

TRUMP: I don't think he went too far. No.

QUESTION: Will you roll them back? What do you think of Lindsey Graham's plan to send you a bill for...

TRUMP: Plans to send me a bill for what?

QUESTION: Tougher sanctions.

TRUMP: I hadn't heard Lindsey Graham was going to do that. Lindsey Graham. I've been competing with him for a long time. He is going to crack that one percent barrier one day. I didn't realize Lindsey Graham still had it. That's all right. I think Lindsey Graham is a nice guy. I've heard that he is a nice guy and I've been hearing it.

Go ahead. Go ahead. You've been waiting.

QUESTION: As far as we understand, the intelligence community...

TRUMP: Stand up.

QUESTION: From BBC news. Ian Pannell from BBC news.

TRUMP: BBC news. That's another beauty.

QUESTION: Thank you. Thank you.

As far as we understand it, the intelligence community are still looking at these allegations, this false news, as you describe it. If they come back with any kind of conclusion that any of it stands up, that any of it is true, will you consider your position...

TRUMP: There's nothing they could come back with.

QUESTION: Can you...

TRUMP: Go ahead.

QUESTION: (inaudible) published fake news and all the problems that we've seen throughout the media over the course of the election, what reforms do you recommend for this industry here?

TRUMP: Well, I don't recommend reforms. I recommend people that are -- that have some moral compass.

You know, I've been hearing more and more about a thing called fake news and they're talking about people that go and say all sorts of things. But I will tell you, some of the media outlets that I deal with are fake news more so than anybody. I could name them, but I won't bother, but you have a few sitting right in front of us. They're very, very dishonest people, but I think it's just something we're going to have to live with.TRUMP: I guess the advantage I have is that I can speak back. When it happens to somebody that doesn't have this -- doesn't have that kind of a megaphone, they can't speak back. It's a very sad thing. I've seen people destroyed. I've seen people absolutely destroyed. And I think it's very unfair. So, all I can ask for is honest reporters.

Yes?

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: I just wanted to follow up on the questions about the U.S. intelligence community. And be very clear about what you're saying. Do you trust your U.S. intelligence officials? And what do you say to foreign policy experts who say you're actually weakening national security by waging this war of words against that community?

TRUMP: Intelligence agencies are vital and very, very important. We are going to be putting in, as you know, Mr. Pompeo and others, you know the Senator Dan Coats. We're going to be putting in some outstanding people. Within 90 days, they're going to be coming back to me with a major report on hacking.

I want them to cover this situation. I also want them, however, to cover, maybe most importantly -- because we're hacked by everybody -- you know, the United States, our government out of a list of 17 in terms of industries is the worst, it's number 17, in terms of protection.

If you look at the retail industry, if you look at the banking industry, various industries, out of 17 industries -- they put this in the category of an industry -- the United States is last in terms of protecting, let's say, hacking defense. Like we had a great hacking defense at the Republican National Committee.

That's why we weren't hacked. By the way, we were told that they were trying to hack us, but they weren't able to hack. And I think I get some credit because I told Reince, and Reince did a phenomenal job, but I said I want strong hacking defense.

The Democratic National Committee didn't do that. Maybe that's why the country runs so badly that way. But I will tell you -- wait -- wait -- wait, let me finish. Within 90 days, we will be coming up with a major report on hacking defense, how do we stop this new phenomena -- fairly new phenomena because the United States is hacked by everybody.

That includes Russia and China and everybody -- everybody. OK.

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: Go ahead -- go ahead.

QUESTION: Mr. President-elect, you said, just now, that you believe Russia indeed was responsible for the hacking of the DNC and Jon Podesta's e-mails, et cetera.

TRUMP: All right, but you know what, it could have been others also.

QUESTION: But why did you spend weeks undermining U.S. intelligence community before simply getting the facts and then making a public statement?

TRUMP: Well, I think it's pretty sad when intelligence reports get leaked out to the press. I think it's pretty sad. First of all, it's illegal. You know, these are -- these are classified and certified meetings and reports.

I'll tell you what does happen. I have many meetings with intelligence. And every time I meet, people are reading about it. Somebody's leaking it out. So, there's -- maybe it's my office. Maybe in my office because I have a lot of people, a lot of great people. Maybe it's them. And what I did is I said I won't tell anybody. I'm going to have a meeting and I won't tell anybody about my meeting with intelligence.

And what happened is I had my meeting. Nobody knew, not even Rhona, my executive assistant for years, she didn't know -- I didn't tell her. Nobody knew. The meeting was had, the meeting was over, they left. And immediately the word got out that I had a meeting.

So, I don't want that -- I don't want that. It's very unfair to the country. It's very unfair to our country; what's happened. That report should have never -- first of all, it shouldn't have been printed because it's not worth the paper it's written on. And I thank the New York Times for saying that.

I thank a lot of different people for saying that. But, I will tell you, that should never, ever happen. OK.

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION: Thank you, Mr. President-elect, can you stand here today, once and for all and say that no one connected to you or your campaign had any contact with Russia leading up to or during the presidential campaign. And if you do indeed believe that Russia was behind the hacking, what is your message to Vladimir Putin right now?

TRUMP: He shouldn't be doing it. He won't be doing it. Russia will have much greater respect for our country when I'm leading than when other people have led it. You will see that. Russia will respect our country more. He shouldn't have done it. I don't believe that he will be doing it more now.

We have to work something out, but it's not just Russia. Take a look at what's happened. You don't report it the same way; 22 million accounts were hacked in this country by China. And that's because we have no defense. That's because we're run by people that don't know what they're doing.TRUMP: Russia will have far greater respect for our country when I'm leading it and I believe and I hope -- maybe it won't happen, it's possible. But I won't be giving (ph) a little reset button like Hillary. Here, press this piece of plastic. A guy looked at her like what is she doing? There's no reset button. We're either going to get along or we're not. I hope we get along, but if we don't, that's possible too.

But Russia and other countries -- and other countries, including China, which has taken total advantage of us economically, totally advantage of us in the South China Sea by building their massive fortress, total. Russia, China, Japan, Mexico, all countries will respect us far more, far more than they do under past administrations.

I want to thank everybody. So this is all -- just so you understand, these papers -- because I'm not sure that was explained properly. But these papers are all just a piece of the many, many companies that are being put into trust to be run by my two sons that I hope at the end of eight years, I'll come back and say, oh, you did a good job. Otherwise, if they do a bad job, I'll say, ''You're fired.''

Good-bye, everybody. Good-bye.

END

Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170112ed1c0006p



travel
Ancient History Along the Nile; Cultured Traveler

By PATRICK SCOTT 
1,395 words
11 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The engine room started rumbling about 3 a.m. the first night of our four-day Nile River cruise, setting the mirror knocking against the wall and stirring me from sleep. The shaky start to our first-ever cruise was continuing.

My wife, Susan, and I and our two daughters, Jenna and Michaela, both in their 20s, are not an organized-trip type of a family, and we hadn’ done our homework before arriving in Aswan, about 540 miles south of Cairo, to start the voyage north to Luxor.

After checking in at noon we were surprised to discover that we were not actually cruising until the middle of the night. We had boarded what was essentially a moored hotel, sandwiched between identical four-story boats —ne of which was blocking a river view from our tight cabin.

Instead of airy nautical déor, our 77-cabin boat was fitted with the dark wood, coffee-colored carpets and red and purple fabrics you might find in a private library. And on our outing that first day to the Philae Temple of the goddess Isis, my image of strolling in solitude amid its colonnades was upended as we arrived on the island with two large groups of Egyptian tourists.

Later, as I lay in bed, something else distracted me. Outside the sliding glass door the moon was a white circle, low on the horizon, racing along as if to keep up with the boat. It seemed to barrel through the palm trees and mud-brick houses that dotted the hushed riverbank, casting a white beam on the water. It was magical, and soon it was gone, fading in the haze of daybreak.

Life, especially in Egypt, can be confounding and exasperating, then suddenly filled with enchantment. That contrast pretty much summed up our Nile cruise.

We had a vague idea of what to expect from the glowing reviews from our friends who had taken such cruises. Susan and I moved to Egypt in 2015, and we knew we would be visiting spectacular ancient temples like Karnak. We also knew we would be starting out in Upper Egypt, even though it’ in the south, because the river flows north to Lower Egypt, where it empties into the Mediterranean. That twist of geography also meant that our 130-mile ride would be against the wind, which explained the strong breeze on the upper deck on the second day of our trip. But at least we were moving. The engines purred, and the teak wood of the hallways, lounges and cabins seemed appropriate now.

It’ incredibly soothing, gliding along this storied river, the wide ribbon of gray-green water flanked by tropics on the riverbanks and desert mountains in the distance. You feel a connection with the past as the wind fills the sails of feluccas that have glided the river for centuries, as the call to prayer echoes from minarets spiking up from lush farmland and brown villages.

We and a couple from Canada were the only North Americans on board, a reflection of the steep drop-off in tourism since Egypt’ 2011 uprising. Most of the 50 passengers were from Germany, with a few from France, Italy and Turkey. Many of them were in their 60s and 70s, chatting on deck, or sunning near the small pool.

We booked the late-February cruise on the Steigenberger Minerva through the tour operator SEEgypt and the World Travel, paying $450 a person, not including flights, drinks or tips. And there were plenty of tips —or the staff and our guide, drivers and the turbaned attendants at monuments who led us to hidden hieroglyphics and posed for pictures.

Our itinerary included a motorboat ride to Philae, begun by a pharaoh in the fourth century B.C. and abandoned by pagans in the sixth century A.D. As we meandered through its courtyard, pylons and sanctuary with our guide, Ahmed A. Kader, an Egyptologist, it became clear that this trip was going to be filled with a bewildering array of dynasties and deities. I did commit to memory a god we would be running into a lot —orus, the son of Isis and Osiris, often depicted as falcon-headed. And I took note of the menus etched in the stone doorway of the pylon, with Mr. Kader explaining that the five vessels held the ancient Egyptians’everages of choice —ilk, water, honey, wine and beer. Alas, there was no bar at the temple.

As we traveled downriver the next day, stopping at temples of the crocodile god Sobek and Horus the hawk at Kom Ombo and Edfu, it became somewhat clear how centuries of raids, desecration and time had turned once beautifully adorned monuments into ruins. From countless walls and columns, vandals had hacked away the heads and legs of the gods.

“e don’ know who or when,”aid Mr. Kader, adding there was evidence of mutilation by early Christians and Muslims.

We sailed to Luxor as a brilliant sunset painted the sky and Susan tried to read in our cabin. “t’ just too hard to focus,”he said from an armchair near the open glass door that framed passing scenes of fishermen in rowboats, a little girl with a donkey waving hello, water buffaloes lolling on the riverbank. “t’ probably been like that for hundreds of years, and they don’ care about me being on this big fancy boat.”

After sunset, as the boat emerged from a lock south of Luxor, we looked two stories down and saw a powder-blue rowboat tethered to the ship. The white-robed pilot spread out a prayer rug on the back. He steadied himself as he stood and folded his arms over his chest, bowed, knelt and touched his forehead to the mat. He repeated the ritual, the boat hopping along, his djellaba fluttering in the wind.

Dinner was at 7:30. The low-ceilinged dining room had white tablecloths and cushy purple armchairs, and at each meal we circled the buffet island selecting duck or Florentine fish, couscous or rice, stuffed zucchini or mixed vegetables. The food was good and the staff attentive. And the cleaners were creative, making a crocodile or a monkey out of our bathroom towels daily and posing them in our cabins.

The third day was a spectacle of underground colors. After seeing faint pigments on columns and walls of temples, we descended the tombs of the Valley of the Kings into shafts and chambers blazoned with orange bodies standing in profile with blue heads of lions or rams, and hieroglyphics painted in gold, silver, blue, green, red and yellow. Scores of the kings like Tutankhamen and multiple Ramses were buried in the arid hills of Luxor. Susan was mesmerized by the detail, thinking how unreal it was to be standing before images she had seen only on pages.

The final day, we entered the most grandiose of the temples, Karnak in Luxor. Mr. Kader said the immense complex of pylons, columns, colossi and obelisks was patched together by pharaohs over more than 1,500 years. He emphasized that its entrances were perfectly aligned with the rising and setting sun of the winter and summer solstices, proclaiming their intimate knowledge and worship of the life-giving star.

Most impressive were 134 massive columns topped with flying-saucer-like capitals. My mind flipped through stills of a tuxedoed James Bond pursuing a villain around the sandstone pillars, and flickered with imagined scenes of Ramses II striding the stone blocks more than 3,000 years ago.

Even the universe of gods and symbols seemed to come into focus. Entering a dim sanctuary, I looked up and saw fragments of blue streaked with light crosses and recognized the pattern from a tomb the day before. “ey, the same stars as in the Valley of the Kings,” said.

“es,”r. Kader said, “ut they have a different meaning.”

Naturally.

PHOTO: The writer’ family, in the center foreground, at the Temple of Hatshepsut in Luxor, one of many ancient sites visited during a cruise on the Steigenberger Minerva. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PATRICK SCOTT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

* Best Time to Visit Luxor? An Egyptologist Says Now

* In Cairo, Alone Time With the Pharaohs

Document INHT000020170123ed1b00004



Op-Ed Columnist
opinion
Online and Scared

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
900 words
11 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

And so it came to pass that in the winter of 2016 the world hit a tipping point that was revealed by the most unlikely collection of actors: , , , and the Macy’ department store. Who’ have thunk it?

And what was this tipping point?

It was the moment when we realized that a critical mass of our lives and work had shifted away from the terrestrial world to a realm known as “yberspace.”hat is to say, a critical mass of our interactions had moved to a realm where we’e all connected but no one’ in charge.

After all, there are no stoplights in cyberspace, no police officers walking the beat, no courts, no judges, no God who smites evil and rewards good, and certainly no “-800-Call-If-Putin-Hacks-Your-Election.”f someone slimes you on Twitter or , well, unless it is a death threat, good luck getting it removed, especially if it is done anonymously, which in cyberspace is quite common.

And yet this realm is where we now spend increasing hours of our day. Cyberspace is now where we do more of our shopping, more of our dating, more of our friendship-making and sustaining, more of our learning, more of our commerce, more of our teaching, more of our communicating, more of our news-broadcasting and news-seeking and more of our selling of goods, services and ideas.

It’ where both our president-elect and the leader of ISIS can communicate with equal ease with tens of millions of their respective followers through Twitter —ithout editors, fact-checkers, libel lawyers or other filters.

And, I would argue, 2016 will be remembered as the year when we fully grasped just how scary that can be —ow easy it was for a presidential candidate to tweet out untruths and half-truths faster than anyone could correct them, how cheap it was for Russia to intervene on Trump’ behalf with hacks of Democratic operatives’omputers and how unnerving it was to hear Yahoo’ chief information security officer, Bob Lord, say that his company still had “ot been able to identify”ow one billion Yahoo accounts and their sensitive user information were hacked in 2013.

Even President Obama was taken aback by the speed at which this tipping point tipped. “ think that I underestimated the degree to which, in this new information age, it is possible for misinformation, for cyberhacking and so forth, to have an impact on our open societies,”e told ABC News’ “his Week.”

At Christmas, Amazon.com taught yet more traditional retailers how hard the cybertipping point has hit retailing. Last week, Macy’ said it was slashing 10,000 jobs and closing dozens of stores because, , “Macy’ hasn’ been able to solve consumers’hift to online shopping.”

At first Zuckerberg, the Facebook founder, insisted that fake news stories carried by Facebook “urely had no impact”n the election and that saying so was “ pretty crazy idea.”ut in a very close election it was not crazy at all.

Facebook —hich wants all the readers and advertisers of the mainstream media but not to be saddled with its human editors and fact-checkers —s now taking more seriously its responsibilities as a news purveyor in cyberspace.

Alan S. Cohen, chief commercial officer of the cybersecurity firm Illumio (I am a small shareholder), noted in an that the reason this tipping point tipped now was because so many companies, governments, universities, political parties and individuals have concentrated a critical mass of their data in enterprise data centers and cloud computing environments.

Ten years ago, said Cohen, bad guys did not have the capabilities to get at all this data and extract it, but “ow they do,”nd as more creative tools like big data and artificial intelligence get “eaponized,”his will become an even bigger problem. It’ a huge legal, moral and strategic problem, and it will require, said Cohen, “ new social compact”o defuse.

Work on that compact has to start with every school teaching children digital civics. And that begins with teaching them that the internet is an open sewer of untreated, unfiltered information, where they need to bring skepticism and critical thinking to everything they read and basic civic decency to everything they write.

A published in November found “ dismaying inability by students to reason about information they see on the internet. Students, for example, had a hard time distinguishing advertisements from news articles or identifying where information came from. …ne assessment required middle schoolers to explain why they might not trust an article on financial planning that was written by a bank executive and sponsored by a bank. The researchers found that many students did not cite authorship or article sponsorship as key reasons for not believing the article.”

Prof. Sam Wineburg, the lead author of the report, said: “any people assume that because young people are fluent in social media they are equally perceptive about what they find there. Our work shows the opposite to be true.”

In an era when more and more of our lives have moved to this digital realm, that is downright scary.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on and , and sign up for the .

https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/11/opinion/11friedmanWeb/11friedmanWeb-articleLarge.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/11/opinion/11friedmanWeb/11friedmanWeb-jumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/11/opinion/11friedmanWeb/11friedmanWeb-superJumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/11/opinion/11friedmanWeb/11friedmanWeb-moth.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/11/opinion/11friedmanWeb/11friedmanWeb-articleInline.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/11/opinion/11friedmanWeb/11friedmanWeb-sfSpan.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/11/opinion/11friedmanWeb/11friedmanWeb-filmstrip.jpg | Corinna Kern for The New York Times 

Document INHT000020170111ed1b0000p



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
Online and Scared

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
927 words
11 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
23
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

And so it came to pass that in the winter of 2016 the world hit a tipping point that was revealed by the most unlikely collection of actors: Vladimir Putin, Jeff Bezos, Donald Trump, Mark Zuckerberg and the Macy's department store. Who'd have thunk it?

And what was this tipping point?

It was the moment when we realized that a critical mass of our lives and work had shifted away from the terrestrial world to a realm known as ''cyberspace.'' That is to say, a critical mass of our interactions had moved to a realm where we're all connected but no one's in charge.

After all, there are no stoplights in cyberspace, no police officers walking the beat, no courts, no judges, no God who smites evil and rewards good, and certainly no ''1-800-Call-If-Putin-Hacks-Your-Election.'' If someone slimes you on Twitter or Facebook, well, unless it is a death threat, good luck getting it removed, especially if it is done anonymously, which in cyberspace is quite common.

And yet this realm is where we now spend increasing hours of our day. Cyberspace is now where we do more of our shopping, more of our dating, more of our friendship-making and sustaining, more of our learning, more of our commerce, more of our teaching, more of our communicating, more of our news-broadcasting and news-seeking and more of our selling of goods, services and ideas.

It's where both our president-elect and the leader of ISIS can communicate with equal ease with tens of millions of their respective followers through Twitter -- without editors, fact-checkers, libel lawyers or other filters.

And, I would argue, 2016 will be remembered as the year when we fully grasped just how scary that can be -- how easy it was for a presidential candidate to tweet out untruths and half-truths faster than anyone could correct them, how cheap it was for Russia to intervene on Trump's behalf with hacks of Democratic operatives' computers and how unnerving it was to hear Yahoo's chief information security officer, Bob Lord, say that his company still had ''not been able to identify'' how one billion Yahoo accounts and their sensitive user information were hacked in 2013.

Even President Obama was taken aback by the speed at which this tipping point tipped. ''I think that I underestimated the degree to which, in this new information age, it is possible for misinformation, for cyberhacking and so forth, to have an impact on our open societies,'' he told ABC News's ''This Week.''

At Christmas, Amazon.com taught yet more traditional retailers how hard the cybertipping point has hit retailing. Last week, Macy's said it was slashing 10,000 jobs and closing dozens of stores because, according to The Wall Street Journal, ''Macy's hasn't been able to solve consumers' shift to online shopping.''

At first Zuckerberg, the Facebook founder, insisted that fake news stories carried by Facebook ''surely had no impact'' on the election and that saying so was ''a pretty crazy idea.'' But in a very close election it was not crazy at all.

Facebook -- which wants all the readers and advertisers of the mainstream media but not to be saddled with its human editors and fact-checkers -- is now taking more seriously its responsibilities as a news purveyor in cyberspace.

Alan S. Cohen, chief commercial officer of the cybersecurity firm Illumio (I am a small shareholder), noted in an interview on siliconAngle.com that the reason this tipping point tipped now was because so many companies, governments, universities, political parties and individuals have concentrated a critical mass of their data in enterprise data centers and cloud computing environments.

Ten years ago, said Cohen, bad guys did not have the capabilities to get at all this data and extract it, but ''now they do,'' and as more creative tools like big data and artificial intelligence get ''weaponized,'' this will become an even bigger problem. It's a huge legal, moral and strategic problem, and it will require, said Cohen, ''a new social compact'' to defuse.

Work on that compact has to start with every school teaching children digital civics. And that begins with teaching them that the internet is an open sewer of untreated, unfiltered information, where they need to bring skepticism and critical thinking to everything they read and basic civic decency to everything they write.

A Stanford Graduate School of Education study published in November found ''a dismaying inability by students to reason about information they see on the internet. Students, for example, had a hard time distinguishing advertisements from news articles or identifying where information came from. ... One assessment required middle schoolers to explain why they might not trust an article on financial planning that was written by a bank executive and sponsored by a bank. The researchers found that many students did not cite authorship or article sponsorship as key reasons for not believing the article.''

Prof. Sam Wineburg, the lead author of the report, said: ''Many people assume that because young people are fluent in social media they are equally perceptive about what they find there. Our work shows the opposite to be true.''

In an era when more and more of our lives have moved to this digital realm, that is downright scary.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170111ed1b0004m



Op-Ed Columnist
opinion
Bannon Versus Trump

By DAVID BROOKS 
875 words
10 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

It’ becoming clear that for the next few years American foreign policy will be shaped by the struggle among Republican regulars, populist ethno-nationalists and the forces of perpetual chaos unleashed by ’ attention span.

The Republican regulars build their grand strategies upon the post-World War II international order —he American-led alliances, norms and organizations that bind democracies and preserve global peace. The regulars seek to preserve and extend this order, and see as a wolf who tears away at it.

The populist ethno-nationalists in the Trump White House do not believe in this order. Their critique —hich is simultaneously moral, religious, economic, political and racial —s nicely summarized in the remarks Steve Bannon made to a Vatican conference in 2014.

Once there was a collection of Judeo-Christian nation-states, Bannon argued, that practiced a humane form of biblical capitalism and fostered culturally coherent communities. But in the past few decades, the party of Davos —ith its globalism, relativism, pluralism and diversity —as sapped away the moral foundations of this Judeo-Christian way of life.

Humane capitalism has been replaced by the savage capitalism that brought us the financial crisis. National democracy has been replaced by a crony-capitalist network of global elites. Traditional virtue has been replaced by abortion and gay marriage. Sovereign nation-states are being replaced by hapless multilateral organizations like the E.U.

Decadent and enervated, the West lies vulnerable in the face of a confident and convicted Islamofascism, which is the cosmic threat of our time.

In this view, Putin is a valuable ally precisely because he also seeks to replace the multiracial, multilingual global order with strong nation-states. Putin ardently defends traditional values. He knows how to take the fight to radical Islam.

It’ actually interesting to read Donald Trump’ ideologist, Bannon, next to Putin’ ideologist Alexander Dugin. It’ like going back to the 20th century and reading two versions of Marxism.

One is American Christian and the other orthodox Russian, but both have grandiose, sweeping theories of world history, both believe we’e in an apocalyptic clash of civilizations, both seamlessly combine economic, moral and political analysis. Both self-consciously see themselves as part of a loosely affiliated international populist movement, including the National Front in France, Nigel Farage in Britain and many others. about Trump last winter, and Bannon referred to Dugin in his Vatican remarks.

“e must create strategic alliances to overthrow the present order of things,”ugin has written, “f which the core could be described as human rights, anti-hierarchy and political correctness —verything that is the face of the Beast, the Antichrist.”

“e, the Judeo-Christian West, really have to look at what [Putin] is talking about as far as traditionalism goes,”annon said, “articularly the sense of where it supports the underpinnings of nationalism.”

Last week’ intelligence report on Russian hacking brought the Republican regulars, like John McCain and Lindsey Graham, into direct conflict with the ethno-nationalist populists. Trump planted himself firmly in the latter camp, and dragged Fox News and a surprising number of congressional Republicans with him.

If Trump were as effective as Putin, we’ probably see a radical shift in American grand strategy, a shift away from the postwar global consensus and toward an alliance with various right-wing populist movements simmering around the globe.

But Trump is no Putin. Putin is theological and cynical, disciplined and calculating, experienced and knowledgeable. When Bannon, Michael Flynn and others try to make Trump into a revolutionary foreign policy president, they will be taking on the entire foreign policy establishment under a leader who may sympathize with them, but is inattentive, unpredictable and basically uninterested in anything but his own status at the moment.

I’ personally betting the foreign policy apparatus, including the secretaries of state and defense, will grind down the populists around Trump. Frictions will explode within the insanely confusing lines of authority in the White House. Trump will find he likes hanging around the global establishment the way he liked having the Clintons at his wedding. In office he won’ be able to fixate on ISIS but will face a blizzard of problems, and thus be dependent on the established institutions.

The result may be a million astounding tweets, but substantively no fundamental strategic shift —ot terrible policy-making, but not good policy-making, either.

The larger battle is over ideas, whether the Republican Party as a whole will become an ethno-populist party like the National Front or the U.K. Independence Party. In this fight the populists might do better. There’ something malevolently forceful about their ideology, which does remind you of Marxism in its early days. There’ something flaccid about globalism, which is de-spiritualized and which doesn’ really have an answer for our economic and cultural problems.

In short, I suspect Steve Bannon is going to fail to corral the peripatetic brain of Donald Trump. But he may have more influence on the next generation.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on and , and sign up for the .

https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/10/opinion/10brooksWeb/10brooksWeb-articleLarge.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/10/opinion/10brooksWeb/10brooksWeb-jumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/10/opinion/10brooksWeb/10brooksWeb-superJumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/10/opinion/10brooksWeb/10brooksWeb-moth.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/10/opinion/10brooksWeb/10brooksWeb-articleInline.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/10/opinion/10brooksWeb/10brooksWeb-sfSpan.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/10/opinion/10brooksWeb/10brooksWeb-filmstrip.jpg | Stephen K. Bannon in December. | Todd Heisler/The New York Times 

Document INHT000020170110ed1a00005



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Ground Raid Kills a Midlevel  ISIS  Leader in Syria

By ERIC SCHMITT; Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting. 
885 words
10 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- United States Special Operations forces carried out a ground raid that killed an Islamic State leader in eastern Syria on Sunday, the Pentagon said, underscoring how the military is using risky commando missions and not just airstrikes to battle the militants.

A Defense Department spokesman, Capt. Jeff Davis, confirmed on Monday that the operation had occurred. But he dismissed a report by the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group based in London, that about 25 fighters had been killed in a two-hour raid in al-Kubar, a village in Deir al-Zour Province.

Captain Davis said that figure overstated the casualties by ''orders of magnitude,'' but he declined to say how many militants had been killed. He said no fighters had been detained in the operation, which did not involve rescuing any hostages, contrary to what some news reports indicated earlier on Monday.

A senior Defense Department official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss details of the operation, said the target of the raid was a midlevel Islamic State leader the American commandos were trying to capture and interrogate. But when the helicopter-borne commandos intercepted the vehicle carrying the leader, a firefight broke out and the suspect and another person in the car were killed. No Americans were injured.

Deir al-Zour, an oil-rich province that borders Iraq, is largely under Islamic State control and has been the focus of American-led airstrikes and other military action.

Since early 2015, the jihadists have besieged the provincial capital, also called Deir al-Zour, where about 200,000 people live. The Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, controls roughly half of the city, while the rest is held by forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.

Captain Davis said the raid was by the so-called expeditionary targeting force, a group of commandos from the secretive Joint Special Operations Command who target Islamic State leaders and fighters in Iraq and Syria.

The group has intensified drone strikes and raids in Syria in recent months against the Islamic State's external operations planners, who have inspired, supported and directed attacks in the West.

The Pentagon announced last month that a United States airstrike had killed three Islamic State operatives who were involved in mounting terrorist attacks in Europe, including the deadly assaults in Paris in November 2015.

In August, a strike by an armed Reaper drone killed Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, the Islamic State's spokesman, in a sign of what Pentagon officials said was the progress that the military's Special Operations forces and the Central Intelligence Agency have made in the conflict's two years by using information from spies on the ground and sensors in the sky to strike at Islamic State leaders.

Until his death, Mr. Adnani led the Islamic State's external operations branch, and he in turn relied on two lieutenants. Those men have been identified by other members of the group by their noms de guerre, Abu Souleymane and Abu Ahmad, and their real identities remain debated.

Beyond these figures, little is known about the hierarchy of the branch of the Islamic State responsible for projecting terrorism abroad. The Pentagon's announcement last month added at least three more names to the mix.

Salah Gourmat and Sammy Djedou, two of the three operatives the Pentagon said were killed last month, were described as ''close associates'' of Mr. Adnani who helped him plan and carry out the attacks that occurred in Paris on Nov. 13, 2015, leaving 130 people dead.

Killed along with the two Islamic state operatives was Walid Hamman, described as ''a suicide attack planner,'' who was convicted in absentia in Belgium for a plot that was thwarted in 2015.

On Monday, military officials did not identify the midlevel Islamic State leader targeted in Sunday's raid or explain why he was important enough to risk the lives of American commandos.

In similar operations, American officials have said that detailed personal information recovered from laptops, cellphones and other electronic devices and materials seized in the raids had helped attacks against important terrorist leaders.

After a Delta Force commando raid in May 2015 killed a top Islamic State leader at his home in eastern Syria, American intelligence agencies extracted valuable information about the Islamic State's leadership structure, financial operations and security measures by analyzing materials seized during the raid.

New insights yielded by that trove -- four to seven terabytes of data, according to one official -- included how the organization's leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, operates and tries to avoid being tracked by coalition forces.

That raid on the residence of the leader, Abu Sayyaf, described by American officials as the group's top financial officer, was one of the earliest major breakthroughs for American intelligence agencies in understanding the elusive terrorist network's operations in Syria and Iraq.

Abu Sayyaf's wife, Umm Sayyaf, who was captured in the operation, has provided information to investigators, one senior American official said.

When asked if Sunday's raid also probably scooped up valuable intelligence, Captain Davis said, ''You can infer that.''

Follow Eric Schmitt on Twitter @EricSchmittNYT .

Document NYTF000020170110ed1a00055



National Desk; SECTA
A 'Tells It Like It Is' Marine Who Is Not Exactly in Lock Step With His New Boss

By RON NIXON 
1,209 words
10 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Two years ago, Gen. John F. Kelly, then head of the United States Southern Command, delivered a dire warning to Congress: The nation was not focusing on the security threat presented by the financial and operational relationship between terrorist networks and drug smuggling organizations.

''Terrorist organizations could seek to leverage those same smuggling routes to move operatives with intent to cause grave harm to our citizens or even bring weapons of mass destruction into the United States,'' General Kelly said.

Now General Kelly, 66, is President-elect Donald J. Trump's choice to lead the Department of Homeland Security, and his view of the threat to the southern border is likely to be the subject of questioning during his confirmation hearing on Tuesday.

The department, with a budget of more than $40 billion and more than 240,000 workers, is responsible for border security, immigration control, responding to natural disasters, cybersecurity and screening passengers at airports, among other duties.

As the commander of about 1,000 military personnel spread over several states and different service branches, General Kelly oversaw an organization with a role similar to that of the department he has been chosen to lead.

General Kelly is expected to be easily confirmed by the Senate Homeland Security Committee, and then by the full Senate. He would be the first noncivilian to head the department since it was created in response to the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

The department has been troubled by low morale and overlapping or conflicting missions among its various agencies.

But General Kelly's biggest challenges might come from within the new Trump administration, particularly over the threat posed by Russia and over Mr. Trump's plan to build a border wall and to increase the number of border agents.

In previous congressional testimony, General Kelly has often called Russia a threat to United States leadership in the Western Hemisphere. He has argued that under President Vladimir V. Putin, Russia had returned to Cold War tactics to challenge the United States in Central and South America.

He has also called for a more balanced approach to protecting the borders, saying security cannot ''be attempted as an endless series of 'goal-line stands' on the one-foot line at the official ports of entry or along the thousands of miles of border between this country and Mexico.'' He has supported increased aid for economic development, education and a focus on human rights to combat unauthorized immigration and drug trafficking.

''He's a Marine; he tells it like it is,'' said Leon E. Panetta, the former defense secretary. ''He'll speak truth to power, no matter who it is. The new administration will benefit from someone like John Kelly as it finds its footing.'' General Kelly served as the senior military assistant to Mr. Panetta.

As the leader of the Southern Command from 2012 to 2016, General Kelly oversaw a sprawling area that covered 32 countries in the Caribbean, Central America and South America.

He also worked closely with Customs and Border Protection and the Coast Guard, two agencies within the Department of Homeland Security that he has praised in testimony before Congress.

In addition, General Kelly has worked with military, law enforcement and political officials from dozens of countries in Central and South America, and he grasps the socioeconomic and geopolitical situation in the region, other officials say, experiences that will be crucial if he is confirmed.

Adm. James G. Stavridis, a retired Navy officer and another former head of the Southern Command, said that General Kelly's background made him an ideal choice.

''The job at the Southern Command is the perfect preparation to be secretary of Homeland Security because it overlaps with many of the missions of D.H.S.,'' said Admiral Stavridis, who is the dean of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University.

Unlike many of Mr. Trump's nominees for cabinet positions, General Kelly has drawn praise from Republicans and Democrats.

He has been described as a blunt but pragmatic military officer whose assessment of threats to the border and views on immigration transcend partisanship.

Alejandro Mayorkas, who served as deputy secretary of Homeland Security in the Obama administration, called General Kelly an ''extraordinary partner'' of the department during his tenure at the Southern Command.

''He took a very thoughtful and strategic approach to battling smuggling organizations seeking to penetrate the southwest border,'' Mr. Mayorkas said.

Senator Ron Johnson, Republican of Wisconsin and chairman of the Senate Homeland Security Committee, said, ''General Kelly has a firm understanding of the threats facing the United States at home and abroad, including the threat from ISIS and other extremists.''

Representative Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, the top Democrat on the House Homeland Security Committee, praised General Kelly for his experience in managing ''large, complex organizations.''

But Mr. Thompson said he was nevertheless worried about some of the nominee's more alarmist past statements about border security, such as when he implied that terrorists were crossing the southern border and entering the United States.

Immigration advocates have voiced similar concerns.

''It seems to be designed to get Congress riled up and increase funding,'' said Adam Isacson, a senior associate for regional security policy at the Washington Office on Latin America, a nonprofit research and rights group.

In congressional testimony, General Kelly has often cited ties between drug trafficking organizations and terrorist groups. For example, he said that supporters of Hezbollah in Lebanese communities in Latin America were engaged in money laundering and other illicit activities that generated profits for the group. According to the State Department's latest Country Reports on Terrorism, supporters in the region are engaged in efforts to build Hezbollah's ''infrastructure in South America and fund-raising, both through licit and illicit means.'' But the report and intelligence analysts say there is no indication that the group is engaged in plans to carry out terrorist attacks against the United States.

One of General Kelly's most contentious statements, however, was that 500,000 Americans had died from terrorism connected to the drug trade.

''You know, since 9/11, there's half a million people have died from narco-terrorism, as we call it, in, down where I live,'' General Kelly told members of Congress in 2015. ''Very few have died from, you know, traditional terrorism, if you will, since 9/11.''

Mr. Isacson said other analysts who study violence in Latin America doubt General Kelly's claim that a half-million people had died as a result of terrorism connected to the drug trade. Official estimates put the number of Americans who have died as result of terrorism over all since the Sept. 11 attacks at fewer than 1,000.

Still, Mr. Isacson said, General Kelly was always open to meeting with rights organizations.

''I didn't know him to be someone who had any antipathy toward migrants,'' he said.

Gen. John Kelly at Trump Tower. ''He'll speak truth to power, no matter who it is,'' said Leon Panetta, a former defense secretary. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HILARY SWIFT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170110ed1a0004y



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Is Suspected After Attack on Police Checkpoint in Sinai

By NOUR YOUSSEF; Declan Walsh contributed reporting. 
459 words
10 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CAIRO -- Gunmen assaulted a police checkpoint in the Sinai Peninsula of Egypt on Monday, killing at least nine people and wounding 12, an Egyptian police spokesman said, and Islamic State militants were suspected to be behind it.

The complex attack, which the police said involved rocket-propelled grenades and rifle fire as well as a failed attempt to ram the checkpoint with a truck bomb, was one of the largest in Sinai in recent months.

The attack came a month after the bombing of a Cairo church that killed at least 28 worshipers. Islamist militants, most affiliated with the Islamic State, have been pressing a twin-pronged war in Egypt, attacking the security forces in remote Sinai while striking civilian and police targets in major cities.

About 20 masked militants, some wearing military fatigues, were involved in Monday's assault in El Arish, the main town in northern Sinai, said Tarek Attiya, a police spokesman. Initially, some used rocket-propelled grenades, the police said.

At least one attacker tried to ram the checkpoint with a vehicle loaded with explosives. In a statement, the police said they had blown up the truck before it reached the checkpoint. And, in security camera footage released by the police, an attacker can be seen running away from a truck, carrying a suicide belt and being shot and falling to the ground.

The police account of the assault could not be independently verified, as the Egyptian authorities have blocked access to Sinai for most news media outlets.

State news media reported that the attack damaged cars and houses in the area.

Although there was no immediate claim of responsibility for Monday's attack, most violence against the security forces in Sinai in recent months has been carried out by the local affiliate of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

The Islamic State also claimed responsibility for a bombing last month on the grounds of St. Mark's, the main Coptic Orthodox church in Cairo, during Sunday Mass.

There was heavy security at Orthodox churches across Egypt this past weekend for celebrations to mark the Orthodox Christmas on Saturday.

''Today's attack was bigger than usual because we have had a very good couple of weeks and a peaceful Christmas,'' said Mr. Attiya, the police spokesman. ''They are trying to avenge their losses and stir things up again.''

Mr. Attiya said the police had killed five militants and were searching for the others. Officers are also searching for a separate group of militants who attacked a different checkpoint later in the day in El Arish and killed one police officer, he said.

Document NYTF000020170110ed1a0004d



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
Bannon vs. Trump

By DAVID BROOKS 
880 words
10 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
21
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

It's becoming clear that for the next few years American foreign policy will be shaped by the struggle among Republican regulars, populist ethno-nationalists and the forces of perpetual chaos unleashed by Donald Trump's attention span.

The Republican regulars build their grand strategies upon the post-World War II international order -- the American-led alliances, norms and organizations that bind democracies and preserve global peace. The regulars seek to preserve and extend this order, and see Vladimir Putin as a wolf who tears away at it.

The populist ethno-nationalists in the Trump White House do not believe in this order. Their critique -- which is simultaneously moral, religious, economic, political and racial -- is nicely summarized in the remarks Steve Bannon made to a Vatican conference in 2014.

Once there was a collection of Judeo-Christian nation-states, Bannon argued, that practiced a humane form of biblical capitalism and fostered culturally coherent communities. But in the past few decades, the party of Davos -- with its globalism, relativism, pluralism and diversity -- has sapped away the moral foundations of this Judeo-Christian way of life.

Humane capitalism has been replaced by the savage capitalism that brought us the financial crisis. National democracy has been replaced by a crony-capitalist network of global elites. Traditional virtue has been replaced by abortion and gay marriage. Sovereign nation-states are being replaced by hapless multilateral organizations like the E.U.

Decadent and enervated, the West lies vulnerable in the face of a confident and convicted Islamofascism, which is the cosmic threat of our time.

In this view, Putin is a valuable ally precisely because he also seeks to replace the multiracial, multilingual global order with strong nation-states. Putin ardently defends traditional values. He knows how to take the fight to radical Islam.

It's actually interesting to read Donald Trump's ideologist, Bannon, next to Putin's ideologist Alexander Dugin. It's like going back to the 20th century and reading two versions of Marxism.

One is American Christian and the other orthodox Russian, but both have grandiose, sweeping theories of world history, both believe we're in an apocalyptic clash of civilizations, both seamlessly combine economic, moral and political analysis. Both self-consciously see themselves as part of a loosely affiliated international populist movement, including the National Front in France, Nigel Farage in Britain and many others. Dugin wrote positively about Trump last winter, and Bannon referred to Dugin in his Vatican remarks.

''We must create strategic alliances to overthrow the present order of things,'' Dugin has written, ''of which the core could be described as human rights, anti-hierarchy and political correctness -- everything that is the face of the Beast, the Antichrist.''

''We, the Judeo-Christian West, really have to look at what [Putin] is talking about as far as traditionalism goes,'' Bannon said, ''particularly the sense of where it supports the underpinnings of nationalism.''

Last week's intelligence report on Russian hacking brought the Republican regulars, like John McCain and Lindsey Graham, into direct conflict with the ethno-nationalist populists. Trump planted himself firmly in the latter camp, and dragged Fox News and a surprising number of congressional Republicans with him.

If Trump were as effective as Putin, we'd probably see a radical shift in American grand strategy, a shift away from the postwar global consensus and toward an alliance with various right-wing populist movements simmering around the globe.

But Trump is no Putin. Putin is theological and cynical, disciplined and calculating, experienced and knowledgeable. When Bannon, Michael Flynn and others try to make Trump into a revolutionary foreign policy president, they will be taking on the entire foreign policy establishment under a leader who may sympathize with them, but is inattentive, unpredictable and basically uninterested in anything but his own status at the moment.

I'm personally betting the foreign policy apparatus, including the secretaries of state and defense, will grind down the populists around Trump. Frictions will explode within the insanely confusing lines of authority in the White House. Trump will find he likes hanging around the global establishment the way he liked having the Clintons at his wedding. In office he won't be able to fixate on ISIS but will face a blizzard of problems, and thus be dependent on the established institutions.

The result may be a million astounding tweets, but substantively no fundamental strategic shift -- not terrible policy-making, but not good policy-making, either.

The larger battle is over ideas, whether the Republican Party as a whole will become an ethno-populist party like the National Front or the U.K. Independence Party. In this fight the populists might do better. There's something malevolently forceful about their ideology, which does remind you of Marxism in its early days. There's something flaccid about globalism, which is de-spiritualized and which doesn't really have an answer for our economic and cultural problems.

In short, I suspect Steve Bannon is going to fail to corral the peripatetic brain of Donald Trump. But he may have more influence on the next generation.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170110ed1a0003y



Op-Ed Columnist
Opinion
Bannon Versus Trump

By DAVID BROOKS 
889 words
10 January 2017
09:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

It’ becoming clear that for the next few years American foreign policy will be shaped by the struggle among Republican regulars, populist ethno-nationalists and the forces of perpetual chaos unleashed by Donald Trump’ attention span.

The Republican regulars build their grand strategies upon the post-World War II international order —he American-led alliances, norms and organizations that bind democracies and preserve global peace. The regulars seek to preserve and extend this order, and see Vladimir Putin as a wolf who tears away at it.

The populist ethno-nationalists in the Trump White House do not believe in this order. Their critique —hich is simultaneously moral, religious, economic, political and racial —s nicely summarized in the remarks Steve Bannon made to a Vatican conference in 2014.

Once there was a collection of Judeo-Christian nation-states, Bannon argued, that practiced a humane form of biblical capitalism and fostered culturally coherent communities. But in the past few decades, the party of Davos —ith its globalism, relativism, pluralism and diversity —as sapped away the moral foundations of this Judeo-Christian way of life.

Humane capitalism has been replaced by the savage capitalism that brought us the financial crisis. National democracy has been replaced by a crony-capitalist network of global elites. Traditional virtue has been replaced by abortion and gay marriage. Sovereign nation-states are being replaced by hapless multilateral organizations like the E.U.

Decadent and enervated, the West lies vulnerable in the face of a confident and convicted Islamofascism, which is the cosmic threat of our time.

In this view, Putin is a valuable ally precisely because he also seeks to replace the multiracial, multilingual global order with strong nation-states. Putin ardently defends traditional values. He knows how to take the fight to radical Islam.

It’ actually interesting to read Donald Trump’ ideologist, Bannon, next to Putin’ ideologist Alexander Dugin. It’ like going back to the 20th century and reading two versions of Marxism.

One is American Christian and the other orthodox Russian, but both have grandiose, sweeping theories of world history, both believe we’e in an apocalyptic clash of civilizations, both seamlessly combine economic, moral and political analysis. Both self-consciously see themselves as part of a loosely affiliated international populist movement, including the National Front in France, Nigel Farage in Britain and many others. Dugin wrote positively about Trump last winter, and Bannon referred to Dugin in his Vatican remarks.

“e must create strategic alliances to overthrow the present order of things,”ugin has written, “f which the core could be described as human rights, anti-hierarchy and political correctness —verything that is the face of the Beast, the Antichrist.”

“e, the Judeo-Christian West, really have to look at what [Putin] is talking about as far as traditionalism goes,”annon said, “articularly the sense of where it supports the underpinnings of nationalism.”

Last week’ intelligence report on Russian hacking brought the Republican regulars, like John McCain and Lindsey Graham, into direct conflict with the ethno-nationalist populists. Trump planted himself firmly in the latter camp, and dragged Fox News and a surprising number of congressional Republicans with him.

If Trump were as effective as Putin, we’ probably see a radical shift in American grand strategy, a shift away from the postwar global consensus and toward an alliance with various right-wing populist movements simmering around the globe.

But Trump is no Putin. Putin is theological and cynical, disciplined and calculating, experienced and knowledgeable. When Bannon, Michael Flynn and others try to make Trump into a revolutionary foreign policy president, they will be taking on the entire foreign policy establishment under a leader who may sympathize with them, but is inattentive, unpredictable and basically uninterested in anything but his own status at the moment.

I’ personally betting the foreign policy apparatus, including the secretaries of state and defense, will grind down the populists around Trump. Frictions will explode within the insanely confusing lines of authority in the White House. Trump will find he likes hanging around the global establishment the way he liked having the Clintons at his wedding. In office he won’ be able to fixate on ISIS but will face a blizzard of problems, and thus be dependent on the established institutions.

The result may be a million astounding tweets, but substantively no fundamental strategic shift —ot terrible policy-making, but not good policy-making, either.

The larger battle is over ideas, whether the Republican Party as a whole will become an ethno-populist party like the National Front or the U.K. Independence Party. In this fight the populists might do better. There’ something malevolently forceful about their ideology, which does remind you of Marxism in its early days. There’ something flaccid about globalism, which is de-spiritualized and which doesn’ really have an answer for our economic and cultural problems.

In short, I suspect Steve Bannon is going to fail to corral the peripatetic brain of Donald Trump. But he may have more influence on the next generation.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Stephen K. Bannon in December. | Todd Heisler/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170110ed1a002e6



world
U.S. Commandos Kill Midlevel  ISIS  Leader in Syria

By ERIC SCHMITT 
865 words
9 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —nited States Special Operations forces carried out a ground raid that killed an Islamic State leader in eastern on Sunday, the Pentagon said, underscoring how the military is using risky commando missions and not just airstrikes to battle the militants.

A Defense Department spokesman, Capt. Jeff Davis, confirmed on Monday that the operation had occurred. But he dismissed a report by the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group based in London, that about 25 fighters had been killed in a two-hour raid in al-Kubar, a village in Deir al-Zour Province.

Captain Davis said that figure overstated the casualties by “rders of magnitude,”ut he declined to say how many militants had been killed. He said no fighters had been detained in the operation, which did not involve rescuing any hostages, contrary to what some news reports indicated earlier on Monday.

A senior Defense Department official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss details of the operation, said the target of the raid was a midlevel Islamic State leader the American commandos were trying to capture and interrogate. But when the helicopter-borne commandos intercepted the vehicle carrying the leader, a firefight broke out and the suspect and another person in the car were killed. No Americans were injured.

Deir al-Zour, an oil-rich province that borders Iraq, is largely under Islamic State control and has been the focus of American-led airstrikes and other military action.

Since early 2015, the jihadists have besieged the provincial capital, also called Deir al-Zour, where about 200,000 people live. The Islamic State, also known as or ISIL, controls roughly half of the city, while the rest is held by forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.

Captain Davis said the raid was by the so-called expeditionary targeting force, a group of commandos from the secretive Joint Special Operations Command who target Islamic State leaders and fighters in Iraq and Syria.

The group has intensified drone strikes and raids in Syria in recent months against the Islamic State’ external operations planners, who have inspired, supported and directed attacks in the West.

The Pentagon announced last month that a United States airstrike had who were involved in mounting terrorist attacks in Europe, including the deadly assaults in Paris in November 2015.

In August, a strike by an armed Reaper drone , the Islamic State’ spokesman, in a sign of what Pentagon officials said was the progress that the military’ Special Operations forces and the Central Intelligence Agency have made in the conflict’ two years by using information from spies on the ground and sensors in the sky to strike at Islamic State leaders.

Until his death, Mr. Adnani led the Islamic State’ external operations branch, and he in turn relied on two lieutenants. Those men have been identified by other members of the group by their noms de guerre, Abu Souleymane and Abu Ahmad, and their real identities remain debated.

Beyond these figures, little is known about the hierarchy of the branch of the Islamic State responsible for projecting terrorism abroad. The Pentagon’ announcement last month added at least three more names to the mix.

Salah Gourmat and Sammy Djedou, two of the three operatives the Pentagon said were killed last month, were described as “lose associates”f Mr. Adnani who helped him plan and carry out the attacks that occurred in Paris on Nov. 13, 2015, leaving 130 people dead.

Killed along with the two Islamic state operatives was Walid Hamman, described as “ suicide attack planner,”ho was convicted in absentia in Belgium for a plot that was thwarted in 2015.

On Monday, military officials did not identify the midlevel Islamic State leader targeted in Sunday’ raid or explain why he was important enough to risk the lives of American commandos.

In similar operations, American officials have said that detailed personal information recovered from laptops, cellphones and other electronic devices and materials seized in the raids had helped attacks against important terrorist leaders.

After killed a top Islamic State leader at his home in eastern Syria, American intelligence agencies extracted valuable information about the Islamic State’ leadership structure, financial operations and security measures by analyzing materials seized during the raid.

New insights yielded by that trove —our to seven terabytes of data, according to one official —ncluded how the organization’ leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, operates and tries to avoid being tracked by coalition forces.

That raid on the residence of the leader, Abu Sayyaf, described by American officials as the group’ top financial officer, was one of the earliest major breakthroughs for American intelligence agencies in understanding the elusive terrorist network’ operations in Syria and Iraq.

Abu Sayyaf’ wife, Umm Sayyaf, who was captured in the operation, has provided information to investigators, one senior American official said.

When asked if Sunday’ raid also probably scooped up valuable intelligence, Captain Davis said, “ou can infer that.”

Follow Eric Schmitt on Twitter @EricSchmittNYT. Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting.

Related Articles

Document INHT000020170110ed190000z



World
U.S. Commandos Kill Midlevel  ISIS  Leader in Syria

By ERIC SCHMITT 
892 words
9 January 2017
14:41
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —nited States Special Operations forces carried out a ground raid that killed an Islamic State leader in eastern Syria on Sunday, the Pentagon said, underscoring how the military is using risky commando missions and not just airstrikes to battle the militants.

A Defense Department spokesman, Capt. Jeff Davis, confirmed on Monday that the operation had occurred. But he dismissed a report by the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group based in London, that about 25 fighters had been killed in a two-hour raid in al-Kubar, a village in Deir al-Zour Province.

Captain Davis said that figure overstated the casualties by “rders of magnitude,”ut he declined to say how many militants had been killed. He said no fighters had been detained in the operation, which did not involve rescuing any hostages, contrary to what some news reports indicated earlier on Monday.

A senior Defense Department official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss details of the operation, said the target of the raid was a midlevel Islamic State leader the American commandos were trying to capture and interrogate. But when the helicopter-borne commandos intercepted the vehicle carrying the leader, a firefight broke out and the suspect and another person in the car were killed. No Americans were injured.

Deir al-Zour, an oil-rich province that borders Iraq, is largely under Islamic State control and has been the focus of American-led airstrikes and other military action.

Since early 2015, the jihadists have besieged the provincial capital, also called Deir al-Zour, where about 200,000 people live. The Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL, controls roughly half of the city, while the rest is held by forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.

Captain Davis said the raid was by the so-called expeditionary targeting force, a group of commandos from the secretive Joint Special Operations Command who target Islamic State leaders and fighters in Iraq and Syria.

The group has intensified drone strikes and raids in Syria in recent months against the Islamic State’ external operations planners, who have inspired, supported and directed attacks in the West.

The Pentagon announced last month that a United States airstrike had killed three Islamic State operatives who were involved in mounting terrorist attacks in Europe, including the deadly assaults in Paris in November 2015.

In August, a strike by an armed Reaper drone killed Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, the Islamic State’ spokesman, in a sign of what Pentagon officials said was the progress that the military’ Special Operations forces and the Central Intelligence Agency have made in the conflict’ two years by using information from spies on the ground and sensors in the sky to strike at Islamic State leaders.

Until his death, Mr. Adnani led the Islamic State’ external operations branch, and he in turn relied on two lieutenants. Those men have been identified by other members of the group by their noms de guerre, Abu Souleymane and Abu Ahmad, and their real identities remain debated.

Beyond these figures, little is known about the hierarchy of the branch of the Islamic State responsible for projecting terrorism abroad. The Pentagon’ announcement last month added at least three more names to the mix.

Salah Gourmat and Sammy Djedou, two of the three operatives the Pentagon said were killed last month, were described as “lose associates”f Mr. Adnani who helped him plan and carry out the attacks that occurred in Paris on Nov. 13, 2015, leaving 130 people dead.

Killed along with the two Islamic state operatives was Walid Hamman, described as “ suicide attack planner,”ho was convicted in absentia in Belgium for a plot that was thwarted in 2015.

On Monday, military officials did not identify the midlevel Islamic State leader targeted in Sunday’ raid or explain why he was important enough to risk the lives of American commandos.

In similar operations, American officials have said that detailed personal information recovered from laptops, cellphones and other electronic devices and materials seized in the raids had helped attacks against important terrorist leaders.

After a Delta Force commando raid in May 2015 killed a top Islamic State leader at his home in eastern Syria, American intelligence agencies extracted valuable information about the Islamic State’ leadership structure, financial operations and security measures by analyzing materials seized during the raid.

New insights yielded by that trove —our to seven terabytes of data, according to one official —ncluded how the organization’ leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, operates and tries to avoid being tracked by coalition forces.

That raid on the residence of the leader, Abu Sayyaf, described by American officials as the group’ top financial officer, was one of the earliest major breakthroughs for American intelligence agencies in understanding the elusive terrorist network’ operations in Syria and Iraq.

Abu Sayyaf’ wife, Umm Sayyaf, who was captured in the operation, has provided information to investigators, one senior American official said.

When asked if Sunday’ raid also probably scooped up valuable intelligence, Captain Davis said, “ou can infer that.”

Follow Eric Schmitt on Twitter @EricSchmittNYT. Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting.

* Airstrikes by Russia Buttress Turkey in Battle vs. \b ISIS\b0 

Document NYTFEED020170109ed19003e9



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Strikes by Russia Buttress Turkey in Battle vs.  ISIS 

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,357 words
9 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Russian warplanes have carried out airstrikes to support Turkey's offensive in northern Syria against the Islamic State, an important evolution in a budding Russian-Turkish partnership. The deepening ties threaten to marginalize the United States in the struggle to shape Syria's ultimate fate.

The air missions, which took place for about a week near the strategically important town of Al Bab, represent the Kremlin's first use of its military might to help the Turks in their fight against the militant group. The Russians seized an opening to try to build a military relationship with Turkey, a NATO member, as the United States has sought to keep the emphasis on taking Raqqa, the Islamic State's self-declared capital.

The Russian bombing is a remarkable turnabout from November 2015, when a Turkish F-16 fighter jet shot down a Russian Su-24 attack plane that had violated Turkey's airspace.

Russia and Turkey had already been involved in a joint effort to establish a cease-fire in Syria -- one that does not involve the United States. At the same time, ties between the United States and Turkey have come under growing strain as the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, has become increasingly alarmed about the Kurdish forces known as the Y.P.G. The United States has aligned itself with those forces to combat the Islamic State in Syria.

Some analysts say Russia appears to have arrived at an accommodation in which the Turks are moving to establish a security zone in northern Syria to preclude Syrian Kurds from setting up an autonomous region. In return, the Turks appear to be backing off their efforts to unseat President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, who, with Russian help, is strengthening his hold on the country's major cities to the south.

''The Russian-Turkish rapprochement is largely tactical,'' said James F. Jeffrey, a former United States ambassador to Turkey. ''Russia can live for now with a Turkish enclave in northern Syria if it does not threaten the Assad regime. And it allows Russia to exploit the U.S. shift to Turkey's rival, the Y.P.G., by providing air support to the Turks against the Islamic State, which the U.S. inexplicably is not providing.''

President-elect Donald J. Trump has spoken positively, though in vague terms, about the possibility of cooperating with Russia in the fight against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. But the Obama administration's efforts to forge a common political and military strategy with the Kremlin on Syria collapsed after Russia supported Syrian forces and Iranian-backed fighters with its air power in the brutal retaking of Aleppo.

Turkey began the operation at Al Bab, east of Aleppo, without coordinating with the United States and without the benefit of American airstrikes. ''This is something that they've decided to do independently,'' Col. John Dorrian, the spokesman for the American-led operation against the Islamic State, said in November.

Turkey appeared to have assumed that it would make short work of the Islamic State fighters there. But the fighting has been stiff. In late November, the Turkish military's problems were compounded when three of its soldiers were killed in what Turkish forces said was a Syrian airstrike.

Mr. Erdogan later spoke by phone with Vladimir V. Putin, the Russian president, who assured him that Russia had not been involved in the air attack, according to Turkish news reports. The improving ties between the two autocratic leaders opened the door to greater cooperation.

The Turkish military spoke publicly about the Russian role in a Jan. 2 statement that noted that Russian warplanes had struck targets the previous day about five miles south of Al Bab. American officials, who asked not to be identified because they were discussing intelligence, said that Russian airstrikes in the Al Bab area began at the end of December, and that Russian aircraft were flying near Al Bab as recently as Friday.

The effectiveness of the Russian air operations, which have mainly involved dropping ''dumb,'' or unguided, bombs, is unclear. As Turkey's casualties have mounted in the Al Bab operation, Turkish officials have complained about the lack of American air support and have even made veiled threats that Turkey might suspend allied combat flights against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria from its major base at Incirlik, which would be a major blow to the American-led air campaign.

American officials suggested that the holdup in carrying out allied airstrikes in recent weeks was related to a Turkish decision to ban the Americans from flying reconnaissance drones in and around Al Bab to help identify and confirm targets, as well as bad weather. The Turkish military said that measure was needed to ensure that no potentially hostile aircraft flew over its troops, but it has hampered the United States' ability to carry out airstrikes without endangering civilians.

Operating without the benefit of precise intelligence, the United States recently engaged in what officials called a ''show of force'' operation in which American aircraft flew low over Al Bab and dropped flares. But last week, the Turks agreed that the United States could fly drones and other aircraft to gather intelligence, which paves the way for the American-led coalition to carry out airstrikes against the Islamic State in Al Bab, American officials said.

The United States regards the Kurdish forces as some of the most effective fighters in the campaign against the Islamic State in Syria. But in deference to Turkish sensitivities, the Americans have declined to arm them directly. The Turks, however, regard them as nothing more than an arm of the Kurdistan Workers' Party, an insurgent Kurdish group in Turkey and Iraq. The Turks have blamed the group for killing dozens of Turkish security forces in recent weeks.

By any measure, the nascent cooperation between Russia and Turkey is a striking development. The situation was far different when Russian warplanes arrived at Latakia, Syria, in September 2015 to help the Assad government take on rebel groups, including some backed by the United States and Turkey.

Relations were thrown into a crisis after a Turkish fighter jet shot down a Russian Su-24 attack plane and the Russian pilot was fatally shot by Syrian rebels as he was parachuting down. Mr. Putin denounced the shoot-down as a ''stab in the back.'' Russia responded by deploying the S-400, an advanced air-defense system, at Latakia, and imposed economic sanctions against Turkey.

But over the past year, the calculations of the two countries have changed. While President Obama warned that Syria would become a Russian military ''quagmire,'' the Russians, working with Iran, Iranian-backed forces and the Syrian military, helped Mr. Assad take back Aleppo in the waning months of the Obama administration without substantial Russian casualties.

Still, Russia has to reckon with the fact that the Syrian military lacks the troops to control all of the country. At the same time, Turkey's immediate objectives have shifted. Worried about the possibility that Kurdish fighters might link up separate cantons to establish an autonomous enclave across northern Syria, as well as about the presence of Islamic State fighters near its borders, Turkey sent its own forces into northern Syria in August.

The Turkish offensive, which has enlisted the support of Syrian opposition groups that Turkey has backed, succeeded in taking the town of Jarabulus. But it has become bogged down near Al Bab, the last major town west of Raqqa still held by the Islamic State.

The Russians notified the United States about the flights using a special hotline between Russian forces in Syria and the American air war command at Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar. The hotline's goal is to ''deconflict'' air missions carried out by the Russians and the American-led coalition.

Presidents Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and Vladimir V. Putin of Russia at the World Energy Congress in October. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EMRAH GUREL/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A3) 

Document NYTF000020170109ed190004e



Foreign Desk; SECTA
4 Are Killed as Truck Driver Rams Group of Israeli Soldiers

By ISABEL KERSHNER; Reporting was contributed by Myra Noveck from Jerusalem; Rami Nazzal from Ramallah, West Bank; Majd al-Waheidi from Gaza; and Sewell Chan from London. 
1,059 words
9 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

JERUSALEM -- A Palestinian driver plowed a truck into a group of Israeli soldiers as they were getting off a bus in Jerusalem on Sunday afternoon, killing four and injuring 17 others, according to the police and witnesses.

The police called the episode an act of terrorism. Micky Rosenfeld, a police spokesman, said the attacker had been shot, and the police released images showing the truck's windshield riddled with bullet holes.

The dead included three female soldiers and one male soldier, the Israeli military confirmed. Several people were hospitalized, some with critical injuries.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu visited the scene of the attack and said the perpetrator was ''by all indications a supporter of the Islamic State.''

''This is part of the same pattern inspired by Islamic State, by ISIS, that we saw first in France, then in Germany and now in Jerusalem. This is part of the same ongoing battle against this global scourge of the new terrorism,'' he added.

Mr. Netanyahu has often made the comparison between local attacks against Israelis and those in the rest of the world, though the attacks in Israel are more broadly viewed as being more connected to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

While the Israeli security services have described a few Palestinian attackers as having been inspired by the ideology of the Islamic State, no direct links have been established between them and the organization.

The attack on Sunday occurred on the Armon Hanatziv Promenade, a popular tourist spot between East Jerusalem and West Jerusalem that offers sweeping views of the Old City.

The four soldiers killed were Erez Orbach, 20, from Alon Shvut, in the West Bank; Yael Yekutiel, 20, from Givatayim, near Tel Aviv; Shir Hajaja, 22, from Maale Adumim in the West Bank; and Shira Tzur, 20, from Haifa.

The violence ended several months of relative calm in the contested city, after a period of frequent stabbings, shootings and car attacks.

It also underlined the volatility of the situation at a time when President-elect Donald J. Trump has promised to move the United States Embassy to Jerusalem from Tel Aviv, a potentially explosive step that American administrations have avoided for decades. Palestinian officials say it would destroy the chances of any peace process by prejudging the outcome, and some have said it would constitute a declaration of war against Palestinians.

Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank, said on Friday that the Palestinians would view any such change in the status quo in Jerusalem as the crossing of a red line. Mosque preachers addressed the proposed embassy move in their sermons during Friday prayers, apparently on the instruction of the Palestinian Authority.

The Palestinians demand East Jerusalem as the capital of a future Palestinian state. Israel captured the area from Jordan in the 1967 war and claims sovereignty there.

Hamas, the Islamic militant group that holds sway in Gaza, praised Sunday's attack, without taking responsibility for it. Fawzi Barhoum, a Hamas official, described it as a ''courageous and heroic operation.'' In Gaza City, people were handing out sweets to passers-by in celebration.

Nickolay Mladenov, the United Nations special coordinator for the Middle East peace process, condemned the attack in a statement. ''It is reprehensible that some choose to glorify such acts, which undermine the possibility of a peaceful future for both Palestinians and Israelis,'' he said. ''There is nothing heroic in such actions.''

The Palestinian official news agency, WAFA, identified the driver of the truck as Fadi Ahmad Al-Qunbar, 28, a resident of the nearby Palestinian neighborhood of Jabel Mukaber in East Jerusalem. Ribhi Ewiysat, a resident of the neighborhood, said that a large number of Israeli security forces had entered the area and were at the attacker's house.

Chaim Newman, a tour guide who was accompanying the group of soldiers at the scene, told Israel Radio, ''The soldiers got off the bus, and we were getting organized when suddenly the truck came with great speed and rammed into the group.''

''Civilians and soldiers began shooting, and this prevented a worse tragedy,'' he added. ''He rammed them a number of times, going into reverse and forward in order to hurt more people.''

Chen Lendi Sharon, a paramedic from the Magen David Adom ambulance service, said there was ''chaos on the scene'' when she arrived. ''I saw a truck that rammed youngsters getting off the bus next to the Armon Hanatziv observation point.''

Ms. Lendi Sharon said that at least 10 people were trapped under the bus or were lying on the grass by the road.

The attack occurred around 1:30 p.m. Dozens of soldiers were getting off buses at the site as part of a routine educational tour of Jerusalem. Aged 18 to 21, they were cadets from an officers' course, Israel Radio reported.

About two hours after the attack, the truck, a white flatbed with a crane on the back, remained at the scene and an ambulance was still removing bodies. Dovy Meyer, a spokesman for the United Hatzalah ambulance service who was at the scene, said that around 100 soldiers had been milling about when the attack occurred.

A spate of deadly stabbings, shootings and car attacks began in October 2015 and quickly spread from Jerusalem and the West Bank to cities around Israel. More than 30 Israelis and two American visitors were among those killed in the attacks. More than 240 Palestinians have been killed during that period, many of them while carrying out or intending to carry out attacks, according to Israeli officials.

Several attackers have come from the Jabel Mukaber neighborhood. Mr. Netanyahu said the neighborhood had been ''encircled'' by security forces on Sunday.

Follow Isabel Kershner on Twitter @IKershner.

Seventeen people were injured in the attack in Jerusalem on Sunday. The police, who called the episode an act of terrorism, said the attacker, a Palestinian, had been shot. (A4); soldier was consoled after the attack in Jerusalem. The violence ended several months of relative calm in the contested city. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MENAHEM KAHANA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A7) 

Document NYTF000020170109ed1900045



U.S.; Politics
Airstrikes by Russia Buttress Turkey in Battle vs.  ISIS 

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,389 words
9 January 2017
03:28
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —ussian warplanes have carried out airstrikes to support Turkey’ offensive in northern Syria against the Islamic State, an important evolution in a budding Russian-Turkish partnership. The deepening ties threaten to marginalize the United States in the struggle to shape Syria’ ultimate fate.

The air missions, which took place for about a week near the strategically important town of Al Bab, represent the Kremlin’ first use of its military might to help the Turks in their fight against the militant group. The Russians seized an opening to try to build a military relationship with Turkey, a NATO member, as the United States has sought to keep the emphasis on taking Raqqa, the Islamic State’ self-declared capital.

The Russian bombing is a remarkable turnabout from November 2015, when a Turkish F-16 fighter jet shot down a Russian Su-24 attack plane that had violated Turkey’ airspace.

Russia and Turkey had already been involved in a joint effort to establish a cease-fire in Syria —ne that does not involve the United States. At the same time, ties between the United States and Turkey have come under growing strain as the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, has become increasingly alarmed about the Kurdish forces known as the Y.P.G. The United States has aligned itself with those forces to combat the Islamic State in Syria.

Some analysts say Russia appears to have arrived at an accommodation in which the Turks are moving to establish a security zone in northern Syria to preclude Syrian Kurds from setting up an autonomous region. In return, the Turks appear to be backing off their efforts to unseat President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, who, with Russian help, is strengthening his hold on the country’ major cities to the south.

“he Russian-Turkish rapprochement is largely tactical,”aid James F. Jeffrey, a former United States ambassador to Turkey. “ussia can live for now with a Turkish enclave in northern Syria if it does not threaten the Assad regime. And it allows Russia to exploit the U.S. shift to Turkey’ rival, the Y.P.G., by providing air support to the Turks against the Islamic State, which the U.S. inexplicably is not providing.”

President-elect Donald J. Trump has spoken positively, though in vague terms, about the possibility of cooperating with Russia in the fight against the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL. But the Obama administration’ efforts to forge a common political and military strategy with the Kremlin on Syria collapsed after Russia supported Syrian forces and Iranian-backed fighters with its air power in the brutal retaking of Aleppo.

Turkey began the operation at Al Bab, east of Aleppo, without coordinating with the United States and without the benefit of American airstrikes. “his is something that they’e decided to do independently,”ol. John Dorrian, the spokesman for the American-led operation against the Islamic State, said in November.

Turkey appeared to have assumed that it would make short work of the Islamic State fighters there. But the fighting has been stiff. In late November, the Turkish military’ problems were compounded when three of its soldiers were killed in what Turkish forces said was a Syrian airstrike.

Mr. Erdogan later spoke by phone with Vladimir V. Putin, the Russian president, who assured him that Russia had not been involved in the air attack, according to Turkish news reports. The improving ties between the two autocratic leaders opened the door to greater cooperation.

The Turkish military spoke publicly about the Russian role in a Jan. 2 statement that noted that Russian warplanes had struck targets the previous day about five miles south of Al Bab. American officials, who asked not to be identified because they were discussing intelligence, said that Russian airstrikes in the Al Bab area began at the end of December, and that Russian aircraft were flying near Al Bab as recently as Friday.

The effectiveness of the Russian air operations, which have mainly involved dropping “umb,”r unguided, bombs, is unclear. As Turkey’ casualties have mounted in the Al Bab operation, Turkish officials have complained about the lack of American air support and have even made veiled threats that Turkey might suspend allied combat flights against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria from its major base at Incirlik, which would be a major blow to the American-led air campaign.

American officials suggested that the holdup in carrying out allied airstrikes in recent weeks was related to a Turkish decision to ban the Americans from flying reconnaissance drones in and around Al Bab to help identify and confirm targets, as well as bad weather. The Turkish military said that measure was needed to ensure that no potentially hostile aircraft flew over its troops, but it has hampered the United States’bility to carry out airstrikes without endangering civilians.

Operating without the benefit of precise intelligence, the United States recently engaged in what officials called a “how of force”peration in which American aircraft flew low over Al Bab and dropped flares. But last week, the Turks agreed that the United States could fly drones and other aircraft to gather intelligence, which paves the way for the American-led coalition to carry out airstrikes against the Islamic State in Al Bab, American officials said.

The United States regards the Kurdish forces as some of the most effective fighters in the campaign against the Islamic State in Syria. But in deference to Turkish sensitivities, the Americans have declined to arm them directly. The Turks, however, regard them as nothing more than an arm of the Kurdistan Workers’arty, an insurgent Kurdish group in Turkey and Iraq. The Turks have blamed the group for killing dozens of Turkish security forces in recent weeks.

By any measure, the nascent cooperation between Russia and Turkey is a striking development. The situation was far different when Russian warplanes arrived at Latakia, Syria, in September 2015 to help the Assad government take on rebel groups, including some backed by the United States and Turkey.

Relations were thrown into a crisis after a Turkish fighter jet shot down a Russian Su-24 attack plane and the Russian pilot was fatally shot by Syrian rebels as he was parachuting down. Mr. Putin denounced the shoot-down as a “tab in the back.”ussia responded by deploying the S-400, an advanced air-defense system, at Latakia, and imposed economic sanctions against Turkey.

But over the past year, the calculations of the two countries have changed. While President Obama warned that Syria would become a Russian military “uagmire,”he Russians, working with Iran, Iranian-backed forces and the Syrian military, helped Mr. Assad take back Aleppo in the waning months of the Obama administration without substantial Russian casualties.

Still, Russia has to reckon with the fact that the Syrian military lacks the troops to control all of the country. At the same time, Turkey’ immediate objectives have shifted. Worried about the possibility that Kurdish fighters might link up separate cantons to establish an autonomous enclave across northern Syria, as well as about the presence of Islamic State fighters near its borders, Turkey sent its own forces into northern Syria in August.

The Turkish offensive, which has enlisted the support of Syrian opposition groups that Turkey has backed, succeeded in taking the town of Jarabulus. But it has become bogged down near Al Bab, the last major town west of Raqqa still held by the Islamic State.

The Russians notified the United States about the flights using a special hotline between Russian forces in Syria and the American air war command at Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar. The hotline’ goal is to “econflict”ir missions carried out by the Russians and the American-led coalition.

* In Turkey’ Unrest, Some See an Extreme Version of Post-9/11 America

* In Turkey, U.S. Hand Is Seen in Nearly Every Crisis

* \b ISIS\b0  Claims Responsibility for Istanbul Nightclub Attack

President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia at the World Energy Congress in Istanbul in October. | Emrah Gurel/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170109ed1900105



FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The @-Bomb

By MATTATHIAS SCHWARTZ 
7,557 words
8 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
30
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDOn the morning of May 18, 2014, Violeta Lagunes was perplexed by a series of strange messages that appeared in her Gmail inbox. It was Election Day to choose the leadership of Mexico's right-wing Partido Acció Nacional, or PAN, and Lagunes, a former federal congresswoman, was holding a strategy meeting in her office in Puebla city. The emails seemed harmless, at least at first. One appeared to come from the account of a trusted colleague. It asked her to download and review a document. Lagunes clicked on the link, but it seemed to be broken, so she wrote back to her colleague and asked him to send it again. Elsewhere in her inbox was an email from Google warning her that someone had tried to log in to her account. Meanwhile, she began to receive phone calls from PAN allies, who claimed that they had received emails from Lagunes's account that she did not remember sending.

Now Lagunes was worried. Around 1 o'clock, she called the colleague who appeared to have emailed her. She reached him at a restaurant, where he was finishing lunch with other campaign allies. ''I did not send you an email,'' he insisted. A consultant with the campaign -- who asked to remain anonymous in order to preserve his relationships with other candidates -- overheard the conversation. He knew of other campaign workers who had been receiving similar messages: emails with vague subject lines, asking the recipient to review a document or click a link. The campaign, he realized, had been hacked.

In the vote for party leader, Lagunes and her allies in Puebla -- a two-hour drive southeast from Mexico City -- were supporting the challenger, a senator who promised to return the party to its conservative roots. But the incumbent was backed by Puebla's powerful governor, Rafael Moreno Valle. One of Mexico's rising political stars, Moreno Valle is close to Mexico's president, Enrique Peñ Nieto, and has forged an alliance between PAN and Nieto's centrist Partido Revolucionario Institucional, or PRI, long the dominant force in Mexican politics. Since winning the governorship in 2010, Moreno Valle's opponents say, his ambitions have grown, and he has resorted to increasingly harsh measures to keep Puebla state -- including members of his own party -- under control. ''In the beginning, the governor was low-profile and respectful,'' Rafael Micalco, a former leader of PAN in Puebla state, told me. ''When he became governor, he transformed. Now he controls the party through threats.''

This race to retain control of the party leadership in 2014 was a crucial test for the governor, who was rumored to be considering a run for Mexico's presidency in 2018. (This past September, Moreno Valle publicly announced his intent to run.) Clashes between the two camps were especially intense in Puebla, where backers of the challenger, Ernesto Cordero, claimed that the governor was using public money to support the incumbent, Gustavo Madero, though the governor's office has denied these charges. Shortly before the election, Madero's campaign manager said that Cordero's side was trying to undermine the legitimacy of the process. ''Their strategy is clear from the outset,'' he said in an interview with a Mexican magazine. '' 'If I win, good. If not, I was cheated.' ''

After Lagunes's call on Election Day, her colleagues rushed from the restaurant back to their local headquarters, a hotel conference room that they had nicknamed ''the bunker.'' All morning, they had been trying to reach their field network, a group of 40 Cordero canvassers who were working to get out the vote in Puebla state. But the field network seemed to have gone dark. Few of the canvassers were even answering their phones. Hackers, the team concluded, must have found the list of the canvassers' names and phone numbers -- widely circulated by email within the campaign -- and begun to intimidate them.

''The day before,'' the consultant told me, the field network was ''motivated and eager to do this work. After the hack, it was very hard to reach them. The few who did answer said that they had received phone calls saying that their lives were at stake. They were worried that if they went out, they or their families would get hurt.''

According to another worker on Cordero's campaign, who also requested anonymity, citing fear of reprisal, the message to the canvassers was simple and direct: ''We know who you are. If you don't want any trouble, shut down your cellphone and stop your activity.'' The worker added: ''It's an authoritarian regime.''

Madero won the election, with 57 percent of the 162,792 votes cast over all. In Puebla, his margin was substantially larger, roughly 74 percent. Cordero's team decided not to contest the result. They had suspicions about how they were hacked. But it would be another year before any evidence emerged. Their political enemies, leaked documents seemed to show, had built a spying operation using software made by an Italian firm called Hacking Team -- just one of many private companies that, largely below public notice, have sprung up to aid governments in surveilling the private lives of individual citizens. The industry claims that its products comply with local laws and are used to fight crime and terror. But in many countries around the world, these tools have proved to be equally adept at political espionage.

On average, an American office worker sends and receives roughly 120 emails per day, a number that grows with each passing year. The ubiquity and utility of email has turned it into a fine-grained record of our day-to-day lives, rich with mundane and potentially embarrassing details, stored in a perpetual archive, accessible from anywhere on earth and protected, in some cases, by nothing more than a single password. In the case of Violeta Lagunes, her email login represented a point of vulnerability, a seam where the digital walls protecting her campaign were at the mercy of her human judgment -- specifically, whether she could determine if a message from an apparently reputable source was real or fake. Nearly two years later, John Podesta , chairman of Hillary Clinton 's campaign, was faced with a similar judgment call. An email warned him that someone in Ukraine had tried to access his Gmail account and asked him to click on a button and reset his password. His senior adviser forwarded the email to one of the campaign's technology experts. ''This is a legitimate email,'' he replied, in what the expert later would clarify was a simple typing error on his part; he meant to say it was not legitimate. ''The gmail one is REAL,'' the senior adviser wrote to Podesta and another aide.

And so, like Lagunes, Podesta fell into a trap. The button appeared to lead to an official Google page, but it was in fact a meticulously personalized fake, with a domain address linked to a remote cluster of atolls in the South Pacific. The details were designed to trick Podesta into entering his password. This technique is known as ''spear phishing.'' It is an especially potent weapon against companies and political organizations because it needs to succeed only one time, against one target. After that, attackers can use the trusted identity of the first compromised account to more easily lure colleagues into opening infected attachments or clicking on malicious links. Not only will a working email password yield years of intraoffice chatter, invoices, credit-card bills and confidential memos; it can often be leveraged into control of other personal accounts -- Twitter , Facebook , Amazon -- and even access to company servers and internet domains.

The Podesta and Lagunes episodes are far from the only cases in which hackers have used information from stolen emails as a weapon against an entire institution. The 2009 ''Climategate'' incident, which exposed troves of emails from prominent climate researchers, began when hackers remotely broke into servers at a British university with the help of illicitly obtained passwords. The 2014 hack of internal Sony files, which American officials attributed to the North Korean government, began with a series of spear-phishing emails that attackers then used to dig deeper into Sony 's servers. Each hack yielded the most private thoughts and deeds from the members of each respective organization: their blunt insults, their quashed dissents, their half-baked plans, their smarmy flattery, all chronicled in time down to the hundredth of the second when the author clicked ''send.'' In an earlier era, the hackers might have had to engage in riskier behavior, like bribery or burglary. Now, in many cases, all they had to do was send along a link.

The White House, C.I.A. and F.B.I. have all claimed that, based on classified evidence, they can trace the hacks of Podesta's email account (and other hacks of people close to the Clinton campaign) back to the Russian government. But with the rise of private firms like Hacking Team , penetrating the email accounts of political opponents does not require the kind of money and expertise available to major powers. A subscription-based website called Insider Surveillance lists more than a dozen companies selling so-called ethical malware, including Milan-based Hacking Team and the German firms FinFisher and Trovicor. Compared with conventional arms, surveillance software is subject to few trade controls; a recent attempt by the United States to regulate it under a 41-country pact called the Wassenaar Arrangement failed. ''The technology is morally neutral,'' says Joel Brenner, a former inspector general of the National Security Agency. ''The same program that you use to monitor your babysitter might be used by Bashar Assad or Abdel Fattah el-Sisi to keep track of whomever they don't like.''

Hacking Team has fewer than 50 employees, but it has customers all over the world. According to internal documents, its espionage tool, which is called the Remote Control System, or R.C.S., can be licensed for as little as $200,000 a year -- well within the budget of a provincial strongman. After it has been surreptitiously installed on a target's computer or phone, the Remote Control System can invisibly eavesdrop on everything: text messages, emails, phone and Skype calls, location data and so on. Whereas the N.S.A.'s best-known programs grab data in transit from switching rooms and undersea cables, the R.C.S. acquires it at the source, right off a target's device, before it can be encrypted. It carries out an invisible, digitized equivalent of a Watergate-style break-in.

The United States government is almost certainly the world's most formidable repository of hacking talent, but its most powerful cyberweapons are generally reserved for intelligence agencies and the military. This might explain why, according to company documents, at least two federal law-enforcement agencies have been Hacking Team clients: the F.B.I., beginning in 2011, and the Drug Enforcement Administration , beginning in 2012. The F.B.I. contract paid Hacking Team more than $700,000; the D.E.A. appears to have used the software to go after targets in Colombia.

Documents show that the company has also sold its software to some of the world's most repressive governments. Some, like those of Honduras, Ethiopia, Bahrain, Morocco, Egypt and Saudi Arabia, are Western allies. Other countries, like Uzbekistan and Turkey, have a more troubled relationship. A few are openly hostile to the West. Between 2012 and 2014, Hacking Team was paid nearly one million euros by the government of Sudan, a United States-designated state sponsor of terrorism. Even more notable, in light of recent events, is the three-year relationship that Hacking Team carried on with the F.S.B., one of Russia's main intelligence agencies. As with Puebla, Hacking Team used a middleman, a research agency called Kvant, to handle its sales to Russia. Between 2012 and 2014, the agency paid Hacking Team 451,000 euros to license the Remote Control System.

Hacking Team claims that it draws the line at customers who commit ''gross human-rights abuses'' and that it sells exclusively to governments operating within the laws of their own countries. In at least one case, David Vincenzetti, Hacking Team 's founder and chief executive, told a salesman to hold off on a potential Mexican client. ''We sell to official, governmental LEAs'' -- law-enforcement agencies -- ''and security agencies ONLY,'' Vincenzetti wrote in an email. But at other times, a more casual attitude prevailed inside the company. ''If one sells sandwiches to Sudan, he is not subject, as far as my knowledge goes, to the law,'' one Hacking Team lawyer wrote in an internal email. ''Hacking Team should be treated like a sandwich vendor.''

When asked about its arrangements in various countries, the company responded that it ''does not comment on confidential business dealings.'' Its American spokesman, Eric Rabe, did tell me that neither Russia nor Sudan is a current Hacking Team customer. (The relationships, Rabe wrote, ended in 2014, Russia because ''the Putin government evolved from one considered friendly to the West to a more hostile regime'' and Sudan ''because of concerns about the country's ability to use the system in accordance with the H.T. contract.'') Separately, the company confirmed that the state of Puebla was, in fact, a former client.

Until recently, most of what was known about the world of private surveillance companies was a matter of hearsay and speculation. Industry players kept a low profile, operating discreetly from rented offices and meeting potential customers in person a few times a year at carefully screened trade shows. This is why it was so notable when, in July 2015, an unusual tweet appeared in Hacking Team 's Twitter feed. ''Since we have nothing to hide,'' it read, ''we're publishing all our emails, files and source code.'' Then came another tweet, with links to a downloadable file called Hacked Team. The file was huge, 420 gigabytes of material scraped from Hacking Team 's internal servers. Inside were 33 folders containing the company's contracts, payroll documents, invoices, legal memos, customer-support records and a five-year cache of email correspondence from the chief executive on down.

Hacking Team had itself been hacked. WikiLeaks pounced on the breach and quickly uploaded the emails into a searchable database. Anyone with an internet connection could now read the chief executive joking about how his company was in the business of selling ''the evilest technology on earth.'' You could browse Hacking Team 's source code, including one line using ''bomb_blueprints.pdf'' as a placeholder for files that might be found on a target's device. On Reddit, an online peanut gallery formed around the time-wasting online habits of one Hacking Team engineer and his own notably weak passwords -- HTPassword!, P4ssword, Passw0rd.

But the most damaging exposures in the leak by far were Hacking Team 's client list and the names of some of the clients' targets. In South Korea, newspapers focused on evidence suggesting that Hacking Team 's software had helped the nation's intelligence service rig an election; after the leak, one agent who had reportedly used the system there committed suicide. In Ecuador, a magazine found an email with seven phone numbers that the government appeared to have targeted with the R.C.S. Three belonged to lawmakers; a fourth to the mayor of Quito; all four were members of the opposition party.

With the source code for the Remote Control System now public, the company and its clients had to stop using it temporarily. By the end of the year, though, Hacking Team had updated its product and was trying to rebuild its reputation. I was curious whether a company that profited from online breaches could recover from its own. Eric Rabe, the American spokesman, sounded eager to meet me for coffee in Philadelphia. A grandfather and former television-news anchor, he exudes square-jawed credibility. ''If you disagree with someone on the internet,'' he said, of the Hacked Team files, with a wave of his hand, ''there's no need to have a public-policy debate. Just go destroy them.''

A couple of months later, I went to Milan to visit Hacking Team 's headquarters, a stately gray apartment building with boxes of limp flowers adorning a few of its sooty sills. Waiting to demonstrate the company's software were Rabe; Philippe Vinci, a company vice president; and Alessandro Scarafile, a young engineer. Scarafile had gathered a Dell desktop computer and three smartphones: iPhone, BlackBerry and Android. The screen from his own laptop, which represented the console of a client intelligence agency, was projected on the wall. Several icons represented the various streams of data that could potentially be acquired by gaining control of the target's computer: images from built-in cameras, sound from built-in mikes, screenshots, detailed records of applications opened and bitcoins transferred, a continuous log of location with latitude and longitude, and logs of address books, calendars, phone calls, Skype calls and passwords, as well as websites visited. A key logger recorded every key that was pressed. It was a lot to keep track of. Two other views, called ''line of events'' and ''line of actions,'' assembled the information into chronological order.

Scarafile, who was playing both the customer and the target, or ''bad guy,'' turned on the Dell . Judging by the background on the desktop, a gothic scene framed by castlelike silhouettes, our target seemed to be planning a terrorist attack from Transylvania.

There are three methods, Scarafile explained, for getting the Remote Control System onto a target's device. Customers can gain physical access to the device and then infect it with a USB stick or memory card. They can beam the R.C.S. in over a Wi-Fi network. Or they can send the customer an email and get him to click on an infected attachment -- usually a file from a brand-name program like Microsoft Word or PowerPoint. Scarafile did not mention a fourth method, one described by Hacking Team 's critics and referred to in its internal emails: the installation of the R.C.S. through a more elaborate process called ''network injection,'' which is said to involve pinpointing the target's exact location on the internet, observing the person as he orders up, say, a YouTube cat video, and then serving up a doctored version of the same page, one with the desired cat video playing in the foreground -- YouTube logo and all -- as the R.C.S. discreetly rolls in past the digital gates.

Whatever the method of infection, the malicious code, known as an ''agent,'' then communicates with its masters anonymously, its dispatches routed through a series of dedicated servers scattered around the world. Even if the target gets suspicious and figures out that something is wrong, this chain of servers makes it nearly impossible for him to figure out exactly who is using Hacking Team 's product to spy on him.

For the demo, Scarafile opted for the third method, which he referred to as ''a bit of social engineering.'' Using the customer's computer, he sent the target an email with a Word file attached. Then he returned to the target's computer and double-clicked on it, just as Lagunes had clicked on the link in her inbox. ''From now on,'' he said, ''this system is currently infected, or monitored, by the Remote Control System.'' It would remain so even if the suspect turned off his machine or logged out.

On the timeline, the target appeared as a stubbly lout in an undershirt, named ''Jimmy Page ... head of the terrorist cell.'' Using Jimmy Page's Dell , Scarafile logged into Page's Gmail, Facebook and Twitter . He opened up Skype, perused Page's criminal colleagues (Don Corleone, Harry Potter, Keyser Soze) and left one of them a voice mail message from Page's phone. Accessing a USB drive attached to the infected computer, Scarafile opened an encrypted file that turned out to contain an order to ''kill David Vincenzetti.'' R.C.S. captured it all, including periodic snapshots of Scarafile, as Page, at work.

''I don't like the words 'inject' and 'infect,' '' Vinci, the vice president, said. ''R.C.S. is deploying the agent into the device of the target because you want to monitor some of his activities. Exactly the way that law enforcement is listening to some of your phone calls, right?''

Rabe had told me that Vincenzetti was ''a fighter,'' and his combative side was apparent from a collage of magazine clippings and printouts taped to the wall beside his desk -- a sort of mood board, like those used in the advertising industry to gather inspiration before the unveiling of a new brand. Vincenzetti's mood board, though, wasn't about sneakers or cola. It was about the global struggle for power, which he seemed to envision as one big conflict, a battle between the good guys and the bad guys. On the good side was a photo of the bell that aspiring Navy SEALs can ring should they want to quit the program during Hell Week, and a quote from another entrepreneur that ''business is war.'' On the bad side, Vincenzetti had taped up a satellite image showing one of the hottest zones of international tension, the artificial islands rising in the South China Sea, a line of terrestrial pawns advancing China's sphere of influence. Beside it was a chart about Iran, depicting how the country could continue to advance its nuclear program despite the recent American-led deal.

''I think the Iran deal is just terrible,'' Vincenzetti said, and then added, sarcastically, ''Oh, it's such a very peaceful expansion. Very peaceful.''

''That is not an official company position,'' Rabe interjected.

Vincenzetti, now 48, is a familiar type -- a ferociously competitive, driven entrepreneur whose existence is organized around his work. He has a wife, who was born in Morocco, and no children. His small, heavy-lidded eyes can make him seem sleepily blasé On the morning we met at Hacking Team 's offices, he wore jeans, a navy-blue cardigan and a striped shirt, unbuttoned to midchest. He seemed more comfortable on his feet than sitting down. As we talked in a conference room, he periodically leapt to his feet and stalked around the table, considering in turn the espresso machine, the view from the window, a case of bottled water.

''If I wanted to break into this room, how would I do it?'' he asked. ''There is a door, and there are two windows.'' He pressed his hands against the glass panes. ''The perimeter is the first thing you must secure,'' he continued. Securing data was what he did earlier in his career. Now he had moved on. ''If you cannot break into a bank, you cannot protect a bank. So when you are in security, really there is no difference between thinking offensively and defensively.''

In the mid-1980s, Vincenzetti's parents, a salesman and a schoolteacher, bought him a Commodore 64, one of the earliest personal computers. He soon created a Pac-Man clone, a Tron lightcycle-style game and a text-based adventure game. As a computer-science student at the University of Milan in the '90s, he became fascinated by cryptography; he corresponded with programmers around the world about new cryptographic theories and wrote code for email encryption. In his senior year, he was appointed to administer the university's internal network, a post that was usually reserved for a graduate student. Vincenzetti remembers these early days as a time when ''everything was free and no one was trying to harm you. We were wide open and accessible. All the best were called hackers, and I was a hacker.''

Vincenzetti left university early and founded three companies, all of them focused on defensive cybersecurity. After he founded Hacking Team in 2003, he tried to sell his services to Italian police agencies but found them skeptical that Mafiosi and other high-level criminals would ever bother to encrypt their communications. In Italy, the police were also used to getting whatever they needed through wiretaps, arranged with varying degrees of formality through their contacts at telecommunications firms. But after the 2004 Madrid train bombings, which were coordinated via cellphones and the internet, police officers and intelligence agents not just in Italy but all across Europe became interested in contracting with offensive-hacking vendors, part of an emerging arms race over consumer-grade encryption. The growth of Skype made it easy for users to encrypt their communications, and the authorities were eager to pay for countermeasures like the Remote Control System. Singapore, Hacking Team 's first non-European client, signed on in 2008. The company's Middle Eastern business took off in 2011, a boom that coincided with the beginning of the Arab Spring.

By then, Hacking Team had entered a growth phase, its business driven in part by demand among third-world governments for first-world surveillance tools. According to two former employees, the company held talks with Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi's chief security officer, who wanted to build a countrywide bulk-collection scheme that could be embedded in every Libyan cellphone. (Rabe would not confirm or deny that this meeting occurred, and added: ''The company often receives requests to provide services that it does not have available or would sell.'') The United Nations, which prohibits the export of ''electronic weaponry'' to Sudan, has investigated Hacking Team 's activities there. Nineteen members of the Italian Parliament signed a petition raising the question of whether the Egyptian government might have used the R.C.S. to track Giulio Regeni, a 28-year-old Italian student who appears to have been under government surveillance and whose mutilated body turned up on the side of a road in Egypt last year. Hacking Team 's software has not been connected to the case, but the company has done business with the current Egyptian regime. As part of the controversy, the Italian government temporarily revoked Hacking Team 's global export license, so that for several months the company had to file a separate application for each of its customers outside the European Union . (When I brought up the Regeni case with Rabe, he called the dead student ''this Italian national who got himself killed in Egypt.'' He cited Hacking Team 's official policy -- the company neither knows nor desires to know the identities of the people its customers choose to target. ''There is no evidence that Hacking Team 's software had anything to do with Regeni's demise,'' Rabe said.)

All Hacking Team customers sign contracts agreeing to comply with local laws. The company says that it vets potential customers and studies reports from journalists and human-rights groups, looking for ''objective evidence or credible concerns'' that its products are being abused. But when it comes to Hacking Team 's own interactions with customers, leaked documents suggest that employees have sometimes turned a blind eye. In the case of the Puebla government and other Latin American customers, Hacking Team employees appeared to ignore warnings suggesting that the Remote Control System was being used to gather intelligence on the political opposition. On multiple occasions, customers emailed Hacking Team attachments with election-related content, including polling data, party registration forms and invitations addressed to and signed by elected officials. Rather than ask what these files had to do with fighting crime and drug trafficking, Hacking Team support-staff members simply emailed them back, as requested, with an embedded ''exploit,'' turning the document into a surveillance tool to be used against whomever it was sent on to. Asked about these cases, Rabe replied that customers ''are not supposed to be using it for political purposes, but I don't think it's reasonable to expect that an Italian computer programmer,'' i.e., a support technician, ''would have seen these files and known what was going on. ... I think that's a stretch, that an Italian software guy could know that an individual is a dissident.''

Hacking Team 's most persistent critic is Citizen Lab, a research group at the University of Toronto's Munk School of Global Affairs. Before the Hacked Team leak, Citizen Lab documented cases in which Hacking Team software turned up on the devices of activists in Morocco and the United Arab Emirates, as well as an Ethiopian-American journalist in Alexandria, Va. Ronald Deibert, Citizen Lab's director, told me that Hacking Team ''is a company that appears to have no internal controls on abuse of its products.'' When I asked Vincenzetti about this, he said that Citizen Lab was motivated by money, noting that the group won a million-dollar grant a week after publishing a report on Hacking Team 's sales to Ethiopia. ''Their identity,'' he said, ''is: 'I am the defender of free speech, I am the defender of liberty and democracy.' O.K. So am I. So is every rational guy.'' If Citizen Lab really cared about good and evil, he said, it would be fighting China and Iran.

Almost immediately after the Hacked Team documents went online, they were being pored over by R3D, a Mexico City-based civil-liberties group. Luis Fernando Garcí, R3D's director, says that intimidation and online surveillance have increased under Peñ Nieto's presidency, and he took notice when Citizen Lab, in 2014, released a report that traced a chain of servers associated with Hacking Team that routed data through Hong Kong, London, Amsterdam and Atlanta before terminating somewhere inside Mexico. Exactly who was on the receiving end of the traffic and what they were doing with it was unknown at the time, but now R3D's team recognized that this could be their chance to find out.

Shortly thereafter, R3D published three invoices from the Hacked Team cache showing that one state government -- that of Jalisco, on the Pacific Coast -- had paid the company nearly half a million euros for the Remote Control System. Soon other documents were found in the leak to implicate several more states, including Puebla, though most of the states denied ever using the software. (Jalisco later admitted to purchasing the system, which it claimed was for its prosecutor's office.) The story failed to get much traction in the Mexican press, except in Puebla, after R3D connected with Lado B, a small online-news collective there. The site's name translates to ''B Side,'' as in the back of a hit single -- symbolizing its dedication to telling stories that would otherwise go untold.

Lado B's editor, Ernesto Aroche, was not surprised that Puebla's government had been using the Remote Control System. In Moreno Valle's six years as governor there, he has spent lavishly on new surveillance systems, including multiple ''security arches,'' highway-spanning structures that scrutinize traffic with video cameras and X-rays, and whose cost had raised some questions in the local press. Beginning in 2013, Aroche began noticing solicitations on the Puebla-state website for hidden cameras and other spying equipment. When he filed a public-records request about them, the government's form response indicated that these orders had never been filled, but Aroche was skeptical, given the mounting evidence that Moreno Valle's administration had begun using its security apparatus for political purposes. There were periodic break-ins of homes belonging to dissident politicians and journalists, with the burglars sometimes taking little besides their victims' laptops. Politicians would answer calls from unknown numbers, only to hear their own taped conversations played back to them. Another journalist, Fernando Maldonado, received an unmarked envelope full of what were purportedly transcripts of 400 private phone calls made by Puebla politicians.

As Aroche and R3D sifted through the Hacked Team file dump, they discovered that the files on Puebla had more detail than those dealing with Hacking Team 's other Mexican accounts. The Puebla client often wrote emails asking for help with infecting a particular document with a malicious virus. Some of these came from an account -- soporteuiamx@gmail.com -- that also appears in many of Hacking Team 's internal support tickets. One of those tickets documents a client's request for help in infecting an attachment: an invitation to attend an event for a Mexican political organization, signed by Violeta Lagunes and addressed to another party colleague opposed to the governor.

Aroche interviewed politicians and journalists who were on the receiving end of the infected emails contained in the Hacked Team trove. According to a 2015 article that Lado B published in conjunction with a politics website, the Puebla group sent Hacking Team at least 47 requests to infect specific files that it would then forward on to their targets. Almost all of those files had to do with political issues. Going through the Hacked Team materials, Aroche found the name of a Puebla government employee who seemed to be working within the spying operation. ''Before, we had been talking about ghosts,'' Aroche told me. ''Now, we could prove it. We started putting names on the actors.''

More than a year later, there have been no political repercussions for the governor or his allies in Puebla. I met Aroche this fall at the Lado B offices, a small room facing a courtyard in a crumbling stone building from Puebla's colonial days. The only suggestion of Lado B's presence was a small sticker on the window. Inside, Aroche was thumbing through an envelope of documents that he had wrung out of the state government. Two redacted contracts signed by Puebla officials showed an arrangement between the state government and a company called Sym Servicios Integrales, which Aroche's reporting had identified as an intermediary for Hacking Team . The details of what had been purchased were redacted. ''These contracts demonstrate that the Puebla government had a commercial relationship with this company,'' Aroche said. ''I'm sorry if they're a little bit stained -- I dropped some coffee on them.'' (Sym Servicios Integrales says it ''never sold H.T. technology to the state of Puebla.'')

In a brief written statement from Sagrario Conde Valerio, a spokeswoman, the government of Puebla denied allegations of spying and claimed that ''no relationship exists nor has ever existed between the government of Puebla and the company 'Hacking Team .' '' The government declined to respond further to a list of questions.

But a former official from Moreno Valle's administration claimed to me that more than $1 million was being diverted from the state budget each year to fund the political-espionage unit. Documents from the Hacked Team archive indicate that Hacking Team received an order from the government of Puebla for 415,000 euros in the spring of 2013, and that Hacking Team booked hotel rooms for three of its associates who traveled to Puebla in May of that year.

Some of the R.C.S. training, I was told, took place in a green building on a residential street. When I visited the purported site this fall, lettering above the door said that the building was once a school. Now it had bars across the door and mirrored windows. Neighbors told me it had been abandoned for several months. ''People would come and go,'' one woman said. ''They were very secretive. They would drop off equipment, take away equipment. Then one day, about a year ago, they came and took everything away and left.'' Another neighbor said that he often saw a state-police car parked in front of the house and a man with a limp entering and leaving -- a former Mexican intelligence agent, according to someone who was present during the Hacking Team training.

Mexico is Hacking Team 's biggest export market, accounting for nearly six million euros in sales, according to leaked documents. Ostensibly, the Remote Control System is intended for fighting criminals and drug traffickers there. (''There have been reports that the software was used in the apprehension of Chapo Guzman,'' Rabe told me, referring to the Mexican drug lord. ''I can't confirm it.'') The files indicate that at least seven other Mexican state governments were Hacking Team clients, but because they did not use email to the same extent as Puebla, their activities are harder to track. Multiple former Hacking Team employees told me that abuses of the software were not limited to Puebla. One former employee described having the system set up inside a mayor's office.

Katitza Rodríuez, international-rights director at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, says that Mexican law allows for interception of communication, like the wiretapping of phone lines, but it does not grant precise legal authority to use new, powerful invasive tools like those created by Hacking Team . And she argues that it is much more dangerous in Mexico than in other Western countries, where checks and balances are stronger. ''This is much more intrusive than the interception of a phone call,'' she said. ''They are not only listening; they are taking over your laptop. Mexico needs to have a full debate in Congress about what legal safeguards are needed for this kind of surveillance or if the government should be using it at all.''

The Hacked Team files indicate that in mid-2015, Hacking Team opened an American subsidiary and leased office space in Reston, Va., a 20-minute drive from the C.I.A.'s headquarters. The company drew up a ''U.S. action plan,'' calling for a significant North American expansion, with new hires and rounds of pitches to the Department of Justice, the United States military and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police . Hacking Team was also targeting another potentially lucrative market: American state and local governments. It pitched the R.C.S. to law-enforcement agencies in San Bernardino, Calif.; Washington; New York; Fort Lauderdale; and Orlando. In a risk assessment commissioned by the company, lawyers advised that such sales were probably legal, so long as the product was provided ''at a distance'' from actual investigations and used ''in the normal course of government operations.''

American expansion by companies like Hacking Team may not face much resistance from the federal government, which is becoming more accepting of electronic surveillance as part of normal police work. Last year, the Justice Department successfully changed the rules of criminal procedure, making it easier for federal agents to hack into multiple computers with a single warrant. Senator Steve Daines of Montana, who tried to block the change, complained that it gives ''unlimited power for unlimited hacking.'' In a 2014 address, now referred to in cybersecurity circles as his ''Going Dark'' speech, the F.B.I.'s director, James Comey, argued that the encryption built into Apple products posed a threat to public safety -- enabling not only terrorism but also drug trafficking, child abuse and hit-and-runs. Instead of ''a safe that can't be cracked,'' Comey wanted technology companies to lend him the combination. ''The law hasn't kept pace with technology, and this disconnect has created a significant public-safety problem,'' Comey said. ''We call it 'going dark.' ''

As the United States government has argued for weaker protections around personal communications, American businesses have been spreading more powerful surveillance tools around the world. Many foreign law-enforcement agencies already buy electronic-surveillance products from SS8 -- a company backed by the storied venture-capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers -- as well as from the Harris Corporation , a $13 billion company based in Florida and traded on the New York Stock Exchange. At least 25 American police departments have used Harris's Stingray device, which mimics cellphone towers and can intercept cellphone calls within 200 meters. All known sales of Stingrays to local law enforcement have been authorized by the F.B.I., which has since fought in court to keep those sales secret. In Baltimore alone, Stingrays have been used more than 4,000 times, in routine drug investigations. Much less is known about another Harris product, the advanced Hailstorm, which is also sold to local police departments. Hailstorm is reportedly capable of implanting malware that can take control of a targeted phone, much like Hacking Team 's R.C.S.

The Hacked Team documents that offer the most revealing view of the company's ethos happen to be the most public ones. For years, as often as two or three times a day, Vincenzetti sent mass emails to hundreds of his business contacts. The recipients included numerous members of the United States military and intelligence community, as well as government employees from the city of Cincinnati and the Internal Revenue Service . In these messages, Vincenzetti often addresses this audience collectively as ''gents.'' The news he cites is a reminder of how the geopolitical winds have been blowing in favor of Hacking Team and other self-described allies of law and order. In Vincenzetti's world, the system is always, as George Tenet famously said about pre-Sept. 11 intelligence, ''blinking red'': the imploding Middle East; a restive, nuclear-armed Russia; battalions of ISIS-trained jihadis roaming around Europe with their encrypted thumb drives and dark-web expertise. Against this backdrop of ever-increasing danger, concerns about human rights are naïe at best.

Vincenzetti's emails vividly exploit this sense of danger and alarm. He writes about shadowy gangs of Iranian hackers using the #JeSuisCharlie hashtag to inject malware into French laptops. He celebrates the conviction of Ross Ulbricht, a.k.a. the Dread Pirate Roberts, creator of the Silk Road website. After the arrests of two Uzbek men in Brooklyn for telling informants that they wanted to join up with ISIS, Vincenzetti writes of ''a very serious terrorist plot on American soil foiled.''

He went on to tap out this sales pitch:

The time has come for a technologically MORE SOPHISTICATED, and much more effective, internet supervision ... something capable to penetrate the core of the terrorists' HIDDEN forums. And such a (quite unique) technology EXISTS.

The following day, he gave a few more hints:

I am talking about a NEW technology capable of neutralizing their encryption-based protective layers in order to track them, identify them, locate them, chase them and finally bust them. Something operating on a massive scale. Something different. I am talking about a novel, superior, next-generation mass-surveillance technology.

The tone of Vincenzetti's sales patter was strangely upbeat, especially considering his dire forecasts. It was almost as if he were in the business of selling microwave ovens or sandwiches, not tools through which the private lives of criminals (and whoever else) could be fully laid bare.

Vincenzetti's unstated equation -- privacy is secrecy, and secrecy is terrorism -- is less controversial than it might appear. A supportive echo can be heard in many public statements from American officials, which Vincenzetti often cut and pasted into his mass emails. The former attorney general Eric Holder called for ''investigative and prosecutorial tools that allow us to be pre-emptive.'' When Comey warned that ''encryption threatens to lead all of us to a very dark place,'' Vincenzetti forwarded it along approvingly, with the tagline: ''We DO have an answer to many if not all of his concerns.'' And when, in May 2015, Comey warned of a ''threat'' that had ''morphed'' into ''a chaotic spider web,'' Vincenzetti sent word to his ''gents'' as well.

One month later, an anonymous hack revealed Hacking Team 's own invisible spider web, and one year later, during the run-up to Election Day, came the internal emails of the Democratic Party. By then it was clear that tools for digital burglary had spread well beyond the hands of regular police officers. Comey had argued for weaker safes; Vincenzetti was selling longer crowbars. They could be used to chase Jimmy Page, arrest Chapo Guzman, fight crime, smear a political opponent or just keep tabs on someone, anyone. To be hidden is to be a terrorist -- this was the heart of his pitch. Any digital redoubt that could resist being pried open was a public risk and a private opportunity.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Correction: January 22, 2017, Sunday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Jan. 8 about surveillance software erroneously included one company among those that sell so-called ethical malware. The Israeli company Nice no longer sells such software; it sold its intelligence division in May 2015.

Mattathias Schwartz is a national-security reporter for The Intercept and a contributing writer for the magazine. He last wrote about the tangled role of paid sources in F.B.I. terrorism investigations.

Violeta Lagunes, whose email account was compromised during a Partido Acció Nacional election campaign. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOMINIC BRACCO II/PRIME, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM33); Top: David Vincenzetti, Hacking Team's chief executive, in Milan. Bottom: An entrance to Hacking Team's Milan offices. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LUCA LOCATELLI/INSTITUTE, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM34); A building in Puebla that was reportedly used to train operatives on Hacking Team's software. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOMINIC BRACCO II/PRIME, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM37) 

Document NYTF000020170122ed1800023



us
Airstrikes by Russia Buttress Turkey in Battle vs.  ISIS 

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,331 words
8 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —ussian warplanes have carried out airstrikes to support ’ offensive in northern against the Islamic State, an important evolution in a budding Russian-Turkish partnership. The threaten to marginalize the United States in the struggle to shape Syria’ ultimate fate.

The air missions, which took place for about a week near the strategically important town of Al Bab, represent the Kremlin’ first use of its military might to help the Turks in their fight against the militant group. The Russians seized an opening to try to build a military relationship with Turkey, a NATO member, as the United States has sought to keep the emphasis on taking Raqqa, the Islamic State’ self-declared capital.

The Russian bombing is a remarkable turnabout from November 2015, when a that had violated Turkey’ airspace.

and Turkey had already been involved in a in Syria —ne that does not involve the United States. At the same time, ties between the United States and Turkey have come under growing strain as the Turkish president, , has become increasingly alarmed about the Kurdish forces known as the Y.P.G. The United States has aligned itself with those forces to combat the Islamic State in Syria.

Some analysts say Russia appears to have arrived at an accommodation in which the Turks are moving to establish a security zone in northern Syria to preclude Syrian Kurds from setting up an autonomous region. In return, the Turks appear to be backing off their efforts to unseat President of Syria, who, with Russian help, is strengthening his hold on the country’ major cities to the south.

“he Russian-Turkish rapprochement is largely tactical,”aid James F. Jeffrey, a former United States ambassador to Turkey. “ussia can live for now with a Turkish enclave in northern Syria if it does not threaten the Assad regime. And it allows Russia to exploit the U.S. shift to Turkey’ rival, the Y.P.G., by providing air support to the Turks against the Islamic State, which the U.S. inexplicably is not providing.”

President-elect Donald J. Trump has spoken positively, though in vague terms, about the possibility of cooperating with Russia in the fight against the Islamic State, also known as or ISIL. But the Obama administration’ efforts to forge a common political and military strategy with the Kremlin on Syria collapsed after Russia supported Syrian forces and Iranian-backed fighters with its air power in the brutal retaking of Aleppo.

Turkey began the operation at Al Bab, east of Aleppo, without coordinating with the United States and without the benefit of American airstrikes. “his is something that they’e decided to do independently,”ol. John Dorrian, the spokesman for the American-led operation against the Islamic State, said in November.

Turkey appeared to have assumed that it would make short work of the Islamic State fighters there. But the fighting has been stiff. In late November, the Turkish military’ problems were compounded when three of its soldiers were killed in what Turkish forces said was a Syrian airstrike.

Mr. Erdogan later spoke by phone with , the Russian president, who assured him that Russia had not been involved in the air attack, according to Turkish news reports. The autocratic leaders opened the door to greater cooperation.

The Turkish military spoke publicly about the Russian role in a Jan. 2 statement that noted that Russian warplanes had struck targets the previous day about five miles south of Al Bab. American officials, who asked not to be identified because they were discussing intelligence, said that Russian airstrikes in the Al Bab area began at the end of December, and that Russian aircraft were flying near Al Bab as recently as Friday.

The effectiveness of the Russian air operations, which have mainly involved dropping “umb,”r unguided, bombs, is unclear. As Turkey’ casualties have mounted in the Al Bab operation, Turkish officials have complained about the lack of American air support and have even made veiled threats that Turkey might suspend allied combat flights against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria from its major base at Incirlik, which would be a major blow to the American-led air campaign.

American officials suggested that the holdup in carrying out allied airstrikes in recent weeks was related to a Turkish decision to ban the Americans from flying reconnaissance drones in and around Al Bab to help identify and confirm targets, as well as bad weather. The Turkish military said that measure was needed to ensure that no potentially hostile aircraft flew over its troops, but it has hampered the United States’bility to carry out airstrikes without endangering civilians.

Operating without the benefit of precise intelligence, the United States recently engaged in what officials called a “how of force”peration in which American aircraft flew low over Al Bab and dropped flares. But last week, the Turks agreed that the United States could fly drones and other aircraft to gather intelligence, which paves the way for the American-led coalition to carry out airstrikes against the Islamic State in Al Bab, American officials said.

The United States regards the Kurdish forces as some of the most effective fighters in the campaign against the Islamic State in Syria. But in deference to Turkish sensitivities, the Americans have declined to arm them directly. The Turks, however, regard them as nothing more than an arm of the Kurdistan Workers’arty, an insurgent Kurdish group in Turkey and Iraq. The Turks have blamed the group for killing dozens of Turkish security forces in recent weeks.

By any measure, the nascent cooperation between Russia and Turkey is a striking development. The situation was far different when , in September 2015 to help the Assad government take on rebel groups, including some backed by the United States and Turkey.

Relations were thrown into a crisis after a Turkish fighter jet shot down a Russian Su-24 attack plane and the Russian pilot was fatally shot by Syrian rebels as he was parachuting down. Mr. Putin denounced the shoot-down as a “tab in the back.”ussia responded by deploying the S-400, an advanced air-defense system, at Latakia, and imposed economic sanctions against Turkey.

But over the past year, the calculations of the two countries have changed. While President Obama would become a Russian military “uagmire,”he Russians, working with Iran, Iranian-backed forces and the Syrian military, helped Mr. Assad take back Aleppo in the waning months of the Obama administration without substantial Russian casualties.

Still, Russia has to reckon with the fact that the Syrian military lacks the troops to control all of the country. At the same time, Turkey’ immediate objectives have shifted. Worried about the possibility that Kurdish fighters might link up separate cantons to establish an autonomous enclave across northern Syria, as well as about the presence of Islamic State fighters near its borders, Turkey into northern Syria in August.

The Turkish offensive, which has enlisted the support of Syrian opposition groups that Turkey has backed, succeeded in taking the town of Jarabulus. But it has become bogged down near Al Bab, the last major town west of Raqqa still held by the Islamic State.

The Russians notified the United States about the flights using a special hotline between Russian forces in Syria and the American air war command at Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar. The hotline’ goal is to “econflict”ir missions carried out by the Russians and the American-led coalition.

PHOTO: Presidents Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and Vladimir V. Putin of Russia at the World Energy Congress in October. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EMRAH GUREL/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A3)

Related Articles

https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/09/world/JP-MILITARY/JP-MILITARY-articleLarge.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/09/world/JP-MILITARY/JP-MILITARY-jumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/09/world/JP-MILITARY/JP-MILITARY-superJumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/09/world/JP-MILITARY/JP-MILITARY-moth.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/09/world/JP-MILITARY/JP-MILITARY-articleInline.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/09/world/JP-MILITARY/JP-MILITARY-sfSpan.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/09/world/JP-MILITARY/JP-MILITARY-filmstrip.jpg | President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia at the World Energy Congress in Istanbul in October. | Emrah Gurel/Associated Press 

Document INHT000020170109ed180000q



Editorial
Opinion
The Devastation of Nimrud

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
410 words
8 January 2017
23:42
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The marauding forces of \b ISIS\b0  were finally driven last November from Nimrud, Iraq’ priceless trove of Middle East history and relics situated south of Mosul. They left behind a barbaric pile of rubble after more than a year of systematically tearing apart the ancient palaces, temples and cultural treasures of what had been the capital of the Assyrian empire nearly three millenniums ago.

With ISIS gone, looters have now descended on the broken remains, gleaning the scorched earth for valuable fragments. No one is protecting the ancient grounds, despite a warning from United Nations inspectors that looters are further obliterating one of the most important archaeological sites of Mesopotamia.

Nimrud is not alone: The terrorists’ommitment to stamping out history and creating a fanatical caliphate has destroyed dozens of other irreplaceable sites.

In Nimrud, ISIS leaders proudly made a high-definition, seven-minute video of their organized attacks by jackhammer, bulldozer and dynamite on a civilization dating to 879 B.C. The city was leveled right up to its 140-foot-high ziggurat, a sacred stepped tower now reduced to bricks and dust. Looters pick among what remains along a 900-acre swath of devastation —ragments of ancient reliefs, chunks of cuneiform texts and pieces of statues, according to an Associated Press report.

The prime casualties of ISIS’ rampage across Syria and Iraq are the thousands of innocent lives destroyed. But to them must be added the priceless heritage of one of the world’ earliest empires. Previous excavations in the last century revealed hundreds of cuneiform tablets describing ancient treaties and palace life, and stores of jewels and gold in royal tombs.

ISIS propagandists maintain their mission will continue as relentless destroyers of the region’ “dols.”“henever we take control of a piece of land, we remove the symbols of polytheism and spread monotheism in it,” jihadi declared to the video camera in Nimrud, after which a massive detonation leveled the palace of King Ashurnasirpal II of Assyria —hich, until ISIS, had managed to stand since the ninth century B.C., despite repeated bouts of warfare.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

* The Crimes of Palmyra

A stone tablet last month amid the damage wrought by the Islamic State group at the ancient site of Nimrud, Iraq. | Maya Alleruzzo/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170108ed18003s5



National Desk; SECTA
What's the Big Deal?' if Putin Meddled, Trump Voters Ask

By CAMPBELL ROBERTSON and MITCH SMITH; Campbell Robertson reported from Covington, La., and Mitch Smith from Valparaiso, Ind. 
1,234 words
8 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

COVINGTON, La. -- ''Sour grapes,'' explained Bob Marino, 79, weighing in on the recent spycraft bombshell from the corner table of a local McDonald's.

''Sour grapes,'' agreed Roger Noel, 65, sitting next to him.

''Bunch of crybabies,'' Reed Guidry, 64, offered from across the table.

The subject of conversation was the report released by United States intelligence chiefs on Friday informing President-elect Donald J. Trump of their unanimous conclusion that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia ordered an extensive, but covert, cyberoperation to help Mr. Trump win the election. The Russians had hacked and leaked emails, unleashed ''trolls'' on social media and used their ''state-run propaganda machine'' to spread stories harmful to Hillary Clinton.

In Washington, the report was viewed as extraordinary, both for its timing, raising sharp questions about the president-elect's legitimacy on the verge of his taking office, and for its assertions, describing the operation as Russia's boldest effort yet to meddle with American elections, to spread discontent and to ''undermine the U.S.-led democratic order.''

But interviews with Trump supporters here in Louisiana, a state the president-elect won by 20 points, and in Indiana, a state he won by nearly the same margin, found opinions about the report that ranged from general indifference to outright derision.

''From the parts of the report I've seen,'' said Rob Maness, a retired Air Force colonel who twice ran for Senate here as Tea Party favorite, ''it seems silly.''

There are genuine concerns about Russia's cyberoperations, he said, but the notion that they changed the outcome of the election was absurd. (The report made no determination on how they affected the election.)

Of the comments he had seen from fellow Trump supporters on Facebook and in emails, he added, ''90 percent of them are like, 'What's the big deal?'''

The Russians may have very well gotten involved, several people said. They added that kind of interference should be combated. But many assumed that foreign actors had long tried to play favorites in American elections, and that the United States had done the same in other countries' elections. Even if the Russians did do it -- which some were more willing to concede than others -- what difference did it make? People did not need the Russians to make up their minds about Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Trump's election opponent. Blaming her loss on the Russians was, as one Trump supporter here said, ''just being sore losers.''

''I don't think the Russians posed as big a problem to the Clintons as the Clintons posed to themselves,'' said Paul Emenes, 49, while he sold ribs, shoulders and chops at a frigid outdoor farmers' market in Covington. Russian hacking was concerning, sure, Mr. Emenes said. He added that, as long as Mr. Trump was not involved himself, ''it doesn't change the way I view him.''

Tina Gunaldo, 44, taking blankets off the citrus trees in her Mandeville, La., front yard after the previous night's frost, had a similar attitude.

''Trump is Trump,'' she said. ''Do I think he's going to become more of a friend to Russia because of this? No I don't. I think -- I hope -- his focus will be on making America great again.''

Ms. Gunaldo would not reveal whom she voted for, but she did say Mr. Trump's slogan resonated with her. It apparently resonated quite widely in this parish, which he won by more than 50 points. But it was a quiet support, she said. She knew of only one yard in the whole subdivision with a sign.

That yard belonged to Thurston Yates Sr.

''I don't believe it,'' Mr. Yates, 78, said flatly of the intelligence report. He was standing in the yard under his ''Make America Great Again'' flag, which he bought at a gun show several months ago. ''Why would Putin even want Trump?''

Mr. Yates, who is retired from a career in pharmaceutical sales, was not concerned about what Mr. Trump might do in office, but said he was deeply alarmed about what President Obama might do before he leaves office.

It was Mr. Obama who was too soft on Russia, who let Mr. Putin get away with things, Mr. Yates continued. Mr. Trump would be much tougher.

But Mr. Yates then added: ''Why is everybody so afraid of Russia? I'm not against Putin.''

This last sentiment was not uncommon. Even among those who were troubled by the hacks, few felt that Russia was a serious threat. The country was ''a basket case,'' and not the powerful foe it once was, said Mr. Marino, from his seat at McDonald's. Others said that North Korea, the Islamic State and China were the real threats. Russia could even be a potential ally in some fights, suggested Valarie Kubacki, 54, a real estate broker in Valparaiso, Ind.

Ms. Kubacki said she perceived Russia as ''somewhere in the middle'' between friend and enemy, but agreed with Mr. Trump that the United States could work with them to defeat the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. ''We may have to line up with people who may not be our 'friend' to make that happen,'' she said.

That those on the right seemed to be warming to Russia was not seen as a particularly unusual development, though some joked about the incongruity of the left putting such faith in the Central Intelligence Agency.

As they watched their son skate with his Boy Scout group at the public ice rink in downtown Valparaiso, Monty and Mary Willis, both registered Republicans, considered the ramifications of the intelligence report.

''The idea of a fair election'' had been placed in doubt, Ms. Willis said. ''We were concerned about money being involved in the election. Now you're talking about espionage.''

The Willises, who both work in real estate, might be Republicans, but they were not Trump voters. In fact, they had last voted for a Republican presidential candidate in 2008, when Senator John McCain of Arizona ran. The party seemed to have changed in recent years, they said. And the incoming administration had them deeply worried.

''Our president being in cahoots with the Russian government?'' Mr. Willis said. ''Yes, I'm very concerned about that.''

In Louisiana, David Gubert, 56, chain-smoked Eagle 20 cigarettes in the cab of his pickup, with stacks of firewood for sale behind him in the bed. Like the Willises, he ruminated on what it would mean if the Russians had gotten involved, and possibly even swung the election.

But Mr. Gubert came to a different conclusion.

''If that's what it took,'' he said, ''I'm glad they did it.''

Paul Emenes: As long as Donald J. Trump wasn't involved, ''it doesn't change the way I view him.''; Tina Gunaldo, on Mr. Trump: ''I think -- I hope -- his focus will be on making America great again.''; Thurston Yates, on the intelligence report: ''I don't believe it. Why would Putin even want Trump?''; David Gubert, on possible Russian interference: ''If that's what it took, I'm glad they did it.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY WILLIAM WIDMER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A15) 

Document NYTF000020170108ed180008t



THE PUBLIC EDITOR
Sunday Review Desk; SECTSR
The Future of The Times: A View From the Top

By LIZ SPAYD 
2,423 words
8 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WITH The New York Times facing another year of rapid-cycle innovation and a big political story in Washington, I sat down with the executive editor, Dean Baquet, to see how he believes readers might feel the impact.

There's a highly anticipated internal report due out soon that will set the future path for New York Times innovation. How do you suppose forthcoming changes will actually affect readers? Will new features be added? Or current ones eliminated? Will The Times tell stories in ways it doesn't now?

I think readers will continue to see more exploration of ways to tell stories, a continuing emphasis on video and multimedia online, and more of an effort in which we acknowledge the phone is a completely different medium than print. We're going to think harder about how we're going to edit The New York Times. Trying to edit The Times the way we edited it in a purely print era is unreasonable. The layers of editing, the number of people who touch a story. The fact is that we now write so much more. Right now, as we talk, there's a hearing on Russian hacking. I've been in meetings all day, but we've probably written 10 posts. All of those posts, and the large print stories done at the end of the day, cannot be edited in the same way. The challenge is how to still be fast and give people a story in a form that is accurate. But it's hard. If we succeed, readers won't notice most of these editing changes.

Also, I think people will see more changes in the print New York Times. We just redesigned Culture. I'm not sure yet what redesigns of other sections of The New York Times will look like, but we're looking at how we produce the print New York Times.

Are they going see less space devoted to m etro coverage?

I'm not being coy. I don't think so, if you think past the actual desks. I think of Metro as everything from local investigative reporting, which we do a lot of, to local culture reporting, which we do a lot of, to local business reporting, which we do a lot of. So I'm not sure people will see the word ''New York'' appear less in The New York Times. I think they will see less -- and I have already seen less -- incremental New York news coverage.

We did a story a few days ago that said we don't have a reporter in New Jersey right now. Look, I wish we had the resources to have what we used to have in New Jersey and Connecticut, but the reality is that we don't. And I think to do the window dressing of having one reporter running around doesn't quite make it. I think we have to try to figure out how to cover stories that resonate for the whole region, which is why you see more transportation coverage. I think you will always see The Times deeply invested in covering the mayor and governor of New York. I have no intention of pulling back any of that coverage. But I think you will see less incremental coverage of New York, without question.

You've spoken about buyouts and other newsroom cuts. How might those impact readers? Will readers be notified if favorite bylines move on, one subscriber asks?

That's interesting, I hadn't thought of that. We will have a smaller newsroom but I don't know what that means yet because there's so many factors. Print advertising, which was one of the things that most sustained our newsroom, and all newsrooms, for a long time is dropping significantly -- and more this year than ever before. The election of Donald Trump also changes the calculation, for example. We went from three to six people covering the White House. We have to think harder about how we cover agencies in Washington, because it's going to undergo a dramatic transformation. My goal is to keep as many people as we can whose work is to gather news. Who write stories, cover the world, take video.

Mark Thompson, the C.E.O., recently raised the possibility that The Times could reach 10 million digital subscribers, which could really be a game changer in supporting your journalistic ambitions. Is that a number pulled out of a hat or do you think it's realistic, and if so by when?

Well, I don't know by when, but I certainly did not expect the dramatic rise in subscriptions that The New York Times has seen. I don't think the industry's seen anything like it -- and that was before Trump. I remember going to a celebration not that long ago when we crossed a million. And that seemed like such an elusive, big thing. And if we have more years like the year we just had, I don't think that's [10 million] unreasonable. I don't know when that will be, but it's not unreasonable. And, by the way, we're just starting our international expansion, because most of our audience is still domestic. I think that there's a big audience for New York Times coverage; I think a lot of people don't know what we do. It's always surprising when we talk to readers -- they don't know how much video we do. We did an experiment in which we showed them some foreign coverage -- and readers assumed it was Vice. We do more adventurous foreign reporting than anybody in the world. Oddly enough for an institution that people think of as overconfident sometimes, we're not that good at tooting our own horn.

I did a call-out to readers earlier this week asking what questions they had for you. Many, not surprisingly, asked about politics. They seem to be in two camps. One complains that opinion is bleeding into news stories. Another worries that The Times will ''normalize'' Trump and fall prey to his manipulations. Does one of these sides better represent your concern?

I think this is an extraordinary presidency. And the reason that we're putting more energy into covering it is not because we have this goal of taking Donald Trump down. It is because he literally has placed people in positions of power who by the standards of Washington, whether you like them or not -- and I'm using this as a neutral word -- are revolutionary figures. The secretary of state is unlike any we have ever had. He ran the biggest corporation in the world. The head of the E.P.A. doesn't necessarily think we should have an E.P.A. So this is an extraordinary moment in the life of Washington. And we will cover that very, very aggressively.

I do not believe that opinion has seeped into the pages of The New York Times. I think some who think that do so because of my decision to use the word ''lie'' [in stories that refer to Trump's bolder falsehoods]. Some of it is, to be frank, because some of our competitors have accused us of that and I think that resonates with people. I really don't buy it and we work really, really hard to not do it.

Our writing is more relaxed than it used to be -- that's intentional. I actually think some newspaper writing of a generation ago was too stilted, was too hard to follow, too hard to understand. And I think that I've tried really hard to push us to loosen up language. I think there was something elitist about coverage of Congress 25 years ago that assumed people knew how a bill became a law. And I think the one thing we've been smacked in the head with in recent years is that people don't understand that stuff. And the most non-elitist thing we can do is to assume people don't understand it. To relax a bit in forms of storytelling, to tell people when we witness things and observe things. To be transparent. Of course, does that mean that sometimes we may have slipped in way I wish we hadn't? Yes, of course. But I think the alternative, which was to keep telling stories in this sort of made-up newspaper language that I grew up on, I don't think that's a good alternative.

But do you think reporters and editors at times inject opinion?

You and I could probably go through The Times every day and come up with a couple examples where they do. But I think mostly they don't.

Another political question from a reader, on the topic of Trump's crack-of-dawn tweets: ''For the love of God, can The Times stop treating Trump's tweets as front-page news?'' In essence, plenty of readers ask, why does The Times give so much attention to his tweets, even some that are misleading or inaccurate?

I think we need to devise a way to more quickly put them in perspective and call them out, if they're exaggerated, and more quickly try to figure out their meaning. But I don't think we could get away with not covering them. He's the president of the United States. They're not press releases. They're his utterances at six o'clock in the morning. You wanna talk about a slippery slope? Picture the scene: six o'clock in the morning, The Times looks at a tweet he makes about ISIS, and we say, ''Eh, that one doesn't feel important, we don't believe him.'' That's more injecting opinion into coverage than an occasional slip in language.

I agree. If he's going to tweet, like when he chastised his own Republican Congress this week, how is that not news? Context is important, but so is how he wields influence.

And learning how to balance them. It's a new phenomenon. And making sure his tweets don't necessarily set the cycle of the day if they're not important. But not covering them, I don't think that's an alternative.

My job, of course, is to serve as an advocate for the reader, watching out for violations of sound journalistic practices. So I wanted to ask you, in looking back at 2016, is there an occasion where you think The Times failed its readers, or where you'd love a do-over?

I still think I've got to figure out a way to get a better handle on the staff's use of social media. I think that's an issue for us. I don't think there's a way around it. Not just for us but for everybody. I think there's a tension between wanting journalists to interact with the public and not wanting them to take it too far, which we didn't used to have when I was a young reporter. I remember being a reporter for The Times-Picayune and when a reader called I'd just hang up on them. That's not good. On the other hand we have to have ways that allow people to communicate without a filter and figure out how to do that in social media.

What does that mean, though? That your reporters are crossing over the line?

I think sometimes reporters and editors go over the line. Or are a little ham-handed in their language in a way they wouldn't be in the pages of The Times. And I think people think that's easy to police. It's not. I want people to interact with readers. I want reporters and editors interacting with the wider world. But I think we sometimes cross the line, and we need to figure out a way to not do that.

If I had a do-over it would be about anger in the country -- that we, the press, did not quite have a handle on during the election. The good thing about being an editor of a news organization is that you get a do-over. You just say: We're going to do it better from now on. I think we struggle because of our location in New York. I've asked the national desk and others to get better at countering that. Also, it is unfortunate that with the weakening of local news organizations, the most powerful and significant news organizations in America are in New York and Washington. That means whole parts of the country don't get the best coverage that would help us understand the rest of the country.

Finally, I wanted to end on the role of the reader in today's media environment. Do readers have more power than they used to have to influence decisions editors make at The Times? Or how has their role changed?

The reader has far more power than ever before -- and they should. It's the healthiest thing that's happened to us. I mean, I grew up in an era when the most powerful entity in the economics of journalism was advertising. And newspapers didn't know much about what readers wanted. Their economics were driven by what advertisers wanted. And now the economics of a place like The New York Times are almost the total reverse. Readers pay our bills more than they ever have. We have to listen to them -- and I'd really, really rather be listening to a group of readers, even if they're mad at me, than a group of advertisers who might be mad at me. They have much, much more power. And I think that's like, as much as we complain about the changing economics of the business, which, you know, makes us all nervous, that's a good thing. That's a great thing, in fact.

This transcript has been lightly edited for clarity. A more condensed version appears i n print .

Follow the public editor on Twitter @spaydl and reach her by email at public@nytimes.com.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

(PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW BURTON/GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170108ed1800070



National Desk; SECTA
Before Florida Attack, Losing Job as Soldier and Problems at Home

By LIZETTE ALVAREZ, FRANCES ROBLES and RICHARD PÉEZ-PEÑ; Lizette Alvarez reported from Fort Lauderdale; Frances Robles from Key West, Fla.; and Richard Péez-Peñ from New York. Reporting was contributed by Kirk Johnson from Anchorage; Eli Rosenberg and Elisa Cho from New York; Emily Palmer from Union City, N.J.; and Carla Minet from Peñelas, P.R. 
2,156 words
8 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. -- Signs of Esteban Santiago's unraveling had mounted over the past year. But it was not until early November, when he walked into an F.B.I. office carrying an ammunition clip -- leaving a pistol and his infant son in his car -- to complain about a C.I.A. plot against him, that his behavior became disturbing enough to earn him a short stay in a psychiatric hospital unit.

In the months before, the police were called repeatedly to his home about domestic disturbances, and the National Guard kicked him out because of ''unsatisfactory performance'' after nearly a decade of service. Mr. Santiago, an Iraq war veteran, increasingly spoke to relatives and associates about voices in his head that were tormenting him.

Then, a little before 1 p.m. Friday, Mr. Santiago, 26, turned up far from his Alaska home, in Terminal 2 of the Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport. There, law enforcement officials said, he retrieved his checked luggage, pulled a 9-millimeter handgun out of his suitcase and used it to kill five people and wound six others, setting off a panic that shut down the airport.

After running out of ammunition, he lay spread-eagled on the floor, waiting quietly to be arrested, witnesses said.

Late Saturday afternoon, the United States attorney for the Southern District of Florida announced that Mr. Santiago had been arrested and charged on a federal criminal complaint ''in connection with the deadly shooting of multiple victims at Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport.'' His first court appearance was scheduled for Monday morning before a federal magistrate in Fort Lauderdale.

Law enforcement officials said they had not determined a motive or cause for the attack. And while they said they could not exclude the possibility of terrorism, the initial investigation suggested that Mr. Santiago had acted alone and that there was no evidence that he had terrorist ties.

''It's way too early for us to really rule out anything,'' George Piro, the agent in charge of the F.B.I.'s Miami office, said at a news conference here on Saturday.

But family members said they had a pretty good idea of what led to the attack.

''He said he heard certain voices, that the U.S. government wanted to enroll him in certain groups for ISIS, and he was very paranoid,'' Bryan Santiago Ruiz, an older brother of Mr. Santiago's, said in an interview on Saturday in Peñelas, the small town in Puerto Rico where they grew up.

Esteban Santiago lived in Anchorage, and Bryan Santiago said he had visited him there, most recently staying with him from August through October.

''He said that the C.I.A. controlled him through secret messages over the internet and told him the things he had to do,'' he recalled.

It was on Nov. 7 that Esteban Santiago went to the F.B.I. office in Anchorage ''to report that his mind was being controlled by U.S. intelligence agencies,'' Marlin L. Ritzman, the agent in charge of the office, said on Saturday. ''During the interview, Mr. Santiago appeared agitated, incoherent and made disjointed statements.''

Elaborating, a senior law enforcement official said Mr. Santiago had claimed that the C.I.A. put terrorist propaganda on his computer.

F.B.I. agents called the local police, who took him to a psychiatric facility.

''Santiago was having terroristic thoughts and believed he was being influenced by ISIS,'' said Christopher Tolley, the Anchorage police chief, referring to the Islamic State.

When Mr. Santiago went into the F.B.I. office, he left a pistol and his newborn in his vehicle, Chief Tolley said, and he had an ammunition clip in his pocket.

The senior law enforcement official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the case publicly, said the gun was the same weapon used in the airport shooting on Friday.

The police confiscated the gun but returned it to Mr. Santiago in December, Chief Tolley said.

Bryan Santiago said his brother was held at the hospital for just a few days before being released and, as far as he knew, did not have any follow-up treatment, like medication or therapy.

The Fort Lauderdale airport reopened on Saturday, as the F.B.I. led an investigation that sprawled across the country and airport officials tried to reunite people with what they said were 20,000 items that had been recovered from the terminal, left behind by passengers and airport workers fleeing for their lives.

Esteban Santiago was born in New Jersey but was raised in Puerto Rico, where he joined the Puerto Rico National Guard in 2007 before he finished high school. A classmate said he had always wanted to be a soldier.

In 2010, Mr. Santiago was deployed to Iraq for nine months, working with the 130th Engineer Battalion clearing roads of improvised explosives and maintaining bridges, according to the Alaska Army National Guard. His company was awarded the Meritorious Unit Commendation.

Guard officials said at least two members of the company were killed in insurgent attacks during the tour, but there is no record indicating that Mr. Santiago was ever involved in combat.

Family members said Mr. Santiago was never quite the same after his return.

''After Iraq, something happened,'' Hernan Rivera, 70, Mr. Santiago's uncle, said Saturday afternoon as he stood in his driveway in Union City, N.J. ''When he came back from Iraq, he was a different person.''

He described his nephew as a ''normal kid'' who enjoyed reading.

''He was a person who used to talk a lot,'' Mr. Rivera said. ''And then when he came back, he kept to himself, he'd go to his room, he wouldn't talk to anybody.''

In 2014, Mr. Santiago moved to Alaska and joined the Alaska Army National Guard. He got a job as a security guard and found a girlfriend 14 years his senior. A few months ago, they had a baby; a law enforcement official said it was not clear whether that was the same child that he brought with him to the F.B.I. office in November.

In January 2016, the girlfriend told the police that Mr. Santiago had flown into a rage while she was using the bathroom, broke down the bathroom door and was ''strangling her and smacking her in the side of the head'' while screaming at her, according to a criminal complaint filed against him. A month later, he was charged with violating a court order to stay away from his girlfriend after the police found that he had been living with her again.

In March, a deferred judgment was entered in the case, meaning that it could be dismissed if he stayed out of trouble, but the signs of unrest continued.

Chief Tolley said that once in March and twice in October, Mr. Santiago was the subject of domestic disturbance calls, but each time, officers lacked the basis for making an arrest.

In August, Mr. Santiago, who had reached the rank of private first class and had won several commendations for his earlier National Guard service -- including the Army Good Conduct Medal -- was discharged by the Alaska Guard for ''unsatisfactory performance.''

Despite the disturbing nature of the episode with the F.B.I. in November, it did not land Mr. Santiago on any law enforcement watch lists or on the federal ''no-fly'' list. Neither did it impede his right to possess a gun.

At a news conference on Saturday in Anchorage, officials with the F.B.I. and local law enforcement said that although Mr. Santiago was clearly incoherent during his encounter with F.B.I. agents, he was not deemed to be threatening.

In two other mass killings, perpetrators had drawn attention from the F.B.I. before carrying out their attacks.

Omar Mateen, who killed 49 people and wounded 53 others at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando in June, had fallen under F.B.I. scrutiny twice for possible ties to terrorism.

And Tamerlan Tsarnaev, the older of the two brothers who carried out the Boston Marathon bombing in 2013, was interviewed by agents looking into whether he had extremist tendencies, but their investigation of him ended there.

On Thursday night, Mr. Santiago boarded a flight in Anchorage, changed planes in Minneapolis on Friday morning, and flew into Fort Lauderdale. Law enforcement officials said that he had a semiautomatic handgun in his checked suitcase and that he followed all legal procedures for transporting the weapon. He went into a terminal restroom, took out the gun and loaded it, then returned to the baggage claim area and started shooting, officials said.

He apparently acted alone, Agent Piro said on Saturday, and ''the early indication is that there was no specific reason that he chose Fort Lauderdale International Airport, but we're still pursuing that and trying to really determine why he came here.''

''The suspect did cooperate with the interview team,'' which Agent Piro described as a joint effort by the F.B.I. and the Broward County Sheriff's Office. ''The interview went over several hours and concluded sometime this morning.''

While people who knew Mr. Santiago recently saw anger, instability and paranoia, those who knew him earlier in his life had known someone very different.

Relatives and acquaintances in Puerto Rico remembered him as being quiet and shy -- so reserved that in his hometown, Peñelas, on the island's southwest coast, few people knew anything about him.

Workers at the barbershop, the bakery and the furniture store, and parishioners at the churches near his family's home, said they did not know Mr. Santiago or his family at all. At the police station, officers said they did not recognize him from the photograph that has been shown repeatedly on network and cable television since his arrest.

A neighbor of the family's, Carlos Cruz, a man in his 50s who has lived in the neighborhood his entire life, said he remembered speaking with Mr. Santiago just once.

Those who did recall him described him as highly intelligent, kind and very quiet, part of a somewhat nerdy group who listened to American rock rather than music in Spanish. He spoke of joining the military, seeing it as a way out of the sleepy, economically stagnant region.

Rosemarie Zapata, 27, who attended middle school and high school with him, credited him with persuading her to join the Puerto Rico National Guard. At first, she failed the exam by two points, but it was Mr. Santiago who talked her into persevering and introduced her to his recruiter, she said.

''He told me, 'Study, go, they will help us pay for college, so why don't you try it out?''' she said. He convinced her that she could do it, saying, ''You are going to defy all odds,'' she recalled.

Years later, she ran into him in a Walgreens parking lot, shortly after he had returned from Iraq.

''He was very different,'' she said in a telephone interview from Puerto Rico. ''He told me: 'You would never want to go to Iraq. I saw horrible things, horrible.' He was very different. He was sad.''

Delia Candelario, who went to Josefa Véez Bauzáigh School with Mr. Santiago, said he played basketball with the best-behaved boys, who always followed the teachers' orders.

''He was the most peaceful of all of them,'' she said. ''He participated in classes and all that, but he was pretty shy.''

Another classmate, Joshua Ortiz, said Mr. Santiago was so quiet that when word got out that someone from their school had committed a massacre, hardly anyone could remember his name.

Mr. Santiago and his friends were ''never known to be involved in any problem or any fight during the whole time we were in school,'' Mr. Ortiz said. ''We wonder, how could his life have changed so much for this to have happened?''

Joséernádez, who taught Mr. Santiago history at the school, said: ''He was brilliant and did not show any indications of being disturbed. It's one of those strange cases. There are students who you expect mischief from, but not this one.''

Esteban Santiago (A1); Passengers waited to check in for their flights on Saturday at Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport.; A Broward County sheriff's deputy patrolled the Fort Lauderdale airport as operations resumed there on Saturday. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SCOTT MCINTYRE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16) 

Document NYTF000020170108ed180005h



U.S.
Russia Hacking Report Fuels Distrust, and Derision, Among Trump Backers

By CAMPBELL ROBERTSON and MITCH SMITH 
1,288 words
8 January 2017
02:50
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

COVINGTON, La. —“our grapes,”xplained Bob Marino, 79, weighing in on the recent spycraft bombshell from the corner table of a local McDonald’.

“our grapes,”greed Roger Noel, 65, sitting next to him.

“unch of crybabies,”eed Guidry, 64, offered from across the table.

The subject of conversation was the report released by United States intelligence chiefs on Friday informing President-elect Donald J. Trump of their unanimous conclusion that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia ordered an extensive, but covert, cyberoperation to help Mr. Trump win the election. The Russians had hacked and leaked emails, unleashed “rolls”n social media and used their “tate-run propaganda machine”o spread stories harmful to Hillary Clinton.

In Washington, the report was viewed as extraordinary, both for its timing, raising sharp questions about the president-elect’ legitimacy on the verge of his taking office, and for its assertions, describing the operation as Russia’ boldest effort yet to meddle with American elections, to spread discontent and to “ndermine the U.S.-led democratic order.”

But interviews with Trump supporters here in Louisiana, a state the president-elect won by 20 points, and in Indiana, a state he won by nearly the same margin, found opinions about the report that ranged from general indifference to outright derision.

“rom the parts of the report I’e seen,”aid Rob Maness, a retired Air Force colonel who twice ran for Senate here as Tea Party favorite, “t seems silly.”

There are genuine concerns about Russia’ cyberoperations, he said, but the notion that they changed the outcome of the election was absurd. (The report made no determination on how they affected the election.)

Of the comments he had seen from fellow Trump supporters on Facebook and in emails, he added, “0 percent of them are like, ‘hat’ the big deal?’”

The Russians may have very well gotten involved, several people said. They added that kind of interference should be combated. But many assumed that foreign actors had long tried to play favorites in American elections, and that the United States had done the same in other countries’lections. Even if the Russians did do it —hich some were more willing to concede than others —hat difference did it make? People did not need the Russians to make up their minds about Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Trump’ election opponent. Blaming her loss on the Russians was, as one Trump supporter here said, “ust being sore losers.”

“ don’ think the Russians posed as big a problem to the Clintons as the Clintons posed to themselves,”aid Paul Emenes, 49, while he sold ribs, shoulders and chops from a small table at a frigid outdoor farmers’arket. Russian hacking was concerning, sure, Mr. Emenes said. He added that, as long as Mr. Trump was not involved himself, “t doesn’ change the way I view him.”

Tina Gunaldo, 44, taking blankets off the citrus trees in her Mandeville, La., front yard after the previous night’ frost, had a similar attitude.

“rump is Trump,”he said. “o I think he’ going to become more of a friend to Russia because of this? No I don’. I think — hope —is focus will be on making America great again.”

Ms. Gunaldo would not reveal whom she voted for, but she did say Mr. Trump’ slogan resonated with her. It apparently resonated quite widely in this parish, which he won by more than 50 points. But it was a quiet support, she said. She knew of only one yard in the whole subdivision with a sign.

That yard belonged to Thurston Yates Sr.

“ don’ believe it,”r. Yates, 78, said flatly of the intelligence report. He was standing in the yard under his “ake America Great Again”lag, which he bought at a gun show several months ago. “hy would Putin even want Trump?”

Mr. Yates, who is retired from a career in pharmaceutical sales, was not concerned about what Mr. Trump might do in office, but said he was deeply alarmed about what President Obama might do before he leaves office.

It was Mr. Obama who was too soft on Russia, who let Mr. Putin get away with things, Mr. Yates continued. Mr. Trump would be much tougher.

But Mr. Yates then added: “hy is everybody so afraid of Russia? I’ not against Putin.”

This last sentiment was not uncommon. Even among those who were troubled by the hacks, few felt that Russia was a serious threat. The country was “ basket case,”nd not the powerful foe it once was, said Mr. Marino, from his seat at McDonald’. Others said that North Korea, the Islamic State and China were the real threats. Russia could even be a potential ally in some fights, suggested Valarie Kubacki, 54, a real estate broker in Valparaiso, Ind.

Ms. Kubacki said she perceived Russia as “omewhere in the middle”etween friend and enemy, but agreed with Mr. Trump that the United States could work with them to defeat the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. “e may have to line up with people who may not be our ‘riend’o make that happen,”he said.

That those on the right seemed to be warming to Russia was not seen as a particularly unusual development, though some joked about the incongruity of the left putting such faith in the Central Intelligence Agency.

As they watched their son skate with his Boy Scout group at the public ice rink in downtown Valparaiso, Monty and Mary Willis, both registered Republicans, considered the ramifications of the intelligence report.

“he idea of a fair election”ad been placed in doubt, Ms. Willis said. “e were concerned about money being involved in the election. Now you’e talking about espionage.”

The Willises, who both work in real estate, might be Republicans, but they were not Trump voters. In fact, they had last voted for a Republican presidential candidate in 2008, when Senator John McCain of Arizona ran. The party seemed to have changed in recent years, they said. And the incoming administration had them deeply worried.

“ur president being in cahoots with the Russian government?”r. Willis said. “es, I’ very concerned about that.”

In Louisiana, David Gubert, 56, chain-smoked Eagle 20 cigarettes in the cab of his pickup, with stacks of firewood for sale behind him in the bed. Like the Willises, he ruminated on what it would mean if the Russians had gotten involved, and possibly even swung the election.

But Mr. Gubert came to a different conclusion.

“f that’ what it took,”e said, “’ glad they did it.”

Campbell Robertson reported from Covington, La., and Mitch Smith from Valparaiso, Ind.

* U.S. Reacting at Analog Pace to a Rising Digital Risk, Hacking Report Shows

* Russians Ridicule U.S. Charge That Kremlin Meddled to Help Trump

* Putin Ordered ‘nfluence Campaign’imed at U.S. Election, Report Says

David Gubert, on possible Russian interference: “f that’ what it took, I’ glad they did it.” William Widmer for The New York Times | Paul Emenes: As long as Donald J. Trump wasn’ involved, “t doesn’ change the way I view him.” William Widmer for The New York Times | Tina Gunaldo, on Mr. Trump: “ think — hope —is focus will be on making America great again.” William Widmer for The New York Times | Thurston Yates, on the intelligence report: “ don’ believe it. Why would Putin even want Trump?” William Widmer for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170108ed180005l



us
‘hat’ the Big Deal?’sk Trump Voters on Russia Hacking Report

By CAMPBELL ROBERTSON and MITCH SMITH 
1,317 words
7 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

COVINGTON, La. —“our grapes,”xplained Bob Marino, 79, weighing in on the recent spycraft bombshell from the corner table of a local McDonald’.

“our grapes,”greed Roger Noel, 65, sitting next to him.

“unch of crybabies,”eed Guidry, 64, offered from across the table.

The subject of conversation was the informing President-elect of their unanimous conclusion that President of ordered an extensive, but covert, cyberoperation to help Mr. Trump win the election. The Russians had hacked and leaked emails, unleashed “rolls”n social media and used their “tate-run propaganda machine”o spread stories harmful to Hillary Clinton.

In Washington, the report was viewed as extraordinary, both for its timing, raising sharp questions about the president-elect’ legitimacy on the verge of his taking office, and for its assertions, describing the operation as Russia’ boldest effort yet to meddle with American elections, to spread discontent and to “ndermine the U.S.-led democratic order.”

But interviews with Trump supporters here in Louisiana, a state the president-elect won by 20 points, and in Indiana, a state he won by nearly the same margin, found opinions about the report that ranged from general indifference to outright derision.

“rom the parts of the report I’e seen,”aid a retired Air Force colonel who twice ran for Senate here as favorite, “t seems silly.”

There are genuine concerns about Russia’ cyberoperations, he said, but the notion that they changed the outcome of the election was absurd. (The report made no determination on how they affected the election.)

Of the comments he had seen from fellow Trump supporters on Facebook and in emails, he added, “0 percent of them are like, ‘hat’ the big deal?’”

The Russians may have very well gotten involved, several people said. They added that kind of interference should be combated. But many assumed that foreign actors had long tried to play favorites in American elections, and that the United States had done the same in other countries’lections. Even if the Russians did do it —hich some were more willing to concede than others —hat difference did it make? People did not need the Russians to make up their minds about Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Trump’ election opponent. Blaming her loss on the Russians was, as one Trump supporter here said, “ust being sore losers.”

“ don’ think the Russians posed as big a problem to the Clintons as the Clintons posed to themselves,”aid Paul Emenes, 49, while he sold ribs, shoulders and chops at a frigid outdoor farmers’arket in Covington. Russian hacking was concerning, sure, Mr. Emenes said. He added that, as long as Mr. Trump was not involved himself, “t doesn’ change the way I view him.”

Tina Gunaldo, 44, taking blankets off the citrus trees in her Mandeville, La., front yard after the previous night’ frost, had a similar attitude.

“rump is Trump,”he said. “o I think he’ going to become more of a friend to Russia because of this? No I don’. I think — hope —is focus will be on making America great again.”

Ms. Gunaldo would not reveal whom she voted for, but she did say Mr. Trump’ slogan resonated with her. It apparently resonated quite widely in this parish, which he won by more than 50 points. But it was a quiet support, she said. She knew of only one yard in the whole subdivision with a sign.

That yard belonged to Thurston Yates Sr.

“ don’ believe it,”r. Yates, 78, said flatly of the intelligence report. He was standing in the yard under his “ake America Great Again”lag, which he bought at a gun show several months ago. “hy would Putin even want Trump?”

Mr. Yates, who is retired from a career in pharmaceutical sales, was not concerned about what Mr. Trump might do in office, but said he was deeply alarmed about what President Obama might do before he leaves office.

It was Mr. Obama who was too soft on Russia, who let Mr. Putin get away with things, Mr. Yates continued. Mr. Trump would be much tougher.

But Mr. Yates then added: “hy is everybody so afraid of Russia? I’ not against Putin.”

This last sentiment was not uncommon. Even among those who were troubled by the hacks, few felt that Russia was a serious threat. The country was “ basket case,”nd not the powerful foe it once was, said Mr. Marino, from his seat at McDonald’. Others said that North Korea, the Islamic State and China were the real threats. Russia could even be a potential ally in some fights, suggested Valarie Kubacki, 54, a real estate broker in Valparaiso, Ind.

Ms. Kubacki said she perceived Russia as “omewhere in the middle”etween friend and enemy, but agreed with Mr. Trump that the United States could work with them to defeat the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. “e may have to line up with people who may not be our ‘riend’o make that happen,”he said.

That those on the right seemed to be warming to Russia was not seen as a particularly unusual development, though some joked about the incongruity of the left putting such faith in the Central Intelligence Agency.

As they watched their son skate with his Boy Scout group at the public ice rink in downtown Valparaiso, Monty and Mary Willis, both registered Republicans, considered the ramifications of the intelligence report.

“he idea of a fair election”ad been placed in doubt, Ms. Willis said. “e were concerned about money being involved in the election. Now you’e talking about espionage.”

The Willises, who both work in real estate, might be Republicans, but they were not Trump voters. In fact, they had last voted for a Republican presidential candidate in 2008, when Senator John McCain of Arizona ran. The party seemed to have changed in recent years, they said. And the incoming administration had them deeply worried.

“ur president being in cahoots with the Russian government?”r. Willis said. “es, I’ very concerned about that.”

In Louisiana, David Gubert, 56, chain-smoked Eagle 20 cigarettes in the cab of his pickup, with stacks of firewood for sale behind him in the bed. Like the Willises, he ruminated on what it would mean if the Russians had gotten involved, and possibly even swung the election.

But Mr. Gubert came to a different conclusion.

“f that’ what it took,”e said, “’ glad they did it.”

Campbell Robertson reported from Covington, La., and Mitch Smith from Valparaiso, Ind.

PHOTOS: Paul Emenes: As long as Donald J. Trump wasn’ involved, “t doesn’ change the way I view him.” Tina Gunaldo, on Mr. Trump: “ think — hope —is focus will be on making America great again.” Thurston Yates, on the intelligence report: “ don’ believe it. Why would Putin even want Trump?” David Gubert, on possible Russian interference: “f that’ what it took, I’ glad they did it.”PHOTOGRAPHS BY WILLIAM WIDMER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A15)

Related Articles

https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-01/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-01-articleLarge.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-01/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-01-jumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-01/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-01-superJumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-01/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-01-moth.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-01/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-01-articleInline.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-01/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-01-sfSpan.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-01/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-01-filmstrip.jpg | David Gubert, on possible Russian interference: “f that’ what it took, I’ glad they did it.” William Widmer for The New York Times | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-02/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-02-articleLarge.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-02/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-02-jumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-02/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-02-superJumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-02/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-02-moth.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-02/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-02-articleInline.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-02/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-02-sfSpan.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-02/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-02-filmstrip.jpg | Paul Emenes: As long as Donald J. Trump wasn’ involved, “t doesn’ change the way I view him.” William Widmer for The New York Times | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-03/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-03-articleLarge.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-03/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-03-jumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-03/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-03-superJumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-03/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-03-moth.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-03/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-03-articleInline.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-03/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-03-sfSpan.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-03/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-03-filmstrip.jpg | Tina Gunaldo, on Mr. Trump: “ think — hope —is focus will be on making America great again.” William Widmer for The New York Times | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-04/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-04-articleLarge.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-04/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-04-jumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-04/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-04-superJumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-04/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-04-moth.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-04/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-04-articleInline.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-04/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-04-sfSpan.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/08/us/08VOTERS-04/08TRUMP-VOICES-HACK-04-filmstrip.jpg | Thurston Yates, on the intelligence report: “ don’ believe it. Why would Putin even want Trump?” William Widmer for The New York Times 

Document INHT000020170110ed170000q



The Public Editor
Public Editor
The Future of the Times: A View From the Top

By LIZ SPAYD 
2,409 words
7 January 2017
20:59
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WITH The New York Times facing another year of rapid-cycle innovation and a big political story in Washington, I sat down with the executive editor, Dean Baquet, to see how he believes readers might feel the impact.

There’ a highly anticipated internal report due out soon that will set the future path for New York Times innovation. How do you suppose forthcoming changes will actually affect readers? Will new features be added? Or current ones eliminated? Will The Times tell stories in ways it doesn’ now?

I think readers will continue to see more exploration of ways to tell stories, a continuing emphasis on video and multimedia online, and more of an effort in which we acknowledge the phone is a completely different medium than print. We’e going to think harder about how we’e going to edit The New York Times. Trying to edit The Times the way we edited it in a purely print era is unreasonable. The layers of editing, the number of people who touch a story. The fact is that we now write so much more. Right now, as we talk, there’ a hearing on Russian hacking. I’e been in meetings all day, but we’e probably written 10 posts. All of those posts, and the large print stories done at the end of the day, cannot be edited in the same way. The challenge is how to still be fast and give people a story in a form that is accurate. But it’ hard. If we succeed, readers won’ notice most of these editing changes.

Also, I think people will see more changes in the print New York Times. We just redesigned Culture. I’ not sure yet what redesigns of other sections of The New York Times will look like, but we’e looking at how we produce the print New York Times.

Are they going see less space devoted to m etro coverage?

I’ not being coy. I don’ think so, if you think past the actual desks. I think of Metro as everything from local investigative reporting, which we do a lot of, to local culture reporting, which we do a lot of, to local business reporting, which we do a lot of. So I’ not sure people will see the word “ew York”ppear less in The New York Times. I think they will see less —nd I have already seen less —ncremental New York news coverage.

We did a story a few days ago that said we don’ have a reporter in New Jersey right now. Look, I wish we had the resources to have what we used to have in New Jersey and Connecticut, but the reality is that we don’. And I think to do the window dressing of having one reporter running around doesn’ quite make it. I think we have to try to figure out how to cover stories that resonate for the whole region, which is why you see more transportation coverage. I think you will always see The Times deeply invested in covering the mayor and governor of New York. I have no intention of pulling back any of that coverage. But I think you will see less incremental coverage of New York, without question.

You’e spoken about buyouts and other newsroom cuts. How might those impact readers? Will readers be notified if favorite bylines move on, one subscriber asks?

That’ interesting, I hadn’ thought of that. We will have a smaller newsroom but I don’ know what that means yet because there’ so many factors. Print advertising, which was one of the things that most sustained our newsroom, and all newsrooms, for a long time is dropping significantly —nd more this year than ever before. The election of Donald Trump also changes the calculation, for example. We went from three to six people covering the White House. We have to think harder about how we cover agencies in Washington, because it’ going to undergo a dramatic transformation. My goal is to keep as many people as we can whose work is to gather news. Who write stories, cover the world, take video.

Mark Thompson, the C.E.O., recently raised the possibility that The Times could reach 10 million digital subscribers, which could really be a game changer in supporting your journalistic ambitions. Is that a number pulled out of a hat or do you think it’ realistic, and if so by when?

Well, I don’ know by when, but I certainly did not expect the dramatic rise in subscriptions that The New York Times has seen. I don’ think the industry’ seen anything like it —nd that was before Trump. I remember going to a celebration not that long ago when we crossed a million. And that seemed like such an elusive, big thing. And if we have more years like the year we just had, I don’ think that’ [10 million] unreasonable. I don’ know when that will be, but it’ not unreasonable. And, by the way, we’e just starting our international expansion, because most of our audience is still domestic. I think that there’ a big audience for New York Times coverage; I think a lot of people don’ know what we do. It’ always surprising when we talk to readers —hey don’ know how much video we do. We did an experiment in which we showed them some foreign coverage —nd readers assumed it was Vice. We do more adventurous foreign reporting than anybody in the world. Oddly enough for an institution that people think of as overconfident sometimes, we’e not that good at tooting our own horn.

I did a call-out to readers earlier this week asking what questions they had for you. Many, not surprisingly, asked about politics. They seem to be in two camps. One complains that opinion is bleeding into news stories. Another worries that The Times will “ormalize”rump and fall prey to his manipulations. Does one of these sides better represent your concern?

I think this is an extraordinary presidency. And the reason that we’e putting more energy into covering it is not because we have this goal of taking Donald Trump down. It is because he literally has placed people in positions of power who by the standards of Washington, whether you like them or not —nd I’ using this as a neutral word —re revolutionary figures. The secretary of state is unlike any we have ever had. He ran the biggest corporation in the world. The head of the E.P.A. doesn’ necessarily think we should have an E.P.A. So this is an extraordinary moment in the life of Washington. And we will cover that very, very aggressively.

I do not believe that opinion has seeped into the pages of The New York Times. I think some who think that do so because of my decision to use the word “ie”in stories that refer to Trump’ bolder falsehoods]. Some of it is, to be frank, because some of our competitors have accused us of that and I think that resonates with people. I really don’ buy it and we work really, really hard to not do it.

Our writing is more relaxed than it used to be —hat’ intentional. I actually think some newspaper writing of a generation ago was too stilted, was too hard to follow, too hard to understand. And I think that I’e tried really hard to push us to loosen up language. I think there was something elitist about coverage of Congress 25 years ago that assumed people knew how a bill became a law. And I think the one thing we’e been smacked in the head with in recent years is that people don’ understand that stuff. And the most non-elitist thing we can do is to assume people don’ understand it. To relax a bit in forms of storytelling, to tell people when we witness things and observe things. To be transparent. Of course, does that mean that sometimes we may have slipped in way I wish we hadn’? Yes, of course. But I think the alternative, which was to keep telling stories in this sort of made-up newspaper language that I grew up on, I don’ think that’ a good alternative.

But do you think reporters and editors at times inject opinion?

You and I could probably go through The Times every day and come up with a couple examples where they do. But I think mostly they don’.

Another political question from a reader, on the topic of Trump’ crack-of-dawn tweets: “or the love of God, can The Times stop treating Trump’ tweets as front-page news?”n essence, plenty of readers ask, why does The Times give so much attention to his tweets, even some that are misleading or inaccurate?

I think we need to devise a way to more quickly put them in perspective and call them out, if they’e exaggerated, and more quickly try to figure out their meaning. But I don’ think we could get away with not covering them. He’ the president of the United States. They’e not press releases. They’e his utterances at six o’lock in the morning. You wanna talk about a slippery slope? Picture the scene: six o’lock in the morning, The Times looks at a tweet he makes about ISIS, and we say, “h, that one doesn’ feel important, we don’ believe him.”hat’ more injecting opinion into coverage than an occasional slip in language.

I agree. If he’ going to tweet, like when he chastised his own Republican Congress this week, how is that not news? Context is important, but so is how he wields influence.

And learning how to balance them. It’ a new phenomenon. And making sure his tweets don’ necessarily set the cycle of the day if they’e not important. But not covering them, I don’ think that’ an alternative.

My job, of course, is to serve as an advocate for the reader, watching out for violations of sound journalistic practices. So I wanted to ask you, in looking back at 2016, is there an occasion where you think The Times failed its readers, or where you’ love a do-over?

I still think I’e got to figure out a way to get a better handle on the staff’ use of social media. I think that’ an issue for us. I don’ think there’ a way around it. Not just for us but for everybody. I think there’ a tension between wanting journalists to interact with the public and not wanting them to take it too far, which we didn’ used to have when I was a young reporter. I remember being a reporter for The Times-Picayune and when a reader called I’ just hang up on them. That’ not good. On the other hand we have to have ways that allow people to communicate without a filter and figure out how to do that in social media.

What does that mean, though? That your reporters are crossing over the line?

I think sometimes reporters and editors go over the line. Or are a little ham-handed in their language in a way they wouldn’ be in the pages of The Times. And I think people think that’ easy to police. It’ not. I want people to interact with readers. I want reporters and editors interacting with the wider world. But I think we sometimes cross the line, and we need to figure out a way to not do that.

If I had a do-over it would be about anger in the country —hat we, the press, did not quite have a handle on during the election. The good thing about being an editor of a news organization is that you get a do-over. You just say: We’e going to do it better from now on. I think we struggle because of our location in New York. I’e asked the national desk and others to get better at countering that. Also, it is unfortunate that with the weakening of local news organizations, the most powerful and significant news organizations in America are in New York and Washington. That means whole parts of the country don’ get the best coverage that would help us understand the rest of the country.

Finally, I wanted to end on the role of the reader in today’ media environment. Do readers have more power than they used to have to influence decisions editors make at The Times? Or how has their role changed?

The reader has far more power than ever before —nd they should. It’ the healthiest thing that’ happened to us. I mean, I grew up in an era when the most powerful entity in the economics of journalism was advertising. And newspapers didn’ know much about what readers wanted. Their economics were driven by what advertisers wanted. And now the economics of a place like The New York Times are almost the total reverse. Readers pay our bills more than they ever have. We have to listen to them —nd I’ really, really rather be listening to a group of readers, even if they’e mad at me, than a group of advertisers who might be mad at me. They have much, much more power. And I think that’ like, as much as we complain about the changing economics of the business, which, you know, makes us all nervous, that’ a good thing. That’ a great thing, in fact.

This transcript has been lightly edited for clarity. A more condensed version appears i n print .

Follow the public editor on Twitter@spaydl and reach her by email at public@nytimes.com.

The New York Times headquarters building. | Andrew Burton/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170107ed17004v1



Foreign Desk; SECTA
In Turkey's Unrest, Some See an Extreme Version of Post-9/11 America

By TIM ARANGO and RICK GLADSTONE; Tim Arango reported from Istanbul, and Rick Gladstone from New York. 
1,686 words
7 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ISTANBUL -- An Islamic State disciple kills 39 New Year's revelers at an Istanbul nightclub. A gunman with a police badge assassinates Russia's ambassador at an Ankara reception. Kurdish separatist bombers kill 14 soldiers on a bus in central Turkey and dozens of police officers at an Istanbul soccer match.

Those assaults were just in the last few weeks, which made a car bombing on Thursday in the city of Izmir, where at least two civilians were killed, seem relatively minor.

The 75 million people of Turkey, the NATO member and European Union aspirant that straddles Europe and Asia and was once seen as a stable democracy, are facing a ferocious onslaught of terrorist attacks unlike anything that has been seen in the West.

Add to that the tumult from roughly three million Syrian war refugees, a resurgent Kurdish insurgency and a failed military coup -- all tied, in the eyes of many Turks, to American negligence, or malice, or both.

President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has responded with a furious crackdown on an array of perceived enemies, including the news media, and has lashed out at what he regards as Western complicity.

While Mr. Erdogan's critics have denounced what they see as a bald usurpation of power that has subverted democracy and polarized the country, many Turks, frightened and uncertain, are not complaining. They view his authoritarianism as reassuring and angrily reject outsider comments about paranoia and conspiracy theories.

Some are even embracing the advent of President-elect Donald J. Trump, despite his anti-Muslim statements, viewing him as a decisive strongman sympathetic to Mr. Erdogan, an Islamist with little tolerance for those who dispute him.

In some ways, political historians and scholars say, what is happening in Turkey parallels the aftermath of the 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, the 2015 attacks in France and, most recently, the response to attacks in Germany.

In all of them, many citizens were willing to overlook or forsake civil liberties, government powers grew, fringe groups strengthened and spread intolerance, and dissent was regarded with suspicion.

''I think there are a lot of similar tendencies, and it leads to, in an extreme case, what we're seeing in Turkey,'' said Steven A. Cook, a senior fellow for Middle East and African Studies at the Council on Foreign Relations in Washington.

Still, Mr. Cook said, ''It's not that far a leap to go to an extreme -- can you imagine if the attacks in Turkey had happened in the United States?''

On Friday, Hilal Kaplan, a columnist for Daily Sabah, a newspaper close to the government, lashed out at Western news coverage, including an article in The New York Times, that has emphasized conspiracy theories coursing through Turkish society that the United States is behind terrorism in Turkey.

Describing the article as ''an attempt to condescend and affront rather than reflecting an effort to understand Turkey,'' Ms. Kaplan said that Turks have good reason to be suspicious of the United States.

She pointed out that Fethullah Gulen, the cleric and former Erdogan ally who many Turks believe was behind the coup attempt, lives in Pennsylvania, and that a former C.I.A. official had once vouched for Mr. Gulen on his green card application.

In addition, she called attention to something else: The United States has provided military support to a Syrian Kurdish militia fighting Islamic State extremists, a militia that Turkey considers an ally of the P.K.K., the outlawed Kurdish separatist organization regarded as a terrorist enemy.

In her Friday column, headlined ''Why Turkey is looking forward to Trump administration,'' she added, ''do they really need such details if their only wish is to represent the Turkish people as paranoid and Erdogan as a villain?''

In another parallel to post-9/11 America, the Turkish government has aggressively exploited tragic events to stoke patriotic feelings and to frame the broader struggle within the country as a fight to secure democracy, even if democratic practices are eroded to do so.

The comparison was not lost on Turkish scholars, even those critical of Mr. Erdogan, who were in the United States when the World Trade Center and the Pentagon were attacked.

''I couldn't believe the extent to which there was a rise in nationalism, even among academics,'' said Kemal Kirisci, a senior fellow and director of The Turkey Project at the Brookings Institution, recalling his own memories of living in America. ''I felt intimidated intellectually, almost felt censured.''

After the coup attempt, the government moved quickly to memorialize victims and places rived by violence, renaming a bridge in Istanbul and a square in Ankara, and changing street names to honor citizens who died defending Mr. Erdogan's government.

At year's end, the prime minister's office delivered packages to foreign correspondents in Turkey. Inside a black velvet box, with a silver clasp, was a small marble chunk, described as rubble from the Parliament building in Ankara, retrieved after an attack was carried out during the coup attempt.

A note said that the rock ''is presented to you as a symbol of Turkey's devotion to democracy.''

And like American leaders who exhort citizens to maintain daily routines after terrorist attacks, the Turkish prime minister, Binali Yildirim, urged Turks this week to carry on. ''Our citizens should not change the flow of their normal lives,'' Mr. Yildirim said in a speech. ''If they do, it will be serving the purposes of the terror group.''

Mr. Erdogan and his allies see a double standard in the West's reaction to Turkey, and say that some of the same measures Turkey is taking to combat terrorism, like resorting to emergency rule, have been embraced in the West, particularly in France.

It is this disconnect -- between how Turkey perceives its own experience and the West's reaction to events in Turkey -- that has contributed to Turkey pulling away from its NATO allies, and moving closer to Russia.

''In France there is emergency rule for three months, and again for three months, and lately for six months, in total for a year,'' Mr. Erdogan said in September. ''Is anyone from around the world asking France, 'why did you declare emergency rule for a year?'''

Mr. Erdogan emphasized that the violence Turkey has faced is far greater than in countries like France. ''My brothers, Turkey was the scene of terror incidents so heavy that they cannot be compared with France, and more importantly we faced a coup attempt,'' he said. ''From this perspective I believe my country will understand the extension of emergency rule, and support it.''

In a speech on Friday, Mr. Erdogan underscored the deep traumas Turkey has suffered in recent years.

''I do not believe any other country exists that went on its way standing upright after living with what we have gone through since 2013,'' Mr. Erdogan said. ''We became a unique example in history. We showed democracy can be protected together with security challenges.''

Mr. Erdogan's supporters say they are especially upset over how the West has reacted to Turkey's response to terrorism, saying they had expected solidarity, not criticism.

''This is an obvious, very serious and problematic disrespect against Turkey's right to defend itself against terror,'' said Mustafa Yeneroglu, a member of Parliament with Mr. Erdogan's Islamist Justice and Development Party.

Mr. Yeneroglu, the head of Parliament's human rights committee, said Turkey faced the same conundrum any country faces when traumatized by terrorist acts.

''If there is no security, there would be no room to enjoy the liberties,'' he said. ''This situation leads to prioritizing security while answering questions, 'security or liberty?' This is not only valid for Turkey but for all over liberal democracies.''

Turkish liberals say they understand the need for extraordinary measures, but they make two counter arguments. One is that Turkey's broad crackdown -- in putting so many journalists and intellectuals in jail -- has gone too far, and is seemingly unrelated to fighting terrorism. Another is that, even with emergency rule, the country has become less safe.

''On the contrary, we have faced more attacks, more terror,'' said Yaman Akdeniz, a lawyer and professor at Bilgi University in Istanbul who represents many jailed journalists.

He continued, ''there is emergency rule in France, but there is no other country limiting fundamental rights and freedoms on this scale.''

Orhan Kemal Cengiz, a prominent human rights lawyer who was briefly detained after the attempted coup, put it this way: ''Yes, ISIS is attacking. The P.K.K. is attacking. There was this coup d'éat attempt. But what is this to do with all these journalists? There are over 150 journalists in jail. And with every passing day, they arrest more and more people.''

Marc Pierini, a visiting scholar at Carnegie Europe in Brussels who was a former European Union ambassador to Turkey, said the post-coup purges in the military, the courts and the police have, paradoxically, compromised the country's ability to protect the public.

Mr. Pierini also took issue with the government's contention that its response to threats has been appropriate.

''As we've seen after the coup, the reaction is way outside of the formal rule of law. You started arresting police and gendarmes, now writers, actors, journalists -- so there is no limit,'' he said. ''When you start pulling the thread on the rule of law, the whole sweater can come off. And that's where we stand.''

The 8-year-old daughter of Fethi Sekin, a police officer killed Thursday by a bomb in Izmir, with his coffin during a funeral service Friday at the city's courthouse. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HAKAN AKGUN/REUTERS); Police officers in Istanbul, near a nightclub where New Year's revelers were killed. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has responded to violence and a coup attempt with a furious crackdown. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EMRAH GUREL/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170107ed170008q



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
Arms and the Trump

By GAIL COLLINS 
882 words
7 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
19
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

When a man at a Florida airport retrieves his luggage, takes out a gun and kills five people, the only part people are surprised about is that it happened at an airport.

In the grand sweep of American gunfire in the 21st century, all we can say about Friday's Fort Lauderdale tragedy was that it's the worst mass shooting so far in 2017. But there have already been six incidents with more than three dead or wounded victims. On Wednesday, three family members in Fontana, Calif., were killed in their home and another critically wounded. A 73-year-old relative was charged. Never even entered the national conversation.

But the Fort Lauderdale case was personal -- almost everybody travels through airports. ''You just can't imagine how this could ever happen in a state like ours,'' said Florida Gov. Rick Scott at a press conference. A few minutes later he did remember to refer to the fact that last year 49 people were shot to death in a gay nightclub in Orlando.

Officials were still unsorting the history of the suspect, identified as Esteban Santiago, and trying to determine whether he was inspired, even in a totally deranged way, by ISIS. Whenever these tragedies happen, the nation holds its breath until there's an assurance that it did not involve terrorism. If we get the word, there's a sigh of relief and we go back to living in a country where a random guy will suddenly open fire in a mall or theater or school just because he's nuts and has a gun.

In theory, when a horrific tragedy occurs, the nation is supposed to join hands and come together. It's hard to do that in mass shooting cases because America is a land divided between gun places and non-gun places. The immediate reaction of many folks from gun places to the Fort Lauderdale shooting was that -- aha! -- Florida is one of the few states where it's illegal to carry a gun anywhere in an airline terminal.

Meanwhile, many people in non-gun places wondered why airline passengers were allowed to have firearms in their luggage.

It's hard to have a rational gun conversation in a country with such a cultural chasm. It's the job of our national officials to bridge the gap. And it ought to be possible, since there are some important issues on which almost everybody agrees. One is that gun purchases should be run through background checks to make sure the buyer doesn't have a record of lawbreaking or serious mental problems.

We will be arguing for a while about whether background checks could have stopped the Florida airport shooting. But either way, sensible regulation of gun sales will still be sensible regulation of gun sales.

This is the moment where I tell you that our president-elect does not believe in sensible regulation of gun sales.

Donald Trump's position on gun laws has gone through a rather familiar evolution. Back in the day he was a sort of indifferent moderate. Then came the campaign and a love affair with the National Rifle Association, which dumped about $30 million into the effort to get Trump elected president.

Soon, he was fantasizing about packing heat during the Paris terrorist shootings. (''I can tell you that if I had been in the Bataclan or in the cafes, I would have opened fire. I may have been killed, but I would have drawn.'')

He appeared, during one rally, to suggest that if Hillary Clinton was elected president, gun lovers might want to take her out. (''If she gets to pick her judges, nothing you can do, folks. Although the Second Amendment people -- maybe there is, I don't know.'')

And he has consistently endorsed the theory that if more people were carrying around guns, the nation would be a much safer place. Donald Trump Jr., a chairman of his dad's new Second Amendment Coalition, declared, ''My father defends the Second Amendment so that you and I and your spouse and your children can take care of themselves when someone much stronger, much meaner, and much more vicious than them tries to break into their home.''

In the real world, the chances that having a weapon in the house will translate into protecting the family from a vicious housebreaker are infinitesimal, and far, far smaller than the chances that someone in the family will wind up shot by the very same weapon.

But about the background checks: The N.R.A. lobbyists hate them. And Trump has promised that as soon as he's sworn in, he'll ''unsign'' Barack Obama's executive order closing a big loophole involving online sales and gun shows.

Trump could make a really good start this month by just -- not doing anything divisive. Give the country a hint that the guy who terrified so many Americans during the campaign will be more measured in office. Leave the background checks alone. We've been through a lot.

I invite you to join me on Facebook.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170107ed170006n



World; Europe
In Turkey’ Unrest, Some See an Extreme Version of Post-9/11 America

By TIM ARANGO and RICK GLADSTONE 
1,742 words
7 January 2017
02:27
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ISTANBUL —n Islamic State disciple kills 39 New Year’ revelers at an Istanbul nightclub. A gunman with a police badge assassinates Russia’ ambassador at an Ankara reception. Kurdish separatist bombers kill 14 soldiers on a bus in central Turkey and dozens of police officers at an Istanbul soccer match.

Those assaults were just in the last few weeks, which made a car bombing on Thursday in the city of Izmir, where at least two civilians were killed, seem relatively minor.

The 75 million people of Turkey, the NATO member and European Union aspirant that straddles Europe and Asia and was once seen as a stable democracy, are facing a ferocious onslaught of terrorist attacks unlike anything that has been seen in the West.

Add to that the tumult from roughly three million Syrian war refugees, a resurgent Kurdish insurgency and a failed military coup —ll tied, in the eyes of many Turks, to American negligence, or malice, or both.

President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has responded with a furious crackdown on an array of perceived enemies, including the news media, and has lashed out at what he regards as Western complicity.

While Mr. Erdogan’ critics have denounced what they see as a bald usurpation of power that has subverted democracy and polarized the country, many Turks, frightened and uncertain, are not complaining. They view his authoritarianism as reassuring and angrily reject outsider comments about paranoia and conspiracy theories.

Some are even embracing the advent of President-elect Donald J. Trump, despite his anti-Muslim statements, viewing him as a decisive strongman sympathetic to Mr. Erdogan, an Islamist with little tolerance for those who dispute him.

In some ways, political historians and scholars say, what is happening in Turkey parallels the aftermath of the 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, the 2015 attacks in France and, most recently, the response to attacks in Germany.

In all of them, many citizens were willing to overlook or forsake civil liberties, government powers grew, fringe groups strengthened and spread intolerance, and dissent was regarded with suspicion.

“ think there are a lot of similar tendencies, and it leads to, in an extreme case, what we’e seeing in Turkey,”aid Steven A. Cook, a senior fellow for Middle East and African Studies at the Council on Foreign Relations in Washington.

Still, Mr. Cook said, “t’ not that far a leap to go to an extreme —an you imagine if the attacks in Turkey had happened in the United States?”

On Friday, Hilal Kaplan, a columnist for Daily Sabah, a newspaper close to the government, lashed out at Western news coverage, including an article in The New York Times, that has emphasized conspiracy theories coursing through Turkish society that the United States is behind terrorism in Turkey.

Describing the article as “n attempt to condescend and affront rather than reflecting an effort to understand Turkey,”s. Kaplan said that Turks have good reason to be suspicious of the United States.

She pointed out that Fethullah Gulen, the cleric and former Erdogan ally who many Turks believe was behind the coup attempt, lives in Pennsylvania, and that a former C.I.A. official had once vouched for Mr. Gulen on his green card application.

In addition, she called attention to something else: The United States has provided military support to a Syrian Kurdish militia fighting Islamic State extremists, a militia that Turkey considers an ally of the P.K.K., the outlawed Kurdish separatist organization regarded as a terrorist enemy.

In her Friday column, headlined “hy Turkey is looking forward to Trump administration,”he added, “o they really need such details if their only wish is to represent the Turkish people as paranoid and Erdogan as a villain?”

In another parallel to post-9/11 America, the Turkish government has aggressively exploited tragic events to stoke patriotic feelings and to frame the broader struggle within the country as a fight to secure democracy, even if democratic practices are eroded to do so.

The comparison was not lost on Turkish scholars, even those critical of Mr. Erdogan, who were in the United States when the World Trade Center and the Pentagon were attacked.

“ couldn’ believe the extent to which there was a rise in nationalism, even among academics,”aid Kemal Kirisci, a senior fellow and director of The Turkey Project at the Brookings Institution, recalling his own memories. “ felt intimidated intellectually, almost felt censured.”

After the coup attempt, the government moved quickly to memorialize victims and places rived by violence, renaming a bridge in Istanbul and a square in Ankara, and changing street names to honor citizens who died defending Mr. Erdogan’ government.

At year’ end, the prime minister’ office delivered packages to foreign correspondents in Turkey. Inside a black velvet box, with a silver clasp, was a small marble chunk, described as rubble from the Parliament building in Ankara, retrieved after an attack was carried out during the coup attempt.

A note said that the rock “s presented to you as a symbol of Turkey’ devotion to democracy.”

And like American leaders who exhort citizens to maintain daily routines after terrorist attacks, the Turkish prime minister, Binali Yildirim, urged Turks this week to carry on. “ur citizens should not change the flow of their normal lives,”r. Yildirim said in a speech. “f they do, it will be serving the purposes of the terror group.”

Mr. Erdogan and his allies see a double standard in the West’ reaction to Turkey, and say that some of the same measures Turkey is taking to combat terrorism, like resorting to emergency rule, have been embraced in the West, particularly in France.

It is this disconnect —etween how Turkey perceives its own experience and the West’ reaction to events in Turkey —hat has contributed to Turkey pulling away from its NATO allies, and moving closer to Russia.

“n France there is emergency rule for three months, and again for three months, and lately for six months, in total for a year,”r. Erdogan said in September. “s anyone from around the world asking France, ‘hy did you declare emergency rule for a year?’”

Mr. Erdogan emphasized that the violence Turkey has faced is far greater than in countries like France. “y brothers, Turkey was the scene of terror incidents so heavy that they cannot be compared with France, and more importantly we faced a coup attempt,”e said. “rom this perspective I believe my country will understand the extension of emergency rule, and support it.”

In a speech on Friday, Mr. Erdogan underscored the deep traumas Turkey has suffered in recent years.

“ do not believe any other country exists that went on its way standing upright after living with what we have gone through since 2013,”r. Erdogan said. “e became a unique example in history. We showed democracy can be protected together with security challenges.”

Mr. Erdogan’ supporters say they are especially upset over how the West has reacted to Turkey’ response to terrorism, saying they had expected solidarity, not criticism.

“his is an obvious, very serious and problematic disrespect against Turkey’ right to defend itself against terror,”aid Mustafa Yeneroglu, a member of Parliament with Mr. Erdogan’ Islamist Justice and Development Party.

Mr. Yeneroglu, the head of Parliament’ human rights committee, said Turkey faced the same conundrum any country faces when traumatized by terrorist acts.

“f there is no security, there would be no room to enjoy the liberties,”e said. “his situation leads to prioritizing security while answering questions, ‘ecurity or liberty?’his is not only valid for Turkey but for all over liberal democracies.”

Turkish liberals say they understand the need for extraordinary measures, but they make two counter arguments. One is that Turkey’ broad crackdown —n putting so many journalists and intellectuals in jail —as gone too far, and is seemingly unrelated to fighting terrorism. Another is that, even with emergency rule, the country has become less safe.

“n the contrary, we have faced more attacks, more terror,”aid Yaman Akdeniz, a lawyer and professor at Bilgi University in Istanbul who represents many jailed journalists.

He continued, “here is emergency rule in France, but there is no other country limiting fundamental rights and freedoms on this scale.”

Orhan Kemal Cengiz, a prominent human rights lawyer who was briefly detained after the attempted coup, put it this way: “es, \b ISIS\b0  is attacking. The P.K.K. is attacking. There was this coup d’éat attempt. But what is this to do with all these journalists? There are over 150 journalists in jail. And with every passing day, they arrest more and more people.”

Marc Pierini, a visiting scholar at Carnegie Europe in Brussels who was a former European Union ambassador to Turkey, said the post-coup purges in the military, the courts and the police have, paradoxically, compromised the country’ ability to protect the public.

Mr. Pierini also took issue with the government’ contention that its response to threats has been appropriate.

“s we’e seen after the coup, the reaction is way outside of the formal rule of law. You started arresting police and gendarmes, now writers, actors, journalists —o there is no limit,”e said. “hen you start pulling the thread on the rule of law, the whole sweater can come off. And that’ where we stand.”

Tim Arango reported from Istanbul, and Rick Gladstone from New York.

* In Turkey, U.S. Hand Is Seen in Nearly Every Crisis

* Nightclub Massacre in Istanbul Exposes Turkey’ Deepening Fault Lines

* In Turkey, a Capstone to a Violent Year. In Germany, a Realization of Fears.

Police officers in Istanbul, near a nightclub where New Year’ revelers were killed. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has responded to violence and a coup attempt with a furious crackdown. | Emrah Gurel/Associated Press | Terror attacks, an assassination, an attempted coup and a crackdown on the opposition made 2016 a turbulent year for the country. | By MEGAN SPECIA, AINARA TIEFENTHÄER, YOUSUR AL-HLOU and NEIL COLLIER | Terror attacks, an assassination, an attempted coup and a crackdown on the opposition made 2016 a turbulent year for the country. | By MEGAN SPECIA, AINARA TIEFENTHÄER, YOUSUR AL-HLOU and NEIL COLLIER 

Document NYTFEED020170107ed17000dx



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Can a Satire of  ISIS  Be Funny? BBC Viewers Are Split

By DAN BILEFSKY 
978 words
6 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON -- The comedy sketch opens with a hijab-wearing British woman named Afsana fretting over how to impress the Islamic State militants who recruited her. ''It's only three days to the beheading, and I've got no idea what I'm going to wear!'' she laments.

Another woman models her new suicide vest for her fellow jihadist wives. ''What do you think?'' she asks. ''Ahmed surprised me with it yesterday.''

A third woman reacts admiringly, typing into her phone and saying: ''Hashtag OMG. Hashtag Jihadi Jane. Hashtag death to the West, ISIS emojis.''

''The Real Housewives of ISIS,'' a sketch that debuted this week on the BBC Two satirical show ''Revolting,'' attracted millions of views on social media. But it left viewers divided over whether a dark sendup of the Islamic State, one of the world's most fearsome terrorist networks, was appropriate, much less funny -- no matter what its creators intended.

''The BBC really made a satirical show called 'The Real Housewives of ISIS' while the real housewives of ISIS are being raped and abused daily,'' Meraj, a Londoner, wrote on Twitter.

Writing in the comments section of BBC Two's Facebook page, a viewer named David Bill criticized the show's attempt to turn human suffering into ''light entertainment.''

Many critics said they could not countenance any effort to draw laughs out of -- or even at the expense of -- a group that has enslaved women and girls for sex, compelling them to use birth control; recruited other women, under false pretenses, to become wives and sex slaves for its fighters; enshrined a theology of rape in its teachings; and shot and tortured women who resisted.

Others say the show has fanned Islamophobia and crossed well past the boundaries of good taste.

Still others railed against the BBC, which is financed primarily through a television license fee, for approving such a show.

The criticism has provoked a counterbacklash, with the show's sympathizers denouncing what they say is political correctness and arguing that freedom of expression -- including pungent satire -- is the best line of defense against extremism. The satire, they say, mines a rich tradition that includes Charlie Chaplin's 1940 sendup of Hitler, ''The Great Dictator.''

''I like it. It's making fun of ISIS which is a good thing,'' Irfan Mansor, a man who identified himself as Muslim, wrote on the BBC Two Facebook page. ''The whole point of satire is to bring people down to a level. If you can mock something, you're not scared of it. ISIS want to be feared. Don't give them that.''

Several scholars of Islamist radicalism echoed that view, saying that comedy was a potent weapon because it denies the Islamic State the approval it so desperately craves.

''We think nothing when the Ku Klux Klan or the Nazis are satirized, so why not ISIS?'' asked Shiraz Maher, deputy director of the International Center for the Study of Radicalization at King's College London. ''ISIS wants to be taken seriously as an actor and state, they want approbation, and comedy denies them that, and takes away their shine.''

A BBC spokeswoman, Kate Toft, said the broadcaster was not commenting on the show ''other than to say that it's satire and the BBC has a rich history of satire.''

''Revolting,'' the show on which the sketch aired, is the brainchild of Jolyon Rubinstein and Heydon Prowse, who met at an elementary school in North London and relish using a mix of acerbic humor, gags and pranks to puncture the hypocrisy they see in politics, business and religion.

The two men attracted the ire of pro-Israel groups a few years ago when they appeared in a comedy sketch in which they impersonated building contractors and told London store owners their land would be taken to make way for an extension of the Israeli Embassy.

Now they are defending ''Real Housewives of ISIS,'' saying that religious fundamentalism is fair game for satire. ''It's important not to pull your punches in satire,'' Mr. Prowse told the British newspaper i. ''You have to be fearless or it undermines your credibility.''

Referring to the former prime minister, he added, ''You can't go after David Cameron for five years like we did and not go after Islamic State.''

Mr. Rubinstein said the show's comedy pointed an uncomfortable spotlight at the grooming of young women by Islamic extremists, and to real cases, including that of a British-born woman, Samantha Lewthwaite, a convert to Islam who married a man who later blew himself up on the London subway on July 7, 2005, part of a terrorist attack that killed 52 civilians.

It also warns of subjugation by the terrorist group, including a scene in which a woman scouring a floor complains that when she met her husband, an Islamic State fighter, in a chat room, she did not realize she would end up a servant.

Previous attempts at Islamic State satire have proved similarly divisive. Four young refugees from the Syrian city of Aleppo risked their lives two years ago by making films mocking the terrorist group, including one depicting its leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, downing wine, grooving to rock music and trading selfies with girls using his smartphone.

In Israel, a promoter for gay events that organizes parties around Tel Aviv drew criticism after publicizing a party using pictures of handsome young men in poses inspired by ISIS beheading videos. But others praised the ads for turning the group's violent homophobia on its head.

Follow Dan Bilefsky on Twitter @DanBilefsky.

A darkly comic BBC sketch, which attracted millions of views on social media, has set off a debate on the limits of satire. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REVOLTING/HAT TRICK/BBC2) 

Document NYTF000020170106ed1600055



ART REVIEW
Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; SECTC
Information Overload in Paint, Not Pixels

By JASON FARAGO 
1,106 words
6 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
25
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

All the news that's fit to paint can be found in the exhibition by Wade Guyton, at the uptown branch of Petzel Gallery. This sly American painter, subject of a poker-faced, challenging retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art in 2012, came to prominence for his printed canvases of black stripes, licking flames and stand-alone Xs and Us, whose repetitive computer imagery was made strange through imprecise edges and wonky ink saturations. But these new works, in contrast to his earlier minimal compositions, are packed with information, as they draw their imagery from ... well, from the website you're now reading. (Or, if you are in the habit of reading print, this newspaper's digital version.)

The series is ''The New York Times Paintings: November-December 2015,'' though to call these works paintings is to give half the game away. Mr. Guyton does not use brushes, but rather produces designs as digital files and outputs them to a large inkjet printer. As with Andy Warhol's silk screens or Christopher Wool's early stencils, his paintings make a virtue of suppressing the artist's hand; where Warhol once said he wanted to paint ''like a machine,'' Mr. Guyton really does it. But just as Warhol never really gave up artistic control when embracing mechanical methods, Mr. Guyton, too, finds a voice in seeming automation. Even the simplest of digital gestures -- once typing the letter X, now taking a millisecond's screenshot -- has some artistic motive, and the translation from JPEG to canvas introduces its own formal kinks.

His current printer, an Epson 9900, is 44 inches wide, and the paintings here are each 69 inches wide; the canvas, therefore, must be folded and go through the machine twice, which results in a disjunctive central seam. The canvas scrunches as it passes through the printer (intended for thinner papers), so that the words ''York Times,'' in one painting, drip into the section navigation bar.

Frequent shortages of printer ink -- far pricier than oil or acrylic paints or even Krug Champagne -- leave illustrations gashed by horizontal white bands. And the relatively low resolution of the screenshots produces strange chromatic effects when blown up to gallery scale. The black digital headlines of The Times, set in the Georgia web font rather than the lighter Cheltenham customarily seen in print, have undertones of iridescent blue. Gray bylines become hazy, and the letters emulsify into one another.

Only one painting reproduces an article: ''ISIS Claims Responsibility for Blasts That Killed Dozens in Beirut,'' written by Anne Barnard and Hwaida Saad and published online on Nov. 12, 2015. The article features an eyewitness video from Reuters, which appears here both striated, thanks to low ink, and bisected at the painting's center. The same striations infect the other images in the painting, of Ray-Ban sunglasses promoted in two large banner ads. Pointing up a disjunction between brutal news and unrelated advertising is familiar, even platitudinous. But in painted form, the white grooves across both the ruined building and the polished aviator frames make the pairing especially jarring.

The other six paintings here reflect the nytimes.com home page. Three of them stutteringly reproduce the page from Dec. 1, 2015, whose lead article concerned the gunman at a Colorado branch of Planned Parenthood; on Dec. 4 and Dec. 5 of that year, the top story was the attacks in San Bernardino, Calif.; and only one painting, from Nov. 30, has a lighter lead, about King Tut's tomb. The home page fits ever so naturally into Mr. Guyton's regular color scheme of black, white and a few cool colors, though these paintings introduce photographs and other representational elements into an oeuvre that has skewed more abstract. In the top-right corner of most of the works is the artist's nytimes.com login, wguyton1 -- a substitute signature, and a rare bit of Duchampian humor from a usually deadpan artist. (Further Times paintings go on view later this month in a retrospective at the Museum Brandhorst, in Munich.)

Mr. Guyton's new works owe a heavy, even slavish debt to Warhol's ''Death and Disaster'' series, in which that Pop artist first painted by hand the front pages of The New York Post and The New York Mirror (''129 Die in Jet!''), and later silk-screened gruesome pictures in numbing repetitions. The best of Mr. Guyton's paintings here features an explicit Warhol tribute: an image of the San Bernardino terrorists' abandoned S.U.V. runs across the central seam, and the smaller half of the picture is tilted about 10 degrees off the horizontal, just as in Warhol's many images of car crashes.

Beyond the day's stories, however, artists have often used (print) newspapers as metonymies for the flow and acceleration of information. The Cubist collages of Picasso, Braque and Gris souped up still lifes with stock prices, horse-racing results and classified ads. Later, Dieter Roth mashed copies of British tabloids like The Daily Mirror into sausage filling, as if information was a kind of cheap nourishment. The artist Pope.L took that sentiment even further with ''Eating The Wall Street Journal'' (1991-2000), performances in which he swallowed and regurgitated that paper, turning information into both food and poison.

Mr. Guyton's paintings are in that vein, too, though they do not depict pages of a newspaper at all -- they depict the website of a media company that publishes news in many formats. That is a significant difference. As he told The Times in 2012, ''I chose the computer because it was right here'' -- and while making screenshots of the website permits this least emotional of painters a rare dose of topicality, Mr. Guyton also treats nytimes.com as a kind of default, like the letters X or U. His ''Times'' paintings are as concerned with the baseline by which we encounter and absorb all information as they are with the news itself, and they're most powerful when the visceral is drowned in the mundane, as in his San Bernardino painting. Then again, if you want to see the day's news preserved in ink, The Times charges you only $2.50.

Wade Guyton: The New York Times Paintings: November-December 2015

Through Jan. 14 at Petzel Gallery, 35 East 67th Street, Manhattan; 212-680-9467, petzel.com.

Wade Guyton's series depicting The New York Times online speaks to the flow and acceleration of information. (PHOTOGRAPH COURTESY OF THE ARTIST AND RON AMSTUTZ, PETZEL, NEW YORK) 

Document NYTF000020170106ed160004y



world
Can a Satire of  ISIS  Possibly Be Funny? BBC Viewers Are Split

By DAN BILEFSKY 
934 words
5 January 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON —he comedy sketch opens with a hijab-wearing British woman named Afsana fretting over how to impress the Islamic State militants who recruited her. “t’ only three days to the beheading, and I’e got no idea what I’ going to wear!”he laments.

Another woman models her new suicide vest for her fellow jihadist wives. “hat do you think?”he asks. “hmed surprised me with it yesterday.”

A third woman reacts admiringly, typing into her phone and saying: “ashtag OMG. Hashtag Jihadi Jane. Hashtag death to the West, ISIS emojis.”

“he Real Housewives of ISIS,” sketch that debuted this week on the BBC Two satirical show “”ttracted millions of views on social media. But it left viewers divided over whether a dark sendup of the Islamic State, one of the world’ most fearsome terrorist networks, was appropriate, much less funny —o matter what its creators intended.

“he BBC really made a satirical show called ‘he Real Housewives of ISIS’hile the real housewives of ISIS are being raped and abused daily,”

Writing in the comments section of BBC Two’ Facebook page, the show’ attempt to turn human suffering into “ight entertainment.”

Many critics said they could not countenance any effort to draw laughs out of —r even at the expense of — group that has enslaved women and girls for sex, ; , under false pretenses, to become wives and sex slaves for its fighters; in its teachings; and .

Others say the show has fanned Islamophobia and crossed well past the boundaries of good taste.

Still others railed against the BBC, which is financed primarily through a television license fee, for approving such a show.

The criticism has provoked a counterbacklash, with the show’ sympathizers denouncing what they say is political correctness and arguing that freedom of expression —ncluding pungent satire —s the best line of defense against extremism. The satire, they say, mines a rich tradition that includes Charlie Chaplin’ 1940 sendup of Hitler, “”

“ like it. It’ making fun of ISIS which is a good thing,” a man who identified himself as Muslim, wrote on the BBC Two Facebook page. “he whole point of satire is to bring people down to a level. If you can mock something, you’e not scared of it. ISIS want to be feared. Don’ give them that.”

Several scholars of Islamist radicalism echoed that view, saying that comedy was a potent weapon because it denies the Islamic State the approval it so desperately craves.

“e think nothing when the Ku Klux Klan or the Nazis are satirized, so why not ISIS?”sked ,deputy director of the International Center for the Study of Radicalization at King’ College London. “ISIS wants to be taken seriously as an actor and state, they want approbation, and comedy denies them that, and takes away their shine.”

A BBC spokeswoman, Kate Toft, said the broadcaster was not commenting on the show “ther than to say that it’ satire and the BBC has a rich history of satire.”

“evolting,”he show on which the sketch aired, is the brainchild of , who met at an elementary school in North London and relish using a mix of acerbic humor, gags and pranks to puncture the hypocrisy they see in politics, business and religion.

The two men attracted the ire of pro-Israel groups a few years ago when they appeared in a in which they impersonated building contractors and told London store owners their land would be taken to make way for an extension of the Israeli Embassy.

Now they are defending “eal Housewives of ISIS,”aying that religious fundamentalism is fair game for satire. “t’ important not to pull your punches in satire,”r. Prowse . “ou have to be fearless or it undermines your credibility.”

Referring to the former prime minister, he added, “ou can’ go after David Cameron for five years like we did and not go after Islamic State.”

Mr. Rubinstein said the show’ comedy pointed an uncomfortable spotlight at the grooming of young women by Islamic extremists, and to real cases, including that of a British-born woman, , a convert to Islam who married a man who later blew himself up on the London subway on July 7, 2005, part of a terrorist attack that .

It also warns of subjugation by the terrorist group, including a scene in which a woman scouring a floor complains that when she met her husband, an Islamic State fighter, in a chat room, she did not realize she would end up a servant.

Previous attempts at Islamic State satire have proved similarly divisive. Four young refugees from the Syrian city of Aleppo risked their lives two years ago by , including one depicting its leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, downing wine, grooving to rock music and trading selfies with girls using his smartphone.

In Israel, a promoter for gay events that organizes parties around Tel Aviv after publicizing a party using pictures of handsome young men in poses inspired by ISIS beheading videos. But others praised the ads for turning the group’ violent homophobia on its head.

Follow Dan Bilefsky on Twitter @DanBilefsky.

PHOTO: A darkly comic BBC sketch, which attracted millions of views on social media, has set off a debate on the limits of satire. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REVOLTING/HAT TRICK/BBC2)

Related Articles

https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/06/world/europe/06isishousewives/06isishousewives-articleLarge.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/06/world/europe/06isishousewives/06isishousewives-jumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/06/world/europe/06isishousewives/06isishousewives-superJumbo.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/06/world/europe/06isishousewives/06isishousewives-moth-v2.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/06/world/europe/06isishousewives/06isishousewives-articleInline.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/06/world/europe/06isishousewives/06isishousewives-sfSpan-v2.jpg | https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/01/06/world/europe/06isishousewives/06isishousewives-filmstrip-v2.jpg | A darkly comic BBC sketch has set off a debate on the limits of satire. | Revolting/Hat Trick/BBC2 

Document INHT000020170106ed1500005



Briefing
Republican Party, Facebook: Your Thursday Evening Briefing

By KAREN ZRAICK and SANDRA STEVENSON 
908 words
5 January 2017
23:56
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good evening. Here’ the latest.

1. Frictions between American intelligence agencies and the incoming administration are worsening.

At a Senate committee hearing, the director of national intelligence, James R. Clapper Jr., above, criticized the “isparagement” of the intelligence community over its findings that Russia interfered in the presidential election. Bolstered by the support of senators from both parties, he will brief President-elect Donald J. Trump himself Friday.

Mr. Trump took on Democrats and the health care law in a new Twitter blitz, calling Senator Chuck Schumer the Democrats’“ead clown.”

_____

2. The videotaped beating of a white teenager with mental disabilities went viral, prompting nationwide outrage —nd hate crimes charges.

Four young African-Americans were charged. The 30-minute video appeared to show a Facebook livestream of the assault, which was laced with racial insults and included derisive statements about Mr. Trump.

_____

3. When the marching band at a Alabama’ Talladega College got an invitation to play at Mr. Trump’ inauguration, some alumni of the historically black college were outraged.

But others saw it an opportunity for the tiny college’ students, some of whom had never visited the capital before.

The college president has now affirmed that the band will perform, saying, “e feel the inauguration of a new president is not a political event but a civil ceremony celebrating the transfer of power.”

_____

4. Peanuts are back on the kids’enu.

In a significant reversal from past advice, new national health guidelines call for parents to give their children foods containing peanuts early and often, starting in infancy.

Health experts say it will help children avoid life-threatening peanut allergies, which few ever outgrow.

_____

5. Charles F. Feeney is a remarkably low-key billionaire.

An early and shrewd investor in tech start-ups, he transferred his fortune to an outfit called Atlantic Philanthropies in 1984, and has since given almost all $8 billion of it away —ostly in total secrecy.

He and his wife, Helga, now live in a rented apartment in San Francisco. “ou can only wear one pair of pants at a time,”e has said.

_____

5. Some young Japanese men are bending fashion gender norms with hair dye, bright lipstick and heels. They say they’e not trying to dress like women, but that the concept of gender is simply irrelevant to their style choices.

“t’ not as if men have to do one thing, and women have to do another,”ne said. “ don’ find that very interesting. We’e all human beings.”

_____

6. Can a satire of ISIS possibly be funny?

That’ the question in Britain, where a sketch called “he Real Housewives of \b ISIS\b0 ”ebuted on a satire show and attracted millions of views on social media.

Viewers were split over whether a dark sendup of one of the world’ most fearsome terrorist networks was appropriate, much less laugh-inducing.

_____

7. Among our best-read articles today is an essay by a reporter in rural Iowa that seeks to explain why Mr. Trump won the rural vote.

His central insight is the philosophical difference between the two parties: Republicans believe people are fundamentally bad, while Democrats see people as fundamentally good.

He argues that the divergence in foundational principles reinforced the rural-urban divides of history, economy and geography.

_____

8. California winemakers are employing both high-tech and old-school techniques to adapt to hotter, drier conditions amid a yearslong drought.

As a result, the state’ wine country has become a laboratory for the reshaping of agriculture nationwide. Because, of course, it’ not just California that’ warming up.

_____

9. New research concludes that a drop in violent crime in many cities is spurring gentrification.

Higher-income and college-educated movers appeared significantly more sensitive to changing crime levels in their housing decisions than other groups.

“hen cities feel safer, that opens people’ eyes,”ne of the researchers said.

_____

10. Finally, in case you’e looking for something to watch on Saturday night: The documentary “right Lights: Starring Carrie Fisher and Debbie Reynolds”will debut then on HBO, after the network moved up its premiere from March.

Our critic says it smartly, and subtly, pushes its audience to ask two of modern pop society’ central, uncomfortable questions: First, are famous people “eal”eople? And second, am I becoming my mother?

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.

Want to look back? Here’ last night’ briefing.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

* Donald Trump, Julian Assange: Your Wednesday Evening Briefing

Al Drago/The New York Times | Chicago Police Department, via Associated Press | Talladega College | Raymond McCrea Jones for The New York Times | Brad Vest for The New York Times | Ko Sasaki for The New York Times | Revolting/Hat Trick, via BBC2 | Damon Winter/The New York Times | Jason Henry for The New York Times | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | Fisher Family Archives, via HBO 

Document NYTFEED020170105ed15008py



World; Europe
Can a Satire of  ISIS  Possibly Be Funny? BBC Viewers Are Split

By DAN BILEFSKY 
1,016 words
5 January 2017
19:07
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON —he comedy sketch opens with a hijab-wearing British woman named Afsana fretting over how to impress the Islamic State militants who recruited her. “t’ only three days to the beheading, and I’e got no idea what I’ going wear!”he laments.

Another woman models her new suicide vest for her fellow jihadist wives. “hat do you think?”he asks. “hmed surprised me with it yesterday.”

A third woman reacts admiringly, typing into her phone and saying: “ashtag OMG. Hashtag Jihadi Jane. Hashtag death to the West, \b ISIS\b0  emojis.”

“he Real Housewives of ISIS,” comedy sketch that debuted this week on the BBC Two satirical show “Revolting,”ttracted millions of views on social media. But it left viewers divided over whether a dark sendup of the Islamic State, one of the world’ most fearsome terrorist networks, was appropriate, much less funny —o matter what its creators intended.

“he BBC really made a satirical show called ‘he Real Housewives of ISIS’hile the real housewives of ISIS are being raped and abused daily,”Meraj, a Londoner, wrote on Twitter.

Writing in the comments section of BBC Two’ Facebook page, a viewer named David Bill criticized the show’ attempt to turn human suffering into “ight entertainment.”

Many critics said they could not countenance any effort to draw laughs out of —r even at the expense of — group that has enslaved women and girls for sex, compelling them to use birth control; recruited other women, under false pretenses, to become wives and sex slaves for its fighters; enshrined a theology of rape in its teachings; and shot and tortured women who resisted.

Others say the show has fanned Islamophobia and crossed well past the boundaries of good taste.

Still others railed against the BBC, which is financed primarily through a television license fee, for approving such a show.

The criticism has provoked a counterbacklash, with the show’ sympathizers denouncing what they say is political correctness and arguing that freedom of expression —ncluding dark satire —s the best line of defense against extremism. The satire, they say, mines a rich tradition that includes Charlie Chaplin’ 1940 sendup of Hitler, “he Great Dictator.”

“ like it. It’ making fun of ISIS which is a good thing,”Irfan Mansor, a man who identified himself as Muslim, wrote on the BBC Two Facebook page. “he whole point of satire is to bring people down to a level. If you can mock something, you’e not scared of it. ISIS want to be feared. Don’ give them that.”

Several scholars of Islamist radicalism echoed that view, saying that comedy was a potent weapon because it denies the Islamic State the approval it so desperately craves.

“e think nothing when the Ku Klux Klan or the Nazis are satirized, so why not ISIS?”sked Shiraz Maher , deputy director of the International Center for the Study of Radicalization at King’ College London. “ISIS wants to be taken seriously as an actor and state, they want approbation, and comedy denies them that, and takes away their shine.”

A BBC spokeswoman, Kate Toft, said the broadcaster was not commenting on the show “ther than to say that it’ satire and the BBC has a rich history of satire.”

“evolting,”he show on which the sketch aired, is the brainchild of Jolyon Rubinstein and Heydon Prowse, who met at an elementary school in North London and relish using a mix of acerbic humor, gags and pranks to puncture the hypocrisy they see in politics, business and religion.

The two men attracted the ire of pro-Israel groups a few years ago when they appeared in a  comedy sketch in which they impersonated building contractors and told London store owners their land would be taken to make way for an extension of the Israeli Embassy.

Now they are defending “eal Housewives of ISIS,”aying that religious fundamentalism is fair game for satire. “t’ important not to pull your punches in satire,”r. Prowse told the British newspaper i. “ou have to be fearless or it undermines your credibility.”

Referring to the former prime minister, he added, “ou can’ go after David Cameron for five years like we did and not go after Islamic State.”

Mr. Rubinstein said the show’ comedy pointed an uncomfortable spotlight at the grooming of young women by Islamic extremists, and to real cases, including that of a British-born woman, Samantha Lewthwaite, a convert to Islam who married a man who later blew himself up on the London subway on July 7, 2005, part of a terrorist attack that killed 52 civilians.

It also warns of subjugation by the terrorist group, including a scene in which a woman scouring a floor complains that when she met her husband, an Islamic State fighter, in a chat room, she did not realize she would end up a servant.

Previous attempts at Islamic State satire have proved similarly divisive. Four young refugees from the Syrian city of Aleppo risked their lives two years ago by making films mocking the terrorist group, including one depicting its leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, downing wine, grooving to rock music and trading selfies with girls using his smartphone.

In Israel, a promoter for gay events that organizes parties around Tel Aviv drew criticism after publicizing a party using pictures of handsome young men in poses inspired by ISIS beheading videos. But others praised the ads for turning the group’ violent homophobia on its head.

Follow Dan Bilefsky on Twitter @DanBilefsky.

* For Women Under \b ISIS\b0 , a Tyranny of Dress Code and Punishment

* To Maintain Supply of Sex Slaves, \b ISIS\b0  Pushes Birth Control

* Nadia Murad, Yazidi Woman Who Survived \b ISIS\b0  Captivity, Wins Human Rights Prize

* When Women Fight \b ISIS\b0 

* \b ISIS\b0  Women and Enforcers in Syria Recount Collaboration, Anguish and Escape

A darkly comic BBC sketch has set off a debate on the limits of satire. | Revolting/Hat Trick/BBC2 

Document NYTFEED020170105ed15005bp



Feature
Magazine
Cyberwar for Sale

By MATTATHIAS SCHWARTZ 
7,581 words
4 January 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

On the morning of May 18, 2014, Violeta Lagunes was perplexed by a series of strange messages that appeared in her Gmail inbox. It was Election Day to choose the leadership of Mexico’ right-wing Partido Acció Nacional, or PAN, and Lagunes, a former federal congresswoman, was holding a strategy meeting in her office in Puebla city. The emails seemed harmless, at least at first. One appeared to come from the account of a trusted colleague. It asked her to download and review a document. Lagunes clicked on the link, but it seemed to be broken, so she wrote back to her colleague and asked him to send it again. Elsewhere in her inbox was an email from Google warning her that someone had tried to log in to her account. Meanwhile, she began to receive phone calls from PAN allies, who claimed that they had received emails from Lagunes’ account that she did not remember sending.

Now Lagunes was worried. Around 1 o’lock, she called the colleague who appeared to have emailed her. She reached him at a restaurant, where he was finishing lunch with other campaign allies. “ did not send you an email,”e insisted. A consultant with the campaign —ho asked to remain anonymous in order to preserve his relationships with other candidates —verheard the conversation. He knew of other campaign workers who had been receiving similar messages: emails with vague subject lines, asking the recipient to review a document or click a link. The campaign, he realized, had been hacked.

In the vote for party leader, Lagunes and her allies in Puebla — two-hour drive southeast from Mexico City —ere supporting the challenger, a senator who promised to return the party to its conservative roots. But the incumbent was backed by Puebla’ powerful governor, Rafael Moreno Valle. One of Mexico’ rising political stars, Moreno Valle is close to Mexico’ president, Enrique Peñ Nieto, and has forged an alliance between PAN and Nieto’ centrist Partido Revolucionario Institucional, or PRI, long the dominant force in Mexican politics. Since winning the governorship in 2010, Moreno Valle’ opponents say, his ambitions have grown, and he has resorted to increasingly harsh measures to keep Puebla state —ncluding members of his own party —nder control. “n the beginning, the governor was low-profile and respectful,”afael Micalco, a former leader of PAN in Puebla state, told me. “hen he became governor, he transformed. Now he controls the party through threats.”

This race to retain control of the party leadership in 2014 was a crucial test for the governor, who was rumored to be considering a run for Mexico’ presidency in 2018. (This past September, Moreno Valle publicly announced his intent to run.) Clashes between the two camps were especially intense in Puebla, where backers of the challenger, Ernesto Cordero, claimed that the governor was using public money to support the incumbent, Gustavo Madero, though the governor’ office has denied these charges. Shortly before the election, Madero’ campaign manager said that Cordero’ side was trying to undermine the legitimacy of the process. “heir strategy is clear from the outset,”e said in an interview with a Mexican magazine. “ ‘f I win, good. If not, I was cheated.’ ”

After Lagunes’ call on Election Day, her colleagues rushed from the restaurant back to their local headquarters, a hotel conference room that they had nicknamed “he bunker.”ll morning, they had been trying to reach their field network, a group of 40 Cordero canvassers who were working to get out the vote in Puebla state. But the field network seemed to have gone dark. Few of the canvassers were even answering their phones. Hackers, the team concluded, must have found the list of the canvassers’ames and phone numbers —idely circulated by email within the campaign —nd begun to intimidate them.

“he day before,”he consultant told me, the field network was “otivated and eager to do this work. After the hack, it was very hard to reach them. The few who did answer said that they had received phone calls saying that their lives were at stake. They were worried that if they went out, they or their families would get hurt.”

According to another worker on Cordero’ campaign, who also requested anonymity, citing fear of reprisal, the message to the canvassers was simple and direct: “e know who you are. If you don’ want any trouble, shut down your cellphone and stop your activity.”he worker added: “t’ an authoritarian regime.”

Madero won the election , with 57 percent of the 162,792 votes cast over all. In Puebla, his margin was substantially larger, roughly 74 percent. Cordero’ team decided not to contest the result. They had suspicions about how they were hacked. But it would be another year before any evidence emerged. Their political enemies, leaked documents seemed to show, had built a spying operation using software made by an Italian firm called Hacking Team —ust one of many private companies that, largely below public notice, have sprung up to aid governments in surveilling the private lives of individual citizens. The industry claims that its products comply with local laws and are used to fight crime and terror. But in many countries around the world, these tools have proved to be equally adept at political espionage.

On average, an American office worker sends and receives roughly 120 emails per day , a number that grows with each passing year. The ubiquity and utility of email has turned it into a fine-grained record of our day-to-day lives, rich with mundane and potentially embarrassing details, stored in a perpetual archive, accessible from anywhere on earth and protected, in some cases, by nothing more than a single password. In the case of Violeta Lagunes, her email login represented a point of vulnerability, a seam where the digital walls protecting her campaign were at the mercy of her human judgment —pecifically, whether she could determine if a message from an apparently reputable source was real or fake. Nearly two years later, John Podesta , chairman of Hillary Clinton ’ campaign, was faced with a similar judgment call. An email warned him that someone in Ukraine had tried to access his Gmail account and asked him to click on a button and reset his password. His senior adviser forwarded the email to one of the campaign’ technology experts. “his is a legitimate email,”e replied, in what the expert later would clarify  was a simple typing error on his part; he meant to say it was not legitimate. “he gmail one is REAL,”he senior adviser wrote to Podesta and another aide.

And so, like Lagunes, Podesta fell into a trap. The button appeared to lead to an official Google page, but it was in fact a meticulously personalized fake, with a domain address linked to a remote cluster of atolls in the South Pacific. The details were designed to trick Podesta into entering his password. This technique is known as “pear phishing.”t is an especially potent weapon against companies and political organizations because it needs to succeed only one time, against one target. After that, attackers can use the trusted identity of the first compromised account to more easily lure colleagues into opening infected attachments or clicking on malicious links. Not only will a working email password yield years of intraoffice chatter, invoices, credit-card bills and confidential memos; it can often be leveraged into control of other personal accounts —Twitter , Facebook , Amazon —nd even access to company servers and internet domains.

The Podesta and Lagunes episodes are far from the only cases in which hackers have used information from stolen emails as a weapon against an entire institution. The 2009 “limategate” incident, which exposed troves of emails from prominent climate researchers, began when hackers remotely broke into servers at a British university with the help of illicitly obtained passwords. The 2014 hack of internal Sony files, which American officials attributed to the North Korean government, began with a series of spear-phishing emails that attackers then used to dig deeper into Sony ’ servers. Each hack yielded the most private thoughts and deeds from the members of each respective organization: their blunt insults, their quashed dissents, their half-baked plans, their smarmy flattery, all chronicled in time down to the hundredth of the second when the author clicked “end.”n an earlier era, the hackers might have had to engage in riskier behavior, like bribery or burglary. Now, in many cases, all they had to do was send along a link.

The White House, C.I.A. and F.B.I. have all claimed that, based on classified evidence, they can trace the hacks of Podesta’ email account (and other hacks of people close to the Clinton campaign) back to the Russian government. But with the rise of private firms like Hacking Team , penetrating the email accounts of political opponents does not require the kind of money and expertise available to major powers. A subscription-based website called Insider Surveillance lists more than a dozen companies selling so-called ethical malware, including Milan-based Hacking Team and the German firms FinFisher and Trovicor. Compared with conventional arms, surveillance software is subject to few trade controls; a recent attempt by the United States to regulate it under a 41-country pact called the Wassenaar Arrangement failed. “he technology is morally neutral,”ays Joel Brenner, a former inspector general of the National Security Agency. “he same program that you use to monitor your babysitter might be used by Bashar Assad or Abdel Fattah el-Sisi to keep track of whomever they don’ like.”

Hacking Team has fewer than 50 employees, but it has customers all over the world. According to internal documents, its espionage tool, which is called the Remote Control System, or R.C.S., can be licensed for as little as $200,000 a year —ell within the budget of a provincial strongman. After it has been surreptitiously installed on a target’ computer or phone, the Remote Control System can invisibly eavesdrop on everything: text messages, emails, phone and Skype calls, location data and so on. Whereas the N.S.A.’ best-known programs grab data in transit from switching rooms and undersea cables, the R.C.S. acquires it at the source, right off a target’ device, before it can be encrypted. It carries out an invisible, digitized equivalent of a Watergate-style break-in.

The United States government is almost certainly the world’ most formidable repository of hacking talent, but its most powerful cyberweapons are generally reserved for intelligence agencies and the military. This might explain why, according to company documents, at least two federal law-enforcement agencies have been Hacking Team clients: the F.B.I., beginning in 2011, and the Drug Enforcement Administration , beginning in 2012. The F.B.I. contract paid Hacking Team more than $700,000; the D.E.A. appears to have used the software to go after targets in Colombia.

Documents show that the company has also sold its software to some of the world’ most repressive governments. Some, like those of Honduras, Ethiopia, Bahrain, Morocco, Egypt and Saudi Arabia, are Western allies. Other countries, like Uzbekistan and Turkey, have a more troubled relationship. A few are openly hostile to the West. Between 2012 and 2014, Hacking Team was paid nearly one million euros by the government of Sudan, a United States-designated state sponsor of terrorism. Even more notable, in light of recent events, is the three-year relationship that Hacking Team carried on with the F.S.B., one of Russia’ main intelligence agencies. As with Puebla, Hacking Team used a middleman, a research agency called Kvant, to handle its sales to Russia. Between 2012 and 2014, the agency paid Hacking Team 451,000 euros to license the Remote Control System.

Hacking Team claims that it draws the line at customers who commit “ross human-rights abuses”nd that it sells exclusively to governments operating within the laws of their own countries. In at least one case, David Vincenzetti, Hacking Team ’ founder and chief executive, told a salesman to hold off on a potential Mexican client. “e sell to official, governmental LEAs”—aw-enforcement agencies —“nd security agencies ONLY,”incenzetti wrote in an email. But at other times, a more casual attitude prevailed inside the company. “f one sells sandwiches to Sudan, he is not subject, as far as my knowledge goes, to the law,”ne Hacking Team lawyer wrote in an internal email. “Hacking Team should be treated like a sandwich vendor.”

When asked about its arrangements in various countries, the company responded that it “oes not comment on confidential business dealings.”ts American spokesman, Eric Rabe, did tell me that neither Russia nor Sudan is a current Hacking Team customer. (The relationships, Rabe wrote, ended in 2014, Russia because “he Putin government evolved from one considered friendly to the West to a more hostile regime”nd Sudan “ecause of concerns about the country’ ability to use the system in accordance with the H.T. contract.” Separately, the company confirmed that the state of Puebla was, in fact, a former client.

Until recently, most of what was known about the world of private surveillance companies was a matter of hearsay and speculation. Industry players kept a low profile, operating discreetly from rented offices and meeting potential customers in person a few times a year at carefully screened trade shows. This is why it was so notable when, in July 2015, an unusual tweet appeared in Hacking Team ’ Twitter feed. “ince we have nothing to hide,”t read, “e’e publishing all our emails, files and source code.”hen came another tweet, with links to a downloadable file called Hacked Team. The file was huge, 420 gigabytes of material scraped from Hacking Team ’ internal servers. Inside were 33 folders containing the company’ contracts, payroll documents, invoices, legal memos, customer-support records and a five-year cache of email correspondence from the chief executive on down.

Hacking Team had itself been hacked. WikiLeaks pounced on the breach and quickly uploaded the emails into a searchable database . Anyone with an internet connection could now read the chief executive joking about how his company was in the business of selling “he evilest technology on earth.”ou could browse Hacking Team ’ source code, including one line using “omb_blueprints.pdf”s a placeholder for files that might be found on a target’ device. On Reddit, an online peanut gallery formed around the time-wasting online habits of one Hacking Team engineer and his own notably weak passwords —TPassword!, P4ssword, Passw0rd.

But the most damaging exposures in the leak by far were Hacking Team ’ client list and the names of some of the clients’argets. In South Korea, newspapers focused on evidence suggesting that Hacking Team ’ software had helped the nation’ intelligence service rig an election ; after the leak, one agent who had reportedly used the system there committed suicide. In Ecuador, a magazine found  an email with seven phone numbers that the government appeared to have targeted with the R.C.S. Three belonged to lawmakers; a fourth to the mayor of Quito; all four were members of the opposition party.

With the source code for the Remote Control System now public, the company and its clients had to stop using it temporarily. By the end of the year, though, Hacking Team had updated its product and was trying to rebuild its reputation. I was curious whether a company that profited from online breaches could recover from its own. Eric Rabe, the American spokesman, sounded eager to meet me for coffee in Philadelphia. A grandfather and former television-news anchor, he exudes square-jawed credibility. “f you disagree with someone on the internet,”e said, of the Hacked Team files, with a wave of his hand, “here’ no need to have a public-policy debate. Just go destroy them.”

A couple of months later, I went to Milan to visit Hacking Team ’ headquarters, a stately gray apartment building with boxes of limp flowers adorning a few of its sooty sills. Waiting to demonstrate the company’ software were Rabe; Philippe Vinci, a company vice president; and Alessandro Scarafile, a young engineer. Scarafile had gathered a Dell desktop computer and three smartphones: iPhone, BlackBerry and Android. The screen from his own laptop, which represented the console of a client intelligence agency, was projected on the wall. Several icons represented the various streams of data that could potentially be acquired by gaining control of the target’ computer: images from built-in cameras, sound from built-in mikes, screenshots, detailed records of applications opened and bitcoins transferred, a continuous log of location with latitude and longitude, and logs of address books, calendars, phone calls, Skype calls and passwords, as well as websites visited. A key logger recorded every key that was pressed. It was a lot to keep track of. Two other views, called “ine of events”nd “ine of actions,”ssembled the information into chronological order.

Scarafile, who was playing both the customer and the target, or “ad guy,”urned on the Dell . Judging by the background on the desktop, a gothic scene framed by castlelike silhouettes, our target seemed to be planning a terrorist attack from Transylvania.

There are three methods, Scarafile explained, for getting the Remote Control System onto a target’ device. Customers can gain physical access to the device and then infect it with a USB stick or memory card. They can beam the R.C.S. in over a Wi-Fi network. Or they can send the customer an email and get him to click on an infected attachment —sually a file from a brand-name program like Microsoft Word or PowerPoint. Scarafile did not mention a fourth method, one described by Hacking Team ’ critics and referred to in its internal emails: the installation of the R.C.S. through a more elaborate process called “etwork injection,”hich is said to involve pinpointing the target’ exact location on the internet, observing the person as he orders up, say, a YouTube cat video, and then serving up a doctored version of the same page, one with the desired cat video playing in the foreground —YouTube logo and all —s the R.C.S. discreetly rolls in past the digital gates.

Whatever the method of infection, the malicious code, known as an “gent,”hen communicates with its masters anonymously, its dispatches routed through a series of dedicated servers scattered around the world. Even if the target gets suspicious and figures out that something is wrong, this chain of servers makes it nearly impossible for him to figure out exactly who is using Hacking Team ’ product to spy on him.

For the demo, Scarafile opted for the third method, which he referred to as “ bit of social engineering.”sing the customer’ computer, he sent the target an email with a Word file attached. Then he returned to the target’ computer and double-clicked on it, just as Lagunes had clicked on the link in her inbox. “rom now on,”e said, “his system is currently infected, or monitored, by the Remote Control System.”t would remain so even if the suspect turned off his machine or logged out.

On the timeline, the target appeared as a stubbly lout in an undershirt, named “immy Page ... head of the terrorist cell.”sing Jimmy Page’ Dell , Scarafile logged into Page’ Gmail, Facebook and Twitter . He opened up Skype, perused Page’ criminal colleagues (Don Corleone, Harry Potter, Keyser Soze) and left one of them a voice mail message from Page’ phone. Accessing a USB drive attached to the infected computer, Scarafile opened an encrypted file that turned out to contain an order to “ill David Vincenzetti.”.C.S. captured it all, including periodic snapshots of Scarafile, as Page, at work.

“ don’ like the words ‘nject’nd ‘nfect,’ ”inci, the vice president, said. “.C.S. is deploying the agent into the device of the target because you want to monitor some of his activities. Exactly the way that law enforcement is listening to some of your phone calls, right?”

Rabe had told me that Vincenzetti was “ fighter,”nd his combative side was apparent from a collage of magazine clippings and printouts taped to the wall beside his desk — sort of mood board, like those used in the advertising industry to gather inspiration before the unveiling of a new brand. Vincenzetti’ mood board, though, wasn’ about sneakers or cola. It was about the global struggle for power, which he seemed to envision as one big conflict, a battle between the good guys and the bad guys. On the good side was a photo of the bell that aspiring Navy SEALs can ring should they want to quit the program during Hell Week, and a quote from another entrepreneur that “usiness is war.”n the bad side, Vincenzetti had taped up a satellite image showing one of the hottest zones of international tension, the artificial islands rising in the South China Sea, a line of terrestrial pawns advancing China’ sphere of influence. Beside it was a chart about Iran, depicting how the country could continue to advance its nuclear program despite the recent American-led deal.

“ think the Iran deal is just terrible,”incenzetti said, and then added, sarcastically, “h, it’ such a very peaceful expansion. Very peaceful.”

“hat is not an official company position,”abe interjected.

Vincenzetti, now 48, is a familiar type — ferociously competitive, driven entrepreneur whose existence is organized around his work. He has a wife, who was born in Morocco, and no children. His small, heavy-lidded eyes can make him seem sleepily blasé On the morning we met at Hacking Team ’ offices, he wore jeans, a navy-blue cardigan and a striped shirt, unbuttoned to midchest. He seemed more comfortable on his feet than sitting down. As we talked in a conference room, he periodically leapt to his feet and stalked around the table, considering in turn the espresso machine, the view from the window, a case of bottled water.

“f I wanted to break into this room, how would I do it?”e asked. “here is a door, and there are two windows.”e pressed his hands against the glass panes. “he perimeter is the first thing you must secure,”e continued. Securing data was what he did earlier in his career. Now he had moved on. “f you cannot break into a bank, you cannot protect a bank. So when you are in security, really there is no difference between thinking offensively and defensively.”

In the mid-1980s, Vincenzetti’ parents, a salesman and a schoolteacher, bought him a Commodore 64, one of the earliest personal computers. He soon created a Pac-Man clone, a Tron lightcycle-style game and a text-based adventure game. As a computer-science student at the University of Milan in the ’0s, he became fascinated by cryptography; he corresponded with programmers around the world about new cryptographic theories and wrote code for email encryption. In his senior year, he was appointed to administer the university’ internal network, a post that was usually reserved for a graduate student. Vincenzetti remembers these early days as a time when “verything was free and no one was trying to harm you. We were wide open and accessible. All the best were called hackers, and I was a hacker.”

Vincenzetti left university early and founded three companies, all of them focused on defensive cybersecurity. After he founded Hacking Team in 2003, he tried to sell his services to Italian police agencies but found them skeptical that Mafiosi and other high-level criminals would ever bother to encrypt their communications. In Italy, the police were also used to getting whatever they needed through wiretaps, arranged with varying degrees of formality through their contacts at telecommunications firms. But after the 2004 Madrid train bombings, which were coordinated via cellphones and the internet, police officers and intelligence agents not just in Italy but all across Europe became interested in contracting with offensive-hacking vendors, part of an emerging arms race over consumer-grade encryption. The growth of Skype made it easy for users to encrypt their communications, and the authorities were eager to pay for countermeasures like the Remote Control System. Singapore, Hacking Team ’ first non-European client, signed on in 2008. The company’ Middle Eastern business took off in 2011, a boom that coincided with the beginning of the Arab Spring.

By then, Hacking Team had entered a growth phase, its business driven in part by demand among third-world governments for first-world surveillance tools. According to two former employees, the company held talks with Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi’ chief security officer, who wanted to build a countrywide bulk-collection scheme that could be embedded in every Libyan cellphone. (Rabe would not confirm or deny that this meeting occurred, and added: “he company often receives requests to provide services that it does not have available or would sell.” The United Nations, which prohibits the export of “lectronic weaponry”o Sudan, has investigated Hacking Team ’ activities there. Nineteen members of the Italian Parliament signed a petition raising the question of whether the Egyptian government might have used the R.C.S. to track Giulio Regeni, a 28-year-old Italian student who appears to have been under government surveillance and whose mutilated body turned up on the side of a road in Egypt last year . Hacking Team ’ software has not been connected to the case, but the company has done business with the current Egyptian regime. As part of the controversy, the Italian government temporarily revoked Hacking Team ’ global export license, so that for several months the company had to file a separate application for each of its customers outside the European Union . (When I brought up the Regeni case with Rabe, he called the dead student “his Italian national who got himself killed in Egypt.”e cited Hacking Team ’ official policy —he company neither knows nor desires to know the identities of the people its customers choose to target. “here is no evidence that Hacking Team ’ software had anything to do with Regeni’ demise,”abe said.)

All Hacking Team customers sign contracts agreeing to comply with local laws. The company says that it vets potential customers and studies reports from journalists and human-rights groups, looking for “bjective evidence or credible concerns”hat its products are being abused. But when it comes to Hacking Team ’ own interactions with customers, leaked documents suggest that employees have sometimes turned a blind eye. In the case of the Puebla government and other Latin American customers, Hacking Team employees appeared to ignore warnings suggesting that the Remote Control System was being used to gather intelligence on the political opposition. On multiple occasions, customers emailed Hacking Team attachments with election-related content, including polling data, party registration forms and invitations addressed to and signed by elected officials. Rather than ask what these files had to do with fighting crime and drug trafficking, Hacking Team support-staff members simply emailed them back, as requested, with an embedded “xploit,”urning the document into a surveillance tool to be used against whomever it was sent on to. Asked about these cases, Rabe replied that customers “re not supposed to be using it for political purposes, but I don’ think it’ reasonable to expect that an Italian computer programmer,”.e., a support technician, “ould have seen these files and known what was going on. ... I think that’ a stretch, that an Italian software guy could know that an individual is a dissident.”

Hacking Team ’ most persistent critic is Citizen Lab , a research group at the University of Toronto’ Munk School of Global Affairs. Before the Hacked Team leak, Citizen Lab documented cases  in which Hacking Team software turned up on the devices of activists in Morocco and the United Arab Emirates, as well as an Ethiopian-American journalist in Alexandria, Va. Ronald Deibert, Citizen Lab’ director, told me that Hacking Team “s a company that appears to have no internal controls on abuse of its products.”hen I asked Vincenzetti about this, he said that Citizen Lab was motivated by money, noting that the group won a million-dollar grant a week after publishing a report on Hacking Team ’ sales to Ethiopia. “heir identity,”e said, “s: ‘ am the defender of free speech, I am the defender of liberty and democracy.’.K. So am I. So is every rational guy.”f Citizen Lab really cared about good and evil, he said, it would be fighting China and Iran.

Almost immediately after the Hacked Team documents went online, they were being pored over by R3D, a Mexico City-based civil-liberties group. Luis Fernando Garcí, R3D’ director, says that intimidation and online surveillance have increased under Peñ Nieto’ presidency, and he took notice when Citizen Lab, in 2014, released a report that traced a chain of servers associated with Hacking Team that routed data through Hong Kong, London, Amsterdam and Atlanta before terminating somewhere inside Mexico. Exactly who was on the receiving end of the traffic and what they were doing with it was unknown at the time, but now R3D’ team recognized that this could be their chance to find out.

Shortly thereafter, R3D published three invoices from the Hacked Team cache showing that one state government —hat of Jalisco, on the Pacific Coast —ad paid the company nearly half a million euros for the Remote Control System. Soon other documents were found in the leak to implicate several more states, including Puebla, though most of the states denied ever using the software. (Jalisco later admitted to purchasing the system, which it claimed was for its prosecutor’ office.) The story failed to get much traction in the Mexican press, except in Puebla, after R3D connected with Lado B, a small online-news collective there. The site’ name translates to “ Side,”s in the back of a hit single —ymbolizing its dedication to telling stories that would otherwise go untold.

Lado B’ editor, Ernesto Aroche, was not surprised that Puebla’ government had been using the Remote Control System. In Moreno Valle’ six years as governor there, he has spent lavishly on new surveillance systems, including multiple “ecurity arches,”ighway-spanning structures that scrutinize traffic with video cameras and X-rays, and whose cost had raised some questions in the local press. Beginning in 2013, Aroche began noticing solicitations on the Puebla-state website for hidden cameras and other spying equipment. When he filed a public-records request about them, the government’ form response indicated that these orders had never been filled, but Aroche was skeptical, given the mounting evidence that Moreno Valle’ administration had begun using its security apparatus for political purposes. There were periodic break-ins of homes belonging to dissident politicians and journalists, with the burglars sometimes taking little besides their victims’aptops. Politicians would answer calls from unknown numbers, only to hear their own taped conversations played back to them. Another journalist, Fernando Maldonado, received an unmarked envelope full of what were purportedly transcripts of 400 private phone calls made by Puebla politicians.

As Aroche and R3D sifted through the Hacked Team file dump, they discovered that the files on Puebla had more detail than those dealing with Hacking Team ’ other Mexican accounts. The Puebla client often wrote emails asking for help with infecting a particular document with a malicious virus. Some of these came from an account —oporteuiamx@gmail.com —hat also appears in many of Hacking Team ’ internal support tickets. One of those tickets documents a client’ request for help in infecting an attachment: an invitation to attend an event for a Mexican political organization, signed by Violeta Lagunes and addressed to another party colleague opposed to the governor.

Aroche interviewed politicians and journalists who were on the receiving end of the infected emails contained in the Hacked Team trove. According to a 2015 article that Lado B published in conjunction with a politics website, the Puebla group sent Hacking Team at least 47 requests to infect specific files that it would then forward on to their targets. Almost all of those files had to do with political issues. Going through the Hacked Team materials, Aroche found the name of a Puebla government employee who seemed to be working within the spying operation. “efore, we had been talking about ghosts,”roche told me. “ow, we could prove it. We started putting names on the actors.”

More than a year later, there have been no political repercussions for the governor or his allies in Puebla. I met Aroche this fall at the Lado B offices, a small room facing a courtyard in a crumbling stone building from Puebla’ colonial days. The only suggestion of Lado B’ presence was a small sticker on the window. Inside, Aroche was thumbing through an envelope of documents that he had wrung out of the state government. Two redacted contracts signed by Puebla officials showed an arrangement between the state government and a company called Sym Servicios Integrales, which Aroche’ reporting had identified as an intermediary for Hacking Team . The details of what had been purchased were redacted. “hese contracts demonstrate that the Puebla government had a commercial relationship with this company,”roche said. “’ sorry if they’e a little bit stained — dropped some coffee on them.”Sym Servicios Integrales says it “ever sold H.T. technology to the state of Puebla.”

In a brief written statement from Sagrario Conde Valerio, a spokeswoman, the government of Puebla denied allegations of spying and claimed that “o relationship exists nor has ever existed between the government of Puebla and the company ‘Hacking Team .’ ”he government declined to respond further to a list of questions.

But a former official from Moreno Valle’ administration claimed to me that more than $1 million was being diverted from the state budget each year to fund the political-espionage unit. Documents from the Hacked Team archive indicate that Hacking Team received an order from the government of Puebla for 415,000 euros in the spring of 2013, and that Hacking Team booked hotel rooms for three of its associates who traveled to Puebla in May of that year.

Some of the R.C.S. training, I was told, took place in a green building on a residential street. When I visited the purported site this fall, lettering above the door said that the building was once a school. Now it had bars across the door and mirrored windows. Neighbors told me it had been abandoned for several months. “eople would come and go,”ne woman said. “hey were very secretive. They would drop off equipment, take away equipment. Then one day, about a year ago, they came and took everything away and left.”nother neighbor said that he often saw a state-police car parked in front of the house and a man with a limp entering and leaving — former Mexican intelligence agent, according to someone who was present during the Hacking Team training.

Mexico is Hacking Team ’ biggest export market, accounting for nearly six million euros in sales, according to leaked documents. Ostensibly, the Remote Control System is intended for fighting criminals and drug traffickers there. (“here have been reports that the software was used in the apprehension of Chapo Guzman,”abe told me, referring to the Mexican drug lord. “ can’ confirm it.” The files indicate that at least seven other Mexican state governments were Hacking Team clients, but because they did not use email to the same extent as Puebla, their activities are harder to track. Multiple former Hacking Team employees told me that abuses of the software were not limited to Puebla. One former employee described having the system set up inside a mayor’ office.

Katitza Rodríuez, international-rights director at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, says that Mexican law allows for interception of communication, like the wiretapping of phone lines, but it does not grant precise legal authority to use new, powerful invasive tools like those created by Hacking Team . And she argues that it is much more dangerous in Mexico than in other Western countries, where checks and balances are stronger. “his is much more intrusive than the interception of a phone call,”he said. “hey are not only listening; they are taking over your laptop. Mexico needs to have a full debate in Congress about what legal safeguards are needed for this kind of surveillance or if the government should be using it at all.”

The Hacked Team files indicate that in mid-2015, Hacking Team opened an American subsidiary and leased office space in Reston, Va., a 20-minute drive from the C.I.A.’ headquarters. The company drew up a “.S. action plan,”alling for a significant North American expansion, with new hires and rounds of pitches to the Department of Justice, the United States military and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police . Hacking Team was also targeting another potentially lucrative market: American state and local governments. It pitched the R.C.S. to law-enforcement agencies in San Bernardino, Calif.; Washington; New York; Fort Lauderdale; and Orlando. In a risk assessment commissioned by the company, lawyers advised that such sales were probably legal, so long as the product was provided “t a distance”rom actual investigations and used “n the normal course of government operations.”

American expansion by companies like Hacking Team may not face much resistance from the federal government, which is becoming more accepting of electronic surveillance as part of normal police work. Last year, the Justice Department successfully changed the rules of criminal procedure, making it easier for federal agents to hack into multiple computers with a single warrant. Senator Steve Daines of Montana, who tried to block the change, complained that it gives “nlimited power for unlimited hacking.”n a 2014 address, now referred to in cybersecurity circles as his “oing Dark”peech, the F.B.I.’ director, James Comey, argued that the encryption built into Apple products posed a threat to public safety —nabling not only terrorism but also drug trafficking, child abuse and hit-and-runs. Instead of “ safe that can’ be cracked,”omey wanted technology companies to lend him the combination. “he law hasn’ kept pace with technology, and this disconnect has created a significant public-safety problem,”omey said. “e call it ‘oing dark.’ ”

As the United States government has argued for weaker protections around personal communications, American businesses have been spreading more powerful surveillance tools around the world. Many foreign law-enforcement agencies already buy electronic-surveillance products from SS8 — company backed by the storied venture-capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers —s well as from the Harris Corporation , a $13 billion company based in Florida and traded on the New York Stock Exchange. At least 25 American police departments have used Harris’ Stingray device, which mimics cellphone towers and can intercept cellphone calls within 200 meters. All known sales of Stingrays to local law enforcement have been authorized by the F.B.I., which has since fought in court to keep those sales secret. In Baltimore alone, Stingrays have been used more than 4,000 times, in routine drug investigations. Much less is known about another Harris product, the advanced Hailstorm, which is also sold to local police departments. Hailstorm is reportedly capable of implanting malware that can take control of a targeted phone, much like Hacking Team ’ R.C.S.

The Hacked Team documents that offer the most revealing view of the company’ ethos happen to be the most public ones. For years, as often as two or three times a day, Vincenzetti sent mass emails to hundreds of his business contacts. The recipients included numerous members of the United States military and intelligence community, as well as government employees from the city of Cincinnati and the Internal Revenue Service . In these messages, Vincenzetti often addresses this audience collectively as “ents.”he news he cites is a reminder of how the geopolitical winds have been blowing in favor of Hacking Team and other self-described allies of law and order. In Vincenzetti’ world, the system is always, as George Tenet famously said about pre-Sept. 11 intelligence, “linking red” the imploding Middle East; a restive, nuclear-armed Russia; battalions of ISIS-trained jihadis roaming around Europe with their encrypted thumb drives and dark-web expertise. Against this backdrop of ever-increasing danger, concerns about human rights are naïe at best.

Vincenzetti’ emails vividly exploit this sense of danger and alarm. He writes about shadowy gangs of Iranian hackers using the #JeSuisCharlie hashtag to inject malware into French laptops. He celebrates the conviction of Ross Ulbricht, a.k.a. the Dread Pirate Roberts, creator of the Silk Road website. After the arrests of two Uzbek men in Brooklyn for telling informants that they wanted to join up with ISIS, Vincenzetti writes of “ very serious terrorist plot on American soil foiled.”

He went on to tap out this sales pitch:

The time has come for a technologically MORE SOPHISTICATED, and much more effective, internet supervision ... something capable to penetrate the core of the terrorists’IDDEN forums. And such a (quite unique) technology EXISTS.

The following day, he gave a few more hints:

I am talking about a NEW technology capable of neutralizing their encryption-based protective layers in order to track them, identify them, locate them, chase them and finally bust them. Something operating on a massive scale. Something different. I am talking about a novel, superior, next-generation mass-surveillance technology.

The tone of Vincenzetti’ sales patter was strangely upbeat, especially considering his dire forecasts. It was almost as if he were in the business of selling microwave ovens or sandwiches, not tools through which the private lives of criminals (and whoever else) could be fully laid bare.

Vincenzetti’ unstated equation —rivacy is secrecy, and secrecy is terrorism —s less controversial than it might appear. A supportive echo can be heard in many public statements from American officials, which Vincenzetti often cut and pasted into his mass emails. The former attorney general Eric Holder called for “nvestigative and prosecutorial tools that allow us to be pre-emptive.”hen Comey warned that “ncryption threatens to lead all of us to a very dark place,”incenzetti forwarded it along approvingly, with the tagline: “e DO have an answer to many if not all of his concerns.”nd when, in May 2015, Comey warned of a “hreat”hat had “orphed”nto “ chaotic spider web,”incenzetti sent word to his “ents”s well.

One month later, an anonymous hack revealed Hacking Team ’ own invisible spider web, and one year later, during the run-up to Election Day, came the internal emails of the Democratic Party. By then it was clear that tools for digital burglary had spread well beyond the hands of regular police officers. Comey had argued for weaker safes; Vincenzetti was selling longer crowbars. They could be used to chase Jimmy Page, arrest Chapo Guzman, fight crime, smear a political opponent or just keep tabs on someone, anyone. To be hidden is to be a terrorist —his was the heart of his pitch. Any digital redoubt that could resist being pried open was a public risk and a private opportunity.

Sign up for  our newsletter   to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Mattathias Schwartz is a national-security reporter for The Intercept and a contributing writer for the magazine. He last wrote about the tangled role of paid sources in F.B.I. terrorism investigations.

Correction: January 22, 2017, Sunday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Jan. 8 about surveillance software erroneously included one company among those that sell so-called ethical malware. The Israeli company Nice no longer sells such software; it sold its intelligence division in May 2015.

* The Perfect Weapon: How Russian Cyberpower Invaded the U.S. 

* Software as Weaponry in a Computer-Connected World 

Prop styling by Pink Sparrow. Photo illustration by Jamie Chung | A building in Puebla that was reportedly used to train operatives on Hacking Team’ software. | Dominic Bracco II/Prime, for The New York Times | Violeta Lagunes, whose email account was compromised during a Partido Acció Nacional election campaign. | Dominic Bracco II/Prime, for The New York Times | David Vincenzetti, Hacking Team’ chief executive, in Milan. | Luca Locatelli/Institute, for The New York Times | An entrance to Hacking Team’ Milan offices. | Luca Locatelli/Institute, for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170104ed14002v3

