 


World; Middle East
 ISIS , Squeezed on Two Sides, Loses Syrian City and Border Crossing

By ANNE BARNARD and MARGARET COKER 
1,510 words
3 November 2017
10:23
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT —slamic State militants lost their last foothold in a major city and a strategic border crossing on Friday, as the Syrian and Iraqi militaries made significant advances, squeezing the militant group into a shrinking patch of territory near the border.

Syrian government forces, supported by intense Russian airstrikes and Iranian-backed militias on the ground, drove the militants from the last few neighborhoods they controlled in the eastern provincial capital of Deir al-Zour, the Syrian army said.

Across the border, the Iraqi army and allied Iranian-backed militias seized control of a crucial border crossing after taking most of the town of Qaim, Iraq, from the Islamic State, according to the Iraqi military chief of staff.

The military advances dealt a severe blow to the militant group, leaving it with fragments of its self-declared caliphate that once stretched from the center of Syria to the outskirts of Baghdad. They also provided yet another indication that President Bashar al-Assad’ fortunes have rebounded and that, with help from Russian and Iranian allies, the Syrian army can take back territory.

The Islamic State now maintains just a few pockets of western Anbar Province in Iraq and somewhat larger patches in Syria, where it controls about a third of the desert province of Deir al-Zour, including a string of small towns and villages, and an oil field.

The developments also set the stage for a battle for the Syrian border town of Bukamal, on the strategic highway from Baghdad to Damascus, and what appears to be the end game for the remaining Islamic State territory in Iraq and Syria.

The seizing of Deir al-Zour punctuates the turnaround Mr. Assad has managed in more than six years of war. Just two years ago, the idea that the government would manage to take back the city seemed remote.

When the Syrian war broke out in 2011, soldiers were defecting from the Syrian army and only a fraction of the troops could be counted on for loyalty in the field. But Mr. Assad hit hard at rebel-held neighborhoods, pummeling Syrian cities with airstrikes with the support of Iran and its Lebanese ally, Hezbollah.

In 2015, Russia entered the war on Mr. Assad’ behalf, carrying out airstrikes against the Islamic State and other insurgent factions. Russia’ backing allowed Mr. Assad’ forces to focus on one front at a time. Once the non-Islamic State insurgents were contained, the pro-government alliance turned its attention to the Islamic State, which it has now mostly routed.

Still, Mr. Assad is faced with running a country that is still divided, politically and territorially, where major cities are devastated, the security forces deeply dependent on Russia and Iran, and the economy gutted.

The government’ announcement of victory in Deir al-Zour came just weeks after an American-backed, Kurdish-led militia, called the Syrian Democratic Forces, took over the city of Raqqa, which had served as the de facto capital of the Islamic State.

The militants never controlled the whole of the city of Deir al-Zour, although they held most of the surrounding province, an oil-rich region that provided an important source of revenue.

For two and a half years, though, the Islamic State had surrounded and besieged 200,000 civilians in the government-held section of the city. Its population dwindled to 90,000, the United Nations estimates, as people escaped or were smuggled out.

Now, the group’ most important territory is the border town of Bukamal and the border crossing on the Syrian side. Iraqi forces claimed the other side of the border on Friday, along with most of Qaim, Bukamal’ counterpart on the Iraqi side.

That battle for the remaining Islamic State territory could inflame tensions among the competing forces fighting the militants as they converge on the region: the Russian and Iranian-backed alliance that supports the Syrian government; the rival American-backed group, Syrian Democratic Forces, or S.D.F.; and the Iraqi forces that are pursuing Islamic State holdouts on their side of the border.

The stakes are high, with the competing armies seeking not only to vanquish the Islamic State, but also racing against each other to win influence in the strategic border zone.

Russia, which wants the Syrian government to reclaim all of its territory, and the United States, which wants to counter Iranian influence, have accused each other of firing at their respective allies on the ground.

The S.D.F., a Kurdish and Arab alliance, wants to seize as much territory as possible, including oil fields. Those resources and points of leverage could increase its chances of staving off a government takeover of the areas it holds, including Raqqa and the areas to the northeast where Kurds have carved out a measure of autonomy.

Iran wants the friendly Syrian government to control the area. With Iraq already a strong ally, Iran could establish a land route linking it with Lebanon, the base of its most powerful allied militia in the region, Hezbollah.

Once the Islamic State is driven out, cities like Raqqa may be the next front. A top Iranian official said Friday that the Syrian government and its allies would soon take Raqqa from the American-backed S.D.F.

According to IRNA, Iran’ semiofficial news agency, Ali Akbar Velayati, a foreign affairs adviser to Iran’ Supreme Leader, said that Raqqa and its surroundings “ill be liberated”nd the Syrian government would take control. “he U.S. is planning to partition Syria,”he agency quoted him as saying. “t will never achieve anything in the field.”

The battle on the Iraqi side of the Iraqi-Syrian border on Friday involved Iraq’ elite counterterrorism units, the Iraqi army, the federal police and Iraqi paramilitaries supported by Iran. American military advisers have been working with the Iraqi army and special forces, and the United States provided air support to the Iraqi ground forces on Friday, according to Gen. Yihya Rasool, the spokesman of the Iraqi joint operations command.

The Iraqi chief of staff said the Iraqis’dvance gave them and their American-led coalition allies a forward operating position to monitor any remaining Islamic State fighters fleeing the converging armies.

An Iraqi Sunni tribal leader whose members also took part in the fighting said that the Islamic State’ foreign fighters had fled Qaim before the final push by the Iraqi forces on Friday. The leader, Sheikh Qutri al-Ubaidi, said that the majority moved their families across the Syrian border in the direction of Bukamal.

Sheikh Ubaidi said several Islamic State fighters remained in Iraqi territory, hidden along the banks of the Euphrates River that flows between the two countries. Several Islamic State supporters also fled Qaim in boats across the river toward Rumana, Iraq, he said.

As of Friday night, at least two Iraqi towns —umana, northwest of Qaim, and Rawa, to the east —ere still under Islamic State control.

The news from Deir al-Zour cheered some of the tens of thousands of its residents who are displaced across Syria and the region, though, as with Raqqa, it did not mean they could go home any time soon, given the intense destruction and the danger of land mines and Islamic State sleeper cells that may remain there.

“e fled from the intensive bombings because we could not stay there any more,”aid Alia Mohamed, 33, at a park in Damascus where she watched her 4-year-old daughter —ne of her six children —un around as her husband tried to find a room for the family.

At a school shelter in Qudsaya, a suburb northwest of Damascus, Hosna Quray’, who said that she had been displaced for two years, greeted the news with “reat joy.”

“ want to return,”he said. “ost of my relatives left there, and I don’ know what happened to them.”

Ibrahim Haj Hussein, a 14-year-old from the government-controlled part of Deir al-Zour, traveled to the shelter eight months ago because his mother was sick. He left his father behind. The price of food was so high that his family had subsisted on a diet of bulgur wheat and rice, he said, adding, “he situation there was really tough.”

Follow Anne Barnard and Margaret Coker on Twitter: @ABarnardNYT and @nytmargaret Anne Barnard reported from Beirut, and Margaret Coker from Dohuk, Iraq. Reporting was contributed by Hwaida Saad, Somini Sengupta and an employee of The New York Times in Damascus, and Nada Homsi in Beirut.

* With Loss of Its Caliphate, \b ISIS\b0  May Return to Guerrilla Roots

* As \b ISIS\b0 ’ole in Syria Wanes, Other Conflicts Take the Stage

* ‘ome Out and Surrender’ Inside Raqqa, With the Fighters Who Drove Off \b ISIS\b0 

The terrorist group has shifted between different promises to maintain credibility in the eyes of its followers. | By CAMILLA SCHICK 

Document NYTFEED020171103edb3002bd



World; Africa
U.S. Bombs  ISIS  in Somalia for the First Time

By THOMAS GIBBONS-NEFF 
571 words
3 November 2017
22:33
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —he United States military bombed Islamic State fighters in Somalia for the first time on Friday, a sign that the air campaign against the group was expanding after recent battlefield successes against the militants in Iraq and Syria.

Several militants were killed in a pair of strikes hours apart in the country’ northeast, according to a statement from United States Africa Command.

“.S. forces will continue to use all authorized and appropriate measures to protect Americans and to disable terrorist threats,”he statement said, adding that the strikes were carried out in coordination with the Somali government.

The announcement of the new strikes came hours after President Trump said on Twitter that his administration had attacked the Islamic State “uch harder”ver the past two days. It was not immediately clear what he was referring to —he larger air campaign against the extremists in Iraq and Syria remained steady, according to the military —ut the announcement of the bombings in Somalia helped clarify his statement.

The Islamic State has suffered numerous defeats in the past several months, including the loss of their stronghold in the Iraqi city of Mosul and in their de facto capital, Raqqa, Syria.

Mr. Trump gave the military wider latitude this year to go after militants in Somalia, specifically those associated with the Shabab terrorist group. The head of Africa Command, Gen. Thomas D. Waldhauser, waited months before exercising the authorities, citing the difficulty of striking militants mixed with a civilian population on the move in the midst of a regional famine.

According to an analysis by the Long War Journal, a publication that tracks militant groups in Africa, the Islamic State has a small presence in northeastern Somalia and consists of dozens of fighters led by a militant that had defected from Shabab.

Before Friday’ strikes, the American military had primarily focused on the Shabab in Somalia, carrying out 15 airstrikes against them since the start of this year, according to the Long War Journal. The Shabab were responsible for the truck bombings last month that killed more than 300 people in Somalia’ capital, Mogadishu.

In May, a Navy SEAL was killed in a raid against the group in Somalia. Several hundred American troops are in the country, primarily advising Somali forces and their African nation allies in the fight against Shabab militants.

In recent weeks, the American military’ presence across Africa has come under increased scrutiny. A team of Green Berets and support soldiers were ambushed on Oct. 4 by militants thought to be associated with the Islamic State near the Niger-Mali border. Four soldiers were killed.

In June, a Special Forces soldier, Staff Sgt. Logan J. Melgar, was found dead in his room in Bamako, Mali. It was unclear how he died, but naval authorities are investigating whether two commandos from SEAL Team 6 strangled him.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* \b ISIS\b0 , Squeezed on Two Sides, Loses Syrian City and Border Crossing

* U.S. Soldiers Were Separated From Unit in Niger Ambush, Officials Say

* 2 Navy SEALs Under Suspicion in Strangling of Green Beret in Mali

President Trump said on Twitter that his administration had attacked the Islamic State “uch harder”ver the past two days. | Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171103edb30096l



Best of Late Night
Arts; Television
Trevor Noah Watches Facebook’ Testimony ‘evolve Into Anger’

By GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO 
723 words
3 November 2017
09:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep —nd lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com .

Social Media Under Oath

Trevor Noah on Thursday looked at the congressional testimonies of executives and lawyers from major social media companies. They have been called this week to account for the role of their organizations in spreading foreign-sponsored disinformation.

“ell, this is really depressing —oth for America and for Russian spies. Because in the old days, espionage meant using exploding pens and poison-tipped umbrellas. Now they have to use the same tool as your divorced aunt.”—REVOR NOAH

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Mr. Noah laughed as he watched Senator Al Franken become exasperated while seeking to get a simple answer out of Facebook’ general counsel, Colin Stretch.

“ love that even in real life, Facebook conversations devolve into anger and frustration. Because look at Al Franken: He’ doing a real-life ‘acepalm’moji. Look at him! The only thing missing was some random person popping in with a racial slur —nd that’ only because Jeff Sessions isn’ in the Senate anymore.”—REVOR NOAH

Back to ‘ut Cut Cut’

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Seth Meyers returned to a favorite topic from the night before: President Trump’ preferred name for the Republicans’ew tax legislation.

“rump has been insistent that the bill be called ‘he Cut Cut Cut Act.’ur president is so adult he can only think in chants. ‘ock her up!’‘uild the wall!’‘ut cut cut!’r. President, what’ on the agenda today? ‘e want golf!’”—ETH MEYERS

Jordan Klepper on Political Correctness

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

On “he Opposition,”ordan Klepper pulled out a gaslight as he tried to justify some of the Trump administration’ public statements. Later, he discussed Mr. Trump’ recent suggestion that “e’e so politically correct that we’e afraid to do anything.”

“e’ right. Political correctness is hobbling us. Do you have any idea how much energy our president wastes trying to not say racial slurs? If he could instead focus that energy for good, he could have defeated ISIS before Obama even had the chance to found it.”—ORDAN KLEPPER

The Punchiest Punchlines (Trebek Edition)

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

“isten, Catalonia, America has no desire to get into the middle of a civil war —f you don’ count Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria and Kardashia.”—STEPHEN COLBERT, hoping that a revolutionary showdown won’ overtake Western Europe, demanding a response from the United States

“n an interview, ‘eopardy!’ost Alex Trebek revealed that he once tripped hard on hash brownies. Tripped hard on hash brownies, yeah. Apparently Trebek spent hours saying, ‘hat is: my hand, for $800.’”—ONAN O’RIEN

The Bits Worth Watching

On this week’ edition of “he President Show,”nthony Atamanuik’ Mr. Trump has become a Macbeth-like figure, deeply afflicted and eager for “scape.”ue dream sequence.

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

On “he Tonight Show,”he cast of “tranger Things”ad a dance battle.

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Enjoy the Weekend

If you’e watching “he Late Show”n Friday night, here’ one guest you won’ see: Jeremy Piven, the actor. Mr. Colbert taped their interview earlier this week, but producers decided to can the segment after sexual-harassment allegations emerged against Mr. Piven.

Have a great weekend, and check back with us on Tuesday morning for more Best of Late Night.

Also, Check This Out

Similar allegations continue to accrue around Kevin Spacey, and collaborators are starting to distance themselves from him. Now, Mr. Spacey has announced —n what is starting to sound like a familiar move for men under this kind of scrutiny —hat he will seek treatment.

Trevor Noah found the back-and-forth between the online giants and Congress distressingly similar to exchanges on social media: “he only thing missing was some random person popping in with a racial slur.” Comedy Central | Kevin Spacey at the Old Vic theater in London in 2015, when his 11-year run as artistic director came to an end. | Samir Hussein/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171103edb30025t



U.S.; Politics
Right and Left React to the New York Attack and Trump’ Call to End the Green Card Lottery

By ANNA DUBENKO 
1,205 words
3 November 2017
08:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The political news cycle is fast, and keeping up can be overwhelming. Trying to find differing perspectives worth your time is even harder. That’ why we have scoured the internet for political writing from the right and left that you might not have seen.

Has this series exposed you to new ideas? Tell us how. Email us at ourpicks@nytimes.com.

For an archive of all the Partisan Writing Roundups, check out Our Picks.

From the Right

Mark Krikorian in  National Review  :

“f course, the admission of one jihadi killer through this cockamamie program (several, actually) isn’ in itself enough of a reason to rid of it. But there are plenty more.”

Mr. Krikorian agrees with President Trump about the need to abolish the Diversity Visa Lottery. He points out that the visa program “dmits a disproportionate share of immigrants from terrorist breeding grounds”nd establishes a “igration network”here one would not have existed. He adds that the program creates “ssimilation-resistant enclaves”hat can themselves pose a threat to national security. Read more »

_____

Ben Shapiro in  The Daily Wire  :

“sn’ radical Islam just as horrifying as white supremacism? And isn’ white supremacism just as statistically nonrepresentative of Confederate flag-owners throughout the South as radical Islam is of observant Muslims across the country?”

Mr. Shapiro criticizes those in the news media who are quick to separate an Islamic terrorist from the entire religion, while equating all white supremacists with those who choose to fly the Confederate flag. He writes, “f we’e going to start attributing terrorist ideologies to broader movements, we’e going to have to abide by that rule across the board.”Read more »

_____

Editorial board of  The New York Post  :

“n the end, though, let’ face it: Attacks like Tuesday’ are extremely hard to stop.”

Members of The New York Post’ editorial board concede that it is difficult to stop the type of lone-wolf terrorist attacks that occurred on Tuesday. However, they write that it is worth re-examining the visa lottery, which began as a “atch on a dysfunctional system”nd which Democrats had agreed to scrap in 2013. Read more »

_____

Megan G. Oprea in  The Federalist  :

“ … while it’ reasonable to want to restrict travel from countries that can’ provide sufficient information about their citizens who seek entry to America, the ban doesn’ address the way in which the Islamic State’ ideology spreads, nor its noncentralized network of adherents, many of whom are unknown even to ISIS leaders.”

For Ms. Oprea, the attack on Tuesday in New York illustrates the ways in which Mr. Trump’ travel ban falls short. Though she acknowledges that “he travel ban never claimed to be able to prevent all terror attacks,”he reminds her readers that the United States must develop a system for combating self-radicalized terrorists, or those who are inspired by the Islamic State from afar. Read more »

_____

From the Left

Julianne Hing in  The Nation  :

“he visa lottery is a rare opportunity for those who are not already well-educated, wealthy or well-connected to immigrate legally to the U.S.”

Ms. Hing points out that it is incredibly difficult to legally immigrate to the United States without having a family member or a corporate sponsorship. Moreover, “ost who come through professional avenues are scientists, corporate executives, software engineers, athletes.”or her, the diversity visa lottery is the clearest articulation of “he stereotypical American dream: chance, luck, opportunity, egalitarianism, diversity.”Read more »

_____

Zaid Jilani in  The Intercept  :

“ … it’ notable that if a shooter is Muslim, the question seems less likely to be asked at all —ven if the attacker, in this case, emerges from a truck waving a BB gun and paintball gun, an act that displays a dubious tethering to reality.”

Mr. Jilani has noticed that the public processes attacks perpetrated by Muslims differently from those perpetrated by white people. When a white person is involved in a mass shooting or act of violence, questions about his or her mental health invariably crop up. Not so with a Muslim attacker, Mr. Jilani writes. However, he argues that “f Muslim terrorists were routinely subjected to this sort of examination in popular media, it might help increase public understanding of the dynamics that fuel terrorism.”Read more »

_____

Simon Jenkins in  The Guardian  :

“he most powerful and secure nation on Earth, its territory last threatened with invasion by the British in 1815, quivers with fear before an imagined army of hostile forces massing across every border and beyond every sea.”

Mr. Trump’ response to the attack in Manhattan, according to Mr. Jenkins, does nothing to heal the nation or demonstrate a steely resolve in the face of terror. Instead, the president’ words betray a “olitics of fear.”he more effective way to battle terrorism, Mr. Jenkins writes, “s to treat terror as a criminal means of making a point”nd book a trip to New York to show that the world will not be cowed. Read more »

_____

Editorial board of  The Washington Post  :

“ike almost any immigration program, the diversity visa lottery is imperfect and susceptible to abuse.”

The editorial board of The Washington Post acknowledges that the visa lottery has its downsides, noting that its winners who lack higher education are “ot uniformly equipped to thrive in this country.”owever, they still contend that the lottery and other programs like it are a “owerful tool of public diplomacy.”Read more »

_____

From the Center

Editorial board of  USA Today  :

“erhaps Trump is unaware that the program was part of a major bipartisan law signed in 1990 by former Republican president George H.W. Bush.”

There are two conclusions to be drawn from Tuesday’ attack, according to the editorial board of USA Today. The first is that though the attack was devastating and deadly, its scale and execution nonetheless betrays a weakened the Islamic State “s its caliphate crumbles in Iraq and Syria.”econd, its members note, Mr. Trump’ response to the attack “akes a bad situation worse.”hey compare Mr. Trump’ divisive language with that of President George W. Bush after the 9/11 attacks, which they write were “owerful messages of resolve, resilience and tolerance.”Read more »

_____

Finally, From Our Readers

 Julie W. in New Jersey  :

“errorism is terrorism, whether it is carried out by a domestic or foreign actor. Why is it that we only seem to feel the need to take action in the latter case?”

Read more about what New York Times readers had to say about the definition of terrorism »

_____

Want the Partisan Writing Roundup in your inbox? Sign up for the Morning Briefing Newsletter or the What We’e Reading Newsletter.

Have thoughts about this collection? Email feedback to ourpicks@nytimes.com.

A makeshift memorial near the scene of Tuesday’ attack in Manhattan. | Hiroko Masuike/The New York Times | After the attacks, President Trump said he wanted to end the Diversity Visa Lottery. | Tom Brenner/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171103edb3001uq



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.N. Says  ISIS  Executed Hundreds in Iraqi City

By RICK GLADSTONE 
593 words
3 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Islamic State fighters executed at least 741 Iraqi civilians in Mosul, including women and children who had tried to flee, during the nine-month battle by government forces to retake the northern Iraq city from the militant group, the United Nations said Thursday.

In a 53-page report detailing atrocities in Mosul that amount to ''international crimes,'' the United Nations said the executed civilians were among at least 2,521 who were killed during the battle for the city, mostly from Islamic State attacks, including indiscriminate shelling and the use of improvised bombs and -- increasingly -- explosive-laden drones.

The report said the militants also carried out mass abductions of civilians, used thousands of civilians as shields in combat with Iraqi soldiers, and forcibly recruited boys as young as nine from families then deployed them as ''Cubs of the Caliphate'' wearing explosive belts.

The report, produced by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, could be used for war-crimes prosecutions.

''During the course of the operation to retake Mosul city thousands of civilians were subjected to shocking human rights abuses and clear violations of international humanitarian law,'' Zeid Ra'ad al-Hussein, the high commissioner for human rights, said in releasing the report. ''Those responsible must answer for their heinous crimes,'' he said.

Among the report's recommendations was allowing the International Criminal Court jurisdiction to pursue justice for victims. The report also said the Iraqi government could amend the country's criminal code to grant domestic courts jurisdiction over international crimes.

Seized by Islamic State fighters in 2014, Mosul was the militant group's biggest urban conquest, with a population of 1.5 million, part of a span of territory it held in Iraq and neighboring Syria.

With air support from the United States military and help from other allies, Iraqi forces began to retake the city in October 2016 and declared victory in July.

But much of Mosul was heavily damaged, including its famed al-Nuri mosque, and vast parts remain littered with unexploded bombs and booby-traps left by fleeing Islamic State fighters.

The report was based on testimony of victims, survivors and witnesses to atrocities. While some implicated Iraqi forces in extrajudicial killings or abuse, the report attributed the vast majority of violations to the Islamic State.

A section of the report on mass killings and summary executions by the Islamic State described three instances in which civilians accused of collaborating with the government were executed.

On Nov. 25, 2016, the report said, militants shot to death 27 civilians in Muhandiseen Park for leaking information. On Dec. 2, militants killed a Mosul University student for having received cash from a friend outside the city. On Dec. 17, they publicly beheaded two civilians in eastern Mosul suspected of having cooperated with Iraqi forces.

Another section of the report, on the Islamic State's use of improvised explosives, included attacks with car bombs and weaponized drones.

On Nov. 6, 2016, it said, an explosive-laden vehicle in eastern Mosul killed 35 civilians, including women and children. On Feb. 3, a drone carrying explosives hit an eastern Mosul primary school, killing two women teachers. A week later, an explosive-laden drone targeted a funeral in northern Mosul, killing eight, including three women.

The report said the Islamic State's use of weaponized drones grew more frequent in the course of the battle for Mosul and ''represented a new tactic.''

Document NYTF000020171103edb300067



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
How Sheets of Paper and Phone Images May Reveal Devotion to  ISIS 

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI; Al Baker contributed reporting from New York. 
1,269 words
3 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
26
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

More than two days after the driver of a pickup truck crushed pedestrians in a bike lane in Lower Manhattan, at least four clues have emerged showing the radicalization of the suspect, Sayfullo Saipov.

While it remains unknown if the suspect was speaking to the terrorist group or being guided by it, pieces of paper and two cellphones at the scene provide a window into his familiarity with the terminology of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS. (On Thursday night, the group took credit for the attack in its weekly newsletter.)

Invoking a Slogan

Feet from where the truck came to a stop on Tuesday afternoon, police recovered sheets of paper bearing a message written in Arabic and English, ''It will endure,'' they said, referring to the Islamic State, according to the criminal complaint against Mr. Saipov.

The phrase is familiar to followers of the group. Throughout the territory it once held in Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State left one Arabic word: baqiya. It was printed on billboards and spray-painted on the buildings it confiscated. Enter a home formerly occupied by one of the terrorist group's emirs, and you find it scrawled in marker on the walls.

You can even find it etched into the desks they used, like teenagers carving their initials on a picnic table.

It means ''remaining'' or ''enduring,'' and it is the terrorist group's slogan, dating to when it was still an affiliate of Al Qaeda.

A senior law enforcement official, who had been briefed on the investigation into the New York attack, said that the phrase appeared more than once in the note. ''There's some stuff in the beginning and then there's the repeated, 'The Islamic State will endure forever,' or 'will last forever,' you know, three times, in Arabic,'' he said, speaking on condition of anonymity because the investigation is continuing.

Adhering to Directions

The Islamic State's magazine, Rumiyah, provided detailed guidance on truck attacks in an issue published in November 2016. The group encouraged supporters to keep driving the car for as long as possible. ''To ensure the most carnage over upon the enemies of Allah, it is imperative that one does not exit his vehicle during the attack. Rather, he should remain inside, driving over the already harvested kuffar'' -- infidels -- ''and continue crushing their remains until it becomes physically impossible to continue by vehicle.''

In the New York attack, the suspect drove over people in the bike lane until he crashed into a school bus.

According to the magazine, the attacker is expected to jump out and use a secondary weapon, like a gun or a knife. The New York attacker did just that: He jumped out with a pellet gun, though he did not appear to have hurt anyone with it. His aim, though, may have also been to use a knife. The complaint states that a black bag containing three knives was found near Mr. Saipov after he was shot.

Among the more obscure instructions, however, is the manner in which the assailant is supposed to tell the public of his allegiance to the Islamic State. The article states that an assailant should write a note on several sheets of paper, throwing them out the window of the vehicle as the attack is being carried out. The magazine suggests including the phrase, ''The Islamic State will remain,'' a rendering of the group's baqiya slogan.

The New York attacker's papers were found about 10 feet from the driver's side of the car, the criminal complaint said.

Addressing the ISIS Leader

On the attacker's cellphone, recovered at the scene, investigators found several pictures of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the self-styled caliph of the Islamic State.

Recruits learn that before an attack, a pledge of allegiance needs to be recorded. It can be written or recorded as audio or video, but the pledge is supposed to be to addressed to an individual, in this case the caliph of the Islamic State, and not to the organization overall.

This ritual is meant to recreate the way in which early Muslims pledged fealty to the Prophet Muhammad, and later to the caliphs that succeeded him, said Amarnath Amarasingam, a senior research fellow at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue. Islamic State recruits refer to Mr. Baghdadi as Emir al-Mumineem, an honorific meaning the commander of the believers, and they will often use a long version of his name -- ''Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi al-Husseini al-Qurayshi.''

The last term -- al-Qurayshi -- is a reference to tribe of the Prophet Muhammad. One of the rules for choosing a caliph is that he must be descended from the lineage of the prophet. Recruits who use this terminology are nodding to this history.

These terms can be heard in the first few sentences of Anis Amri's pledge of allegiance, released after the Tunisian immigrant used a tractor-trailer to run over shoppers in a Christmas market in Berlin last December, killing 12.

Although Mr. Saipov had pictures of Mr. Baghdadi on his phone and told investigators that he began plotting his attack after hearing one of the leader's audio recordings, the authorities said, he does not appear to have pledged allegiance in this formal manner. This could reflect someone who was self-radicalized, not coached online, at least not extensively, by Islamic State recruiters.

Propaganda Through Closed Channels

At the same time, what the complaint said was found on the attacker's phone suggests he may have had access to the Islamic State's secret chat rooms on the app Telegram. It is in these chat rooms, known as ''channels,'' that Islamic State followers congregate and post claims for attacks as well as share videos, including executions.

With numerous lawsuits filed against social media companies by the families of victims of recent Islamic State attacks, the group's videos are often suspended within hours of being uploaded to YouTube, Twitter or Facebook. The group has increasingly turned to closed channels to share information.

Among the videos that investigators said they found on Mr. Saipov's phone was one of the group's most disturbing clips, showing the grotesque executions of prisoners forced to wear orange jumpsuits in an echo of the United States prison at Guantáamo Bay.

That the suspect was said to have these videos, as well as thousands of images of Islamic State propaganda suggests he may have had access to the group's Telegram channels.

These channels include online tutorials on how to carry out attacks. For example, the Lone Lions channel routinely posts step-by-step demonstrations showing how to make triacetone triperoxide, or TATP, the explosive compound used in nearly all Islamic State attacks in the West. More important, these channels serve as digital watering holes, where ISIS scouts identify potential new attackers.

Numerous attacks in the last three years were carried out by recruits who made contact with Islamic State handlers on the Telegram app, and later migrated to encrypted, one-on-one chats.

Like any other app, Telegram can be deleted from a phone. The complaint does not state if investigators found the app on the two cellphones the suspect left at the scene, or if he erased the digital bread crumbs leading back to ISIS.

Graffiti behind the ancient amphitheater of Palmyra reads ''remaining....expanding,'' a frequent Islamic State slogan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRYAN DENTON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171103edb30005b



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Claims Responsibility as Authorities Look at 2015 Wedding

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI, BENJAMIN MUELLER, MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ and ADAM GOLDMAN; Al Baker, Nick Madigan and William K. Rashbaum contributed reporting. Susan C. Beachy contributed research. 
1,221 words
3 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
26
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The Islamic State claimed responsibility late Thursday for the terrorist attack in Lower Manhattan two days earlier that killed eight people and wounded a dozen more.

The statement was issued in the group's weekly newsletter and called Tuesday's rampage ''one of the most prominent attacks targetting Crusaders in America.''

It describes the suspect, Sayfullo Saipov, 29, as a ''soldier of the Caliphate'' and goes on to say that the attack was carried out in response to the group's call to target ''citizens of the Crusader countries involved in the alliance against the Islamic State.''

It was an uncharacteristically late claim for a group that in the past year has typically issued its statements within the first 24 hours after an attack. It was also not released through the Islamic State's Amaq News Agency, which is usually the first to carry such statements. And it marks a break with the usual pattern of not claiming responsibility for an attack when a suspect is in custody.

As the investigation continues, the federal authorities are increasingly focusing on a wedding in Florida two years ago attended by Mr. Saipov as a possible key to understanding whether he had personal ties to people connected to the Islamic State, law enforcement officials said.

A person at the wedding was under scrutiny by the F.B.I. as part of a terrorism investigation at the time, the officials said. Mr. Saipov's presence at the wedding brought him to the F.B.I.'s attention, though it did not prompt an investigation of him, law enforcement officials said.

The wedding, the details of which have not previously been reported, was held in August 2015 in the clubhouse of a sprawling apartment complex in Fort Myers, Fla., that was the home of relatives of Mr. Saipov, according to a Muslim cleric whom Mr. Saipov invited to the celebration.

The groom was the brother-in-law of Mr. Saipov, an immigrant from Uzbekistan. The bride was an Uzbek woman from Fort Myers, whose family lived in the apartment complex where the celebration was held.

The cleric, Abdul, who is affiliated with a mosque in Tampa and spoke on the condition that only his first name be used because he feared reprisals, described the event as a small affair with about 20 attendees, some of whom had traveled from New York and California.

The person at the wedding who was under an active F.B.I. investigation would have been the subject of physical and electronic surveillance.

While the wedding provided a clue about the direction of the F.B.I. investigation into the Manhattan truck attack, many questions about the wedding remain unanswered.

It is not clear if the F.B.I. is still investigating the person at the wedding who was under scrutiny at the time. Officials have also not named that person or said why they were investigating the person.

The wedding is at the center of widening circles of Mr. Saipov's connections that federal agents are scrutinizing as they try to determine whether he had direct connections with ISIS operatives.

The celebration was held in a carpeted poolside meeting room with maroon walls and a built-in bar. A sign warns against exceeding an occupancy of 92 people. The apartment complex, Osprey Cove, rents the room to residents at the complex for a $100 fee, and a $100 deposit, for four hours.

Oak trees and palm trees dot the complex, a circle of apartment buildings arranged around a man-made lake. The complex has about 350 apartment units.

Adjoining the party space is a smaller room where brides sometimes change and the apartment complex stores chairs and tables for big dinners.

At the wedding, Abdul said he gave about a 20-minute speech -- a blessing of sorts -- before the attendees ate Uzbek food and talked. He described the apartment complex as fancy, but said little else was memorable about the ceremony.

It was an unlikely setting for an Uzbek wedding because few Uzbek families live in Fort Myers, he said. He was invited to many weddings because of his following in the Uzbek community, and he officiated Mr. Saipov's wedding, he said.

Mr. Saipov was married in Ohio in 2013 to Nozima Odilova. Officials said she was cooperating with investigators and has hired a lawyer. The couple live in Paterson, N.J., and have three children.

Abdul said Mr. Saipov attended his Tampa mosque for a time, and he became worried that Mr. Saipov increasingly misinterpreted Islam. As Mr. Saipov grew more devoted to the outward observances of Islam, Abdul said he urged him to calm down and learn the substance of the religion.

Federal investigators this week were pursuing another lead related to Mr. Saipov's friendships in Florida. They announced on Wednesday that they were trying to learn more about a second Uzbek man, Mukhammadzoir Kadirov, 32. Later that day, they said they had found Mr. Kadirov in New Jersey. They did not say why they were interested in him.

It was at an apartment complex in Tampa where neighbors said Mr. Kadirov lived until a few months ago where they saw him and Mr. Saipov together.

''They'd be together all the time,'' said Joshua Clemente, 26, who remembered Mr. Kadirov moving into the apartment directly above his with a wife and two children. ''His friend would come over. They would go inside or they would go to the mosque down the street.''

Mr. Clemente was referring to the Islamic Society of Tampa Bay, where his younger brother, Jeremy, 17, said he used to see the two men.

The brothers said an F.B.I. agent had come to the family's apartment on Wednesday and shown them a picture of Mr. Kadirov.

''Oh, I know that guy,'' the younger Mr. Clemente said he told the agent. ''He was a self-conscious person. Him and the other guy would go up and down the stairs all the time. They'd just sit on the bench by the basketball court, or get into the white Toyota van that the guy with the beard had. He didn't talk a lot; he'd only talk to the people he knew. Sometimes he'd wave or say 'hi,' but that was about it.''

On Thursday, Mr. Kadirov, through an intermediary, issued a statement denouncing the attack in New York.

''It is so sad and unbelievable,'' the statement read in part. ''It is not acceptable. We as Muslims completely reject this kind of actions. No human being who has a heart can do this.''

In New York on Thursday, the Transportation Department began placing hundreds of concrete barriers at 57 intersections along the Hudson River Park Bikeway.

As officials discussed Sayfullo Saipov during a New York news conference, federal investigators were focusing on a Florida wedding. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAM HODGSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); The clubhouse of the Osprey Cove apartment complex in Fort Myers, Fla., where Mr. Saipov attended a wedding in 2015. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EDWARD LINSMIER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171103edb30003h



World; Americas
‘llahu Akbar!’n Everyday Phrase, Tarnished by Attacks

By ERIC NAGOURNEY 
693 words
2 November 2017
10:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

When H. A. Hellyer is out walking with his family, strangers sometimes approach him and declare, “llahu akbar!”

Many Westerners may find it hard to believe these days, but Mr. Hellyer does not recoil in fear.

“’l be walking out with my kids,”e said, “nd someone will say: ‘h, they’e so cute. Allahu akbar.’nd I’l joke, ‘hank you —ow stop talking to my kids.’”

The Arabic phrase, which means simply “od is great,”as, it sometimes seems, become intertwined with terrorism.

The driver of a truck that mowed down 20 people on a Manhattan bike path on Tuesday was said to have cried out “llahu akbar”efore he was shot by a police officer. The men who carried out the attack on the French newspaper Charlie Hebdo in 2015 shouted it during their onslaught. And the phrase rang through the air as a British soldier was run down near military barracks in 2013 and then hacked to death.

But for Mr. Hellyer and other Muslims, Allahu akbar is so commonplace a saying as to be utterly unworthy of note. “t’ quite an innocuous expression,”e said.

Its origin is explicitly religious. It is said in the call to prayer that is heard five times day, and in the prayers that follow.

But it is heard far from the mosque, too.

“omething good will happen and people will say, ‘ongratulations’—nd they will proclaim God’ greatness as a way of recognizing what they see as the divine blessing,”aid Mr. Hellyer, a scholar of religion and politics at the Atlantic Council who lives in London.

Its use can be even less divinely inspired.

“et’ say your football team is mounting an attack,”aid Ahdaf Soueif, an Egyptian author. “ou can say, ‘llahu akbar, Allahu akbar, Allahu akbar,’nd you’e pushing them along, like, ‘o for it, go for it, go for it.’”

Even more prosaically, Ms. Soueif said, “ou see a really beautiful woman or a good-looking guy, you go, ‘llahu akbar.’”

But the phrase —o many Muslims’istress —as also been seized on by jihadists who claim that Islam justifies their attacks on innocent civilians in the name of God.

And in tense times, language itself can become a barrier.

Last year, for example, a Berkeley student was removed from a Southwest Airlines flight after a fellow passenger heard him on the phone telling his uncle he would call him when they landed, “nshallah.”he phrase means “od willing”nd —s in the West —s widely used in conversation.

And in 1999, when an EgyptAir jetliner inexplicably plummeted into the Atlantic Ocean, American investigators concluded that it had been downed intentionally because the voice recorder captured a crew member saying, “awakilt ala Allah”—“ put my trust in God.”

To the investigators’ars, the phrase suggested ill intent. But to many Muslims, it was simply a man accepting his fate.

Still, when it comes to Allahu akbar, there is no denying that what it means can depend on who is saying it.

Ms. Soueif pointed to the reported use of the phrase by the suspect in the Manhattan attacks. Mr. Hellyer suggested, though, that in the end, it had little real meaning.

“eople may read the headlines about the attack and say: ‘h, he said “llahu akbar,”o that means something,’”e said. “ell, it probably means that he thinks it means something —ut that shouldn’ mean anyone who says ‘llahu akbar’s suddenly about to do some violent act. Far from it.”

Mohamed Andeel, an Egyptian cartoonist and writer, wonders if it is worth trying to teach non-Muslims the real meaning of Allahu akbar.

“f you tell people not to be afraid of something,”e said, “hey will basically learn to be afraid of something else.”

* I Want ‘llahu Akbar’ack

* Prosecutors Describe Driver’ Plan to Kill in Manhattan Terror Attack

* When Its Attacker Is in Handcuffs, \b ISIS\b0  Stays Mum

Gathering for prayer at a mosque in Doha, Qatar. | Tomas Munita for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171102edb20020d



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
'Monsters' Fed Rage in Wanderer

By KIM BARKER, JOSEPH GOLDSTEIN and MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ; Reporting was contributed by Nick Madigan, Tiffany Hsu, Liz Robbins, Nate Schweber, Mitch Smith and Nikita Stewart. Doris Burke and Susan C. Beachy contributed research. 
1,462 words
2 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Sayfullo Saipov left home in 2010, just after he celebrated his 22nd birthday and won the lottery to come to America. He never looked back, never again saw his hometown of Tashkent, the capital of Uzbekistan, and never stopped moving.

Mr. Saipov drove a semi-truck for a living, logging tens of thousands of miles back and forth across the country, from Denver to Detroit, from Canton, Mass., to Salt Lake City. He moved his wife and children from state to state, always searching for something -- friends in Ohio, a new life in Florida, family in New Jersey, where he started driving for Uber six months ago. Nothing ever stuck.

And on Tuesday, Mr. Saipov, now 29, who had spent so many hours on the road by himself, who a former friend said had ''monsters inside,'' decided to drive one last truck, this one a Home Depot rental, down a crowded bike path on the West Side of Manhattan, the authorities said. Eight people died.

As with any attack like this, there is no single reason Mr. Saipov reportedly decided to kill innocents, mostly tourists enjoying a blustery fall day, 56 degrees with blue skies. He had come to the United States as a moderate Muslim with dreams of making it. He married another Uzbek immigrant and fathered three children. But life did not work out the way Mr. Saipov had wanted. He could not find a job in the hotel business, in which he had worked back home. He developed a violent temper. He lost jobs. An imam in Florida worried that Mr. Saipov increasingly misinterpreted Islam.

''I used to tell him: 'Hey, you are too much emotional. Read books more. Learn your religion first,''' said Abdul, the imam, who did not want his last name used because he feared reprisals. ''He did not learn religion properly. That's the main disease in the Muslim community.''

In Tashkent, Mr. Saipov grew up in a well-off family who practiced traditional Islam and never embraced extremism, the Uzbek government said on Wednesday. His neighbors there said Mr. Saipov never raised suspicions and ''always carried himself in a measured and friendly way,'' according to the government statement. He never crossed paths with the police.

From 2005 to 2009, Mr. Saipov studied at the Tashkent Financial Institute, one of the biggest universities in Uzbekistan, a former Soviet republic in Central Asia that at the time was run by Islam Karimov, an autocrat called one of the most oppressive leaders in the world. After college, Mr. Saipov worked as an accountant for the Sayokhat hotel in Tashkent, described as having dated rooms and indifferent customer service.

Then he won the green card lottery, which meant he was one of the lucky ones who could escape the repression of home and immigrate legally to America. In March 2010, Mr. Saipov flew into Kennedy International Airport in New York City, his first time in the United States, and made his way to the home of a friend of his father's in the northeast outskirts of Cincinnati. He skipped the mandate of his government to register with the consulate. There were no plans to go back.

Mr. Saipov wanted to secure a job in the hotel business. But with little English and no connections, he had no luck finding work. His father's friend, a trucker, asked him to move out and find his own place because he wasn't earning any money. So Mr. Saipov found his first job: as a trucker. And by the end of 2011 he had found his own place, an apartment 200 miles away, in Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio, on a street called Americana Drive.

He wasn't exactly an extremist. Mr. Saipov liked fancy clothes, a vanity frowned on in conservative Islamic circles. He cursed as if he couldn't help it. He routinely showed up late for Friday Prayer at the Islamic Society of Akron and Kent. He displayed only rudimentary knowledge of the Quran.

Over the three years he lived in the area, he started to change, said Mirrakhmat Muminov, a truck driver and local community activist. He became argumentative, aggressive even, and started to grow out his beard. Mr. Muminov described him as someone ''with monsters inside.''

''I always thought deep in my soul that he would be jailed for beating someone or insulting someone,'' Mr. Muminov recalled. ''He had a vulgar character.''

Although his grandfather sometimes visited from Uzbekistan, his parents never did, Mr. Muminov said. Mr. Saipov made his own family: In 2013 he married an Uzbek immigrant almost six years younger, Nozima Odilova, who ended up in Ohio after landing first in Las Vegas. They started a family, first a daughter, and then a second. He told friends that he really hoped for a son.

While in Ohio, Mr. Saipov formed two businesses as part of his fledgling truck career -- Sayf Motors, a play on his name, launched only 14 months after he arrived in the country, and a more Midwestern-sounding company, Bright Auto. But Mr. Saipov mainly drove for others, companies like Abror Logistics out of Paterson, N.J.

Over the years, he racked up at least nine tickets, in Iowa, Missouri, Nebraska, Pennsylvania and Maryland. Those tickets are the closest thing to snapshots of how Mr. Saipov lived on the road.

There he was in Iowa, in December 2011, waiting for 35 minutes along Interstate 80 as officers checked his truck and documents, wrote him a ticket and let him go on his way to Salt Lake City. There he was in Iowa again, in April 2014, stopped for more than an hour for having a cracked windshield and for missing a reflective device while driving a load of cars from Denver to Detroit.

And there he was repeatedly at the weigh station at the 415-mile marker on Interstate 80 in Nebraska. Mr. Saipov received a ticket there for driving too long without required rest and for carrying a load just slightly more than allowed.

By the end of 2015, Mr. Saipov had moved to Tampa, Fla., chasing something. His problems deepened, Mr. Muminov said. He had a hard time finding work. He ran out of money. He exploded in anger.

''He had a character problem,'' said Abdul, the imam.

He became more obsessed with the physical trappings of Islam: the long beard, the ankle-high pants. He never spoke of violence, though.

By March last year, he had found a new job, with IIK Transport out of Illinois. A company official, who asked not to be identified because he did not want to be associated with someone accused of terrorism, described Mr. Saipov as someone who ''worked the lower 48'' states and was ''just a regular guy.''

That was when he had his biggest run-in with the law, after a ticket went unpaid and turned into a warrant. It caught up with him at a weigh station in Missouri. He spent 40 minutes on Oct. 20, 2016, at the St. Charles County jail, where he posted a $200 bond with his credit card.

Over the years, he made little impression except for those tickets. ''Don't remember him,'' said Jim Klepper, a lawyer who represented him on a ticket in Pike County, Penn. ''Nobody recalls him,'' said Lt. Michael McKee of the St. Charles County Department of Corrections.

By this spring, he told friends that he wanted to move closer to his wife's family, who lived in Brooklyn, and the family moved to Paterson. She was pregnant -- this time, with a son, born over the summer. Mr. Saipov started driving for Uber. Still, he was not happy. He told friends and acquaintances that he planned to move back to Uzbekistan. ''It's boring here,'' he said. ''There's nothing for me to do here.''

But about a year ago, he began plotting an attack, the authorities said, and he eventually started downloading ISIS videos. Two months ago he decided how he would do it, the way he could inflict maximum damage. It was obvious: a truck.

Top, with an image of Sayfullo Saipov on display, officials gave a briefing at One Police Plaza. Above right, the apartment building in which Mr. Saipov lived in Tampa, Fla. Above left, investigators carrying a bag of evidence outside Mr. Saipov's home in Paterson, N.J. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SAM HODGSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; EDWARD LINSMIER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; BRYAN ANSELM FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A23) 

Document NYTF000020171102edb20005x



EDITORIAL
Editorial Desk; SECTA
After Terrorism, Presidential Posturing

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
737 words
2 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
26
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

New Yorkers on Wednesday were mourning the eight dead from a terrorist attack in Lower Manhattan and wondering how vulnerable they and their families might be, even as they picked themselves up, as New Yorkers do, and went on with life.

Some of them inevitably thought back to another beautiful fall day in Lower Manhattan, on Sept. 11, 2001. After that day, they remembered, they and their nation were led in mourning, and toward unity, by a president who shared their sorrow and understood his own role.

The current American president reacted rather differently.

''A Chuck Schumer beauty,'' Mr. Trump tweeted on Wednesday, blaming an immigrant visa program, signed into law by President George H.W. Bush and supported by Senator Schumer, for the fact that the terrorism suspect, an immigrant from Uzbekistan, was in this country as a legal resident.

Mr. Trump might instead have rallied the nation. But he could not resist resorting to his campaign fantasy that closing the nation's borders to those whom he selectively targets is the all-purpose solution to terrorist violence. Overnight, he and the nativist media seized on the title of the program -- the Diversity Visa Lottery -- to portray it as a ''politically correct'' indulgence undermining the country, rather than affirming its core values.

''Sounds nice,'' Mr. Trump said of the program, which is open to about 50,000 applicants a year from nations that traditionally send few emigrants here. But ''it's not nice,'' he insisted. He called on Congress to end it.

Prompted by a question from a reporter, the president said he would ''certainly consider'' sending the suspect, Sayfullo Saipov, to the military prison at Guantáamo Bay, Cuba. That would be foolishly controversial and counterproductive, considering the criminal case that authorities are already building in New York. The accused allegedly left a note expressing sympathy for the Islamic State. Authorities charged him under terrorism laws, as investigators focused on whether he had meaningful ties to ISIS or other terrorist organizations.

''I guess it's not too soon to politicize a tragedy,'' Mr. Schumer said in reaction to the president's charge that he was ''helping to import Europe's problems.'' ''President Trump, where is your leadership?'' Mr. Schumer said on the Senate floor, pointing out that the president's proposed budget would cut an estimated half-billion dollars from antiterrorism programs.

Mr. Trump's distortion of the attack, in which 11 people were injured, contrasted with his reaction to the Las Vegas shooting on Oct. 1 when 58 people were murdered and hundreds wounded. ''There's a time and place for political debate, but now is a time to unite as a country,'' Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, declared in cutting off discussion of gun laws the day after the shooting.

This time, Mr. Trump issued a condolence tweet for victims and families, but on Wednesday cited the attack as prime evidence for his proposals to slash legal immigration in half in coming years and curtail Muslims' ability to enter the country. ''Being politically correct is fine, but not for this!'' the president tweeted, and later called for ''merit based'' immigration and ''no more Democrat Lottery Systems.''

The president, in suggesting that he might consider sending the defendant to Guantáamo Bay, enthusiastically trashed the federal court system as a ''joke'' and a ''laughingstock.'' Terrorism defendants need ''punishment that's far quicker and far greater than the punishment these animals are getting right now,'' he said. ''They'll go through court for years, at the end they'll be'' -- here the president paused, having perhaps reached the limits of his understanding of a proven system -- ''who knows what happens?''

In fact, what happens is prosecutors have won hundreds of convictions of terrorism defendants in the courts since Sept. 11 -- including Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, one of the Boston Marathon bombers, who was sentenced to death in 2015, two years after his crimes. Meanwhile, 16 years after the Guantáamo Bay prison opened, not a single Sept. 11 defendant held there has been brought to trial, including Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the professed mastermind of the attacks. When it comes to achieving justice, Guantáamo is the real laughingstock.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

(PHOTOGRAPH BY TODD HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171102edb200064



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Driver's Rampage Was Timed to Kill, Prosecutors Say

By BENJAMIN MUELLER, WILLIAM K. RASHBAUM, AL BAKER and ADAM GOLDMAN; Reporting was contributed by Rukmini Callimachi, Sarah Maslin Nir, Eric Schmitt, Michael Schwirtz, Ashley Southall, Vivian Wang and Ben Weiser. Susan C. Beachy and Doris Burke contributed research. 
1,511 words
2 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Federal prosecutors on Wednesday filed charges accusing the driver in the Manhattan truck attack of carrying out a long-planned plot, spurred by Islamic State propaganda videos, to kill people celebrating Halloween.

The charges, filed just over 24 hours after the deadliest terror attack on New York City since Sept. 11, 2001, placed the case in the civilian courts even as President Trump denounced the American criminal justice system as ''a joke'' and ''a laughingstock.''

The charges describe the driver, Sayfullo Saipov, 29, as a voracious consumer and meticulous student of ISIS propaganda, and detail how he said he was spurred to attack by an ISIS video questioning the killing of Muslims in Iraq. They say he began planning the attack about a year ago and, after taking a test run in a Home Depot rental truck last week, chose Halloween to carry it out because more people would be on the streets.

The charges were filed in civilian court, and not the military system set up for foreign terrorists, a decision that flew in the face of Mr. Trump's broadsides against the criminal justice system. Mr. Trump said he was open to trying Mr. Saipov instead in military court at the American prison at Guantáamo Bay, Cuba.

Mr. Saipov, accused of killing eight people and injuring 12 in the attack, was pushed into a Manhattan federal courtroom in a wheelchair just after 6 p.m. on Wednesday. He sat slightly hunched, his rail-thin body dressed in a gray shirt and gray pants. His hair stuck up slightly in the back. His hands and feet were chained. Five guards stood behind him.

A Russian interpreter spoke into a microphone, and Mr. Saipov, an immigrant from Uzbekistan, fitted an earpiece over his long beard and sharp features. When Magistrate Judge Barbara C. Moses asked if he understood the proceedings, Mr. Saipov, in a strong, clear audible voice, responded in English, ''Yes, ma'am.''

He nodded along as Judge Moses read his rights, but sat still and impassive when she read the charges against him: one count of providing material support to terrorists and one count of violence and destruction of a motor vehicle causing death.

The vehicle charge, which carries the possibility of the death penalty, raised the prospect of a rare capital case being brought to trial in New York.

David E. Patton, the chief federal public defender in New York City, who was representing Mr. Saipov, asked that he receive a daily change of dressing on the wounds he sustained after being shot by a police officer.

''He is in a significant amount of pain,'' Mr. Patton said.

The grievous injuries to victims, the scope of the inquiry and Mr. Saipov's path toward extremism all began coming into view on Wednesday. The F.B.I., after saying it was trying to learn more about a second Uzbek man in connection with the attack, later announced that investigators had found the man, Mukhammadzoir Kadirov, 32, in New Jersey. It was not clear why federal authorities wanted to question him in connection with the attack.

The authorities questioned Mr. Saipov after he waived his Miranda rights at a Manhattan hospital, the complaint says. They were also questioning Mr. Saipov's wife, Nozima Odilova, who was cooperating, law enforcement officials said. The couple live in Paterson, N.J., and have three children.

As investigators looked into whether Mr. Saipov's Uzbek contacts may have handed him off to an ISIS operative, they pieced together parts of his past, law enforcement officials said. He attended a wedding in Florida of an Uzbek man who was under scrutiny by the F.B.I. But his attendance didn't trigger a separate investigation of him, the officials said.

Investigators were still looking into whether Mr. Saipov had links to other federal counterterrorism inquiries.

On Mr. Saipov's cellphone, F.B.I. agents found 90 videos, including of ISIS fighters killing prisoners and of instructions for making an explosive device, according to the criminal complaint. They also found 3,800 images, among them some of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of ISIS. The complaint said Mr. Saipov reported being inspired in particular by a video in which Mr. al-Baghdadi ''questioned what Muslims in the United States and elsewhere were doing to respond to the killing of Muslims in Iraq.''

The F.B.I. was uncovering details that sent agents on a far-ranging chase for leads.

But several crucial facts remain unclear. It is not known if the F.B.I. is still investigating the Uzbek man whose wedding Mr. Saipov attended. And as investigators built out concentric circles of his associates, they are still looking at whether Mr. Saipov had direct connections with ISIS operatives.

Even so, the federal complaint filed against Mr. Saipov said he hewed closely to instructions last November in an ISIS magazine, Rumiyah, for a vehicle attack. After plowing his Home Depot rental truck down a bike path along the Hudson River that teemed with pedestrians and cyclists and crashing into a school bus, the complaint said, he jumped out of the truck, yelled ''Allahu akbar'' (Arabic for ''God is great'') and waved a paintball gun and a pellet gun.

The Rumiyah instructions called for followers to carry secondary weapons so they could continue an attack after crashing the vehicle, and Mr. Saipov did so, the complaint said: He had a bag of knives in the truck ''but was unable to reach them before exiting.'' There was also a stun gun on the floor of the truck near the driver's seat, according to the complaint.

Investigators found a handwritten note in Arabic and English 10 feet from the driver's side door, as the front of the truck sat smashed in, with soil strewn across the street that had been knocked out of a nearby planter. According to the complaint, the note detailed a pledge that echoed language used by ISIS: ''Islamic Supplication. It will endure.''

''He appears to have followed almost to a T the instructions that ISIS has put out,'' John J. Miller, the New York Police Department's deputy commissioner for intelligence and counterterrorism, said at a news conference on Wednesday morning.

Those who knew Mr. Saipov said he had been turning toward extremism for years since arriving in the United States in 2010.

Mirrakhmat Muminov, a truck driver and community activist in Stow, Ohio, said Mr. Saipov became aggressive and grew out his beard during his three years there. Mr. Muminov said he grew concerned about Mr. Saipov's temper, including how heated he became when he discussed American policies regarding Israel.

Mr. Saipov created more unease when he moved to Florida. Abdul, an imam at a Tampa mosque who spoke on the condition that only his first name be used because he feared reprisals from other radicals, said he worried Mr. Saipov was misinterpreting Islam and urged him to calm down and study the religion.

In the two months since Mr. Saipov ''decided to use a truck in order to inflict maximum damage against civilians,'' the complaint said, he began plotting assiduously. Nine days beforehand, he rented a Home Depot pickup truck so he could practice making turns, according to the complaint.

He also rehearsed the route from New Jersey, over the George Washington Bridge and down the West Side of Manhattan in an Uber car he drove in the days before the incident, a law enforcement official said.

On Tuesday, he asked to rent the Home Depot truck for a short while, though he never intended to return it, the complaint said. He planned to drive all the way south to the Brooklyn Bridge, but he made it only as far as Chambers Street.

By the time his rampage ended, six people had been killed and two others would later die. Nine people remained hospitalized from injuries on Wednesday, officials said, four of them critically injured but in stable condition. The injuries ranged from the amputation of multiple limbs to serious head, neck and back trauma.

The complaint said Mr. Saipov wanted to display ISIS flags on the truck and decided against it to avoid drawing attention. But lying in his hospital bed, he continued his quest, the complaint said: He asked law enforcement officials to put up the ISIS flag and ''stated that he felt good about what he had done.''

Ann-Laure Decadt of Belgium, left, and Darren Drake of New Jersey also died in the assault. (A1); A woman left flowers on Wednesday on a bike path near where a day earlier a truck driver killed eight people and injured 12 on the West Side of Manhattan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HIROKO MASUIKE/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A21) 

Document NYTF000020171102edb20003h



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
When the Attacker Is in Handcuffs, the Islamic State Stays Mum

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
1,146 words
2 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
25
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

In the hours before the coordinated attacks in Paris two years ago, a 10-man unit of Islamic State militants car-pooled to the city, where they shared hotel rooms before strapping on suicide belts.

Weeks later, the Islamic State released a video eulogizing them as ''lions,'' and sharing clips of each fighter pledging allegiance to the militant group, also known as ISIS.

Each fighter, that is, except Salah Abdeslam, the only member who did not die in the attacks, and who instead went on the run. He was dragged from his hide-out in Belgium following a monthslong manhunt.

To date, analysts say, he has said little to interrogators who have pressed him for details on how the cell hatched its plan, the worst terrorist attack in French history.

His absence from the numerous releases distributed by the group -- which often included photographs of his older brother, who detonated his belt in a Parisian cafe on the night of the attacks -- pointed to what would become a trend.

It may help explain why the Islamic State had not, as of Wednesday night, asserted responsibility for the deadly rampage the day before in Manhattan by a truck driver who was wounded and arrested by the police, who say he is a disciple of the group.

With few exceptions, the Islamic State has not claimed attacks when a surviving recruit falls into the hands of the authorities.

''It's as if he didn't even exist,'' said Jean-Charles Brisard, director of the Center for the Analysis of Terrorism in Paris, regarding the omission of the 10th attacker from the group's propaganda.

The Islamic State has followed this practice regardless of whether the attacker was directly dispatched or inspired remotely through online tutorials.

Among the attacks that investigators have definitively tied to the group -- and which it never claimed, despite the casualties they caused -- were those at the Jewish Museum in Brussels in 2014, which left four dead, and on the Thalys train in 2015, which wounded three.

Last year, when Ahmad Khan Rahimi, who planted bombs in New Jersey and in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan, was finally taken into custody, the police also found his bloodstained journal, containing references to Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, the Islamic State spokesman and the leading figure calling for attacks on the West. But ISIS did not take responsibility for Mr. Rahimi's acts.

More recently, the Islamic State never claimed a truck-ramming in Stockholm in April, even though the perpetrator was found to have been a recruiter for the group.

Nor did the group take responsibility for a vehicular attack in Edmonton, Canada, just over a month ago, carried out by a man who took the time to drape the Islamic State flag on the dashboard of his Chevrolet Malibu before using it to ram through a traffic barricade.

The constant in each of these cases is that the perpetrator was apprehended.

More than 24 hours after the arrest of the driver in the Manhattan assault, which left eight people dead, the group's media arm remained mum, even though he had left a note stating that the ''Islamic State will endure forever,'' a reference to the group's slogan.

The lack of a claim is conspicuous in light of how much territory the group has lost in Syria and Iraq in recent months, erasing 90 percent of the caliphate it once held. Claiming responsibility for the truck rampage in New York, the worst terrorist attack in the city since Sept. 11, 2001, might be expected to project an image of strength for the group.

A New York Times tally of the more than four dozen attacks on Western targets claimed by the group since 2014 indicates that the Islamic State typically issues its claim of responsibility within 24 hours, though there have been some exceptions, including two attacks this past summer that the group claimed a month later.

It is possible that the group is simply taking its time.

Among the arguments for why the Islamic State would not claim responsibility, even when everything points to it, is a pragmatic consideration.

''It's essentially about loyalty. No one would be motivated to do an ISIS attack if they know that when they end up getting caught, someone will out them,'' said Raphael Gluck, an independent researcher who focuses on the group's digital footprint and has embedded himself in many of the group's online chat rooms. ''It would work counter to their whole recruitment line and would serve to push off the next attack.''

Amarnath Amarasingam, a senior research fellow at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue, who has interviewed Islamic State followers online as part of his work, said that members of the group explained to him that not asserting responsibility for attacks was intended to protect fighters.

''I think it's very much a matter of internal communication,'' he said, ''a way of telling their supporters that if they are captured, they won't be sold out by the group.''

Others said they see a theological justification: The Islamic State encourages recruits to die in a standoff with the police in a ''martyrdom operation.'' When the fighter survives, the mission is incomplete, Mr. Brisard said.

This theory has been given weight by several recent attacks, including the London Bridge and the Barcelona attacks this summer, in which assailants wore what turned out to be fake suicide belts. Online tutorials teach followers how to make these look-alike vests, strapped on for the purpose of inviting law enforcement's gunfire.

That motivation may also explain why the Manhattan suspect, Sayfullo Saipov, emerged from his rented Home Depot truck armed with both a pellet gun and a paintball gun, neither powerful enough to cause significant harm, but making him look dangerous to the police.

''According to their logic, their ideology, they are supposed to die during the action,'' Mr. Brisard said.

He and others discounted the notion that attacks were not claimed because they were not deemed successful. The group has asserted responsibility for foiled plots, like the attacker who rammed his explosive-laden car into a police vehicle on the Champs-Éysés in Paris in June.

No one was hurt except the assailant, who had appeared on France's S-list of radicalized individuals.

He was killed, and sometime after, the Islamic State claimed the attack, calling it a reminder to Western powers that the ''battle has come to their homeland.''

Follow Rukmini Callimachi on Twitter: @rcallimachi https://twitter.com/rcallimachi

Ahmad Khan Rahimi, who planted bombs in Chelsea and in New Jersey, being taken into custody in September 2016. ISIS did not take responsibility for his acts. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NICOLAUS CZARNECKI/BOSTON HERALD, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020171102edb200034



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
Editorial Desk; SECTA
The Perversion of 'Allahu Akbar'

By WAJAHAT ALI 
963 words
2 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
27
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Allahu akbar. It's Arabic for ''God is greatest.'' Muslims, an eccentric tribe with over a billion members, say it several times in our five daily prayers. The phrase is also a convenient way to express just the right kind of gratitude in any situation.

I say ''Allahu akbar'' out loud more than 100 times a day. Yesterday, I uttered it several times during my late-evening Isha prayer. Earlier, during dinner, I said it with my mouth full after biting into my succulent halal chicken kebab. In the afternoon, I dropped it in a conference room at the State Department, where I'd been invited to address a packed room of government employees about the power of storytelling. Specifically, I expressed my continuing gratitude for the election of Barack Obama, whom, in a joking nod to the Islamophobic paranoia that surrounded him, I called ''our first Muslim American president,'' adding ''Allahu akbar!''

People in the crowd laughed and applauded, the world continued to spin, no one had an aneurysm, and only a few people seemed to wonder with arched, Sarah Sanders-like eyebrows, ''Wait, is he ...?'' I even confess to saying ''Allahu akbar'' two days ago in a restroom after losing the battle, but ultimately winning the war, against a nasty stomach virus.

I'm 37 years old. In all those years, I, like an overwhelming majority of Muslims, have never uttered ''Allahu akbar'' before or after committing a violent act. Unfortunately, terrorists like ISIS and Al Qaeda and their sympathizers, who represent a tiny fraction of Muslims, have. In the public imagination, this has given the phrase meaning that's impossible to square with what it represents in my daily life.

''Allahu akbar'' is in the headlines again because the 29-year-old man who plowed a rental truck along a bicycle path killing eight people and injuring a dozen in Manhattan on Tuesday is reported to have said it after the attack. My heart sank as I heard the live news coverage, dotted with pieces of information meant to help us make sense of a tragedy: the suspect's physical description, the kind of vehicle he drove, the stunned eyewitness accounts emphatically saying that it didn't look at all accidental. And the two words the police say he shouted when the unthinkable act was over: Allahu akbar.

The attack had similarities to the one that took place in Charlottesville, Va., in August, when a neo-Nazi, James Alex Fields, rammed his car into a crowd of people who were protesting against a rally staged by white nationalists, killing 32-year-old Heather Heyer and injuring 19 people. President Trump defended his initial response blaming violence on ''many sides,'' saying, ''It takes a little while to get the facts.'' That caution doesn't seem to be applied when the suspects have been described by witnesses as ''Middle Eastern'' -- and definitely not when they've said, ''Allahu akbar.''

Not long after the killing in Charlottesville, Muslim extremists in Barcelona plowed a vehicle through a crowd, killing 16 people. Within hours, Mr. Trump repeated a long-debunked myth, urging those who sought to combat terrorism to ''study what General Pershing did to terrorists when caught'' -- shoot them with a bullet smeared in pig's blood. ''There was no more Radical Islamic Terror for 35 years!'' he tweeted. Allow me to clarify: You don't have to dip your bullets in pig blood to kill us. Regular bullets work just fine. Why? Because we're human.

That's why it hurts that on Tuesday, ''Allahu'' and ''akbar,'' those two simple words so close to our hearts, instantly shaped the entire news coverage and presidential response. A common, benign phrase used daily by Muslims, especially during prayer, is now understood as code for ''It was terrorism.''

It's easy to forget that language is often hijacked and weaponized by violent extremists. Some people yell ''Allahu akbar'' and others chant ''heritage,'' ''culture'' and ''white pride.'' The preferred slogans of a killer don't make much difference to the people whose lives are lost or their loved ones, but they make all the difference in Americans' collective understanding of a tragedy.

Within hours after the Manhattan attack, Mr. Trump tweeted: ''I have just ordered Homeland Security to step up our already Extreme Vetting Program. Being politically correct is fine, but not for this!'' He also said on Tuesday that he would end the Diversity Visa Lottery program through which officials say the attacker entered the country. It's the sort of reaction that was conspicuously lacking with respect to gun control after the recent mass shooting in Las Vegas.

If only the hurricane that devastated Puerto Rico, leaving American citizens in desperate need of power, food or water, could have yelled, ''Allahu akbar,'' triggering that kind of tough response. Perhaps our president would have been able to see the storm as evil. Perhaps he would have been energized by a ''them versus us'' rage to insist on swift action to repair the damage.

Last night, as breathless news coverage of the phrase the suspect uttered repeated on a loop, I took my children trick-or-treating in the Virginia suburbs. We walked the streets with friendly, diverse neighbors and hordes of happy kids wearing costumes and clutching bags filled with fattening goodies. My 3-year-old was a pirate and my 1-year-old was Supergirl. We all shared smiles and candies with strangers, with open hearts, without fear. Allahu akbar. God is greatest.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Wajahat Ali is a playwright, lawyer and contributing opinion writer.

Document NYTF000020171102edb20002x



U.S.; Politics
Trump Suggests Guantáamo Prison for Truck Attack Suspect, an Unprecedented Step

By CHARLIE SAVAGE 
1,244 words
2 November 2017
01:18
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

President Trump said on Wednesday that he was considering sending the terrorism suspect in the truck attack in New York to the wartime prison at Guantáamo Bay, Cuba, an unprecedented step that would raise novel legal questions and likely set off a protest by veteran national security law enforcement officials.

Mr. Trump made his comments at the start of a cabinet meeting a day after an immigrant from Uzbekistan, Sayfullo Saipov, plowed a pickup truck along a crowded Manhattan bicycle path, prosecutors say, killing eight people. Mr. Saipov had expressed support for the Islamic State, the authorities said.

Asked by reporters whether he would send the suspect to Guantáamo, Mr. Trump said, “ would certainly consider that.”e added: “end him to Gitmo — would certainly consider that, yes.”

The government last sent a detainee to Guantáamo in 2008, and it has never transferred someone arrested on American soil there. During the Bush administration, two terrorism suspects who were arrested inside the United States and initially charged in civilian court were transferred to military custody, but the Supreme Court has never resolved whether that was lawful.

President Barack Obama refused to use the military to handle terrorism suspects who were arrested on domestic soil. But during the 2016 presidential campaign, Mr. Trump said he would be “ine” with sending Americans to Guantáamo for military prosecution. The case of Mr. Saipov, a lawful permanent resident, presents a test of how Mr. Trump will handle such a situation now that he has the power and responsibility of governing.

Doing so would infuriate career national security professionals and disrupt a carefully-honed approach to handling terrorism suspects, said Joshua A. Geltzer, a former Justice Department attorney. That includes the F.B.I.’ policy of delaying terror suspects’iranda warning rights to remain silent and have a defense lawyer during initial interrogations, he said.

“he F.B.I. would lose its mind”f Mr. Trump transferred Mr. Saipov to military custody, said Mr. Geltzer, who served as senior director for counterterrorism at the National Security Council during the Obama administration. Invoking Jim Mattis, the secretary of defense, Mr. Geltzer added: “hy would Mattis want this headache?”

Even if Mr. Saipov is not sent to Guantáamo, Mr. Trump could place him in military custody on domestic soil for prolonged interrogation without charges or access to a defense attorney, like the two suspects President George W. Bush held as “nemy combatants”n a South Carolina brig.

At a press briefing on Wednesday, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, said, “ believe we would consider this person to be an enemy combatant,”ut said no decision had yet been made about how to handle him.

But by Wednesday evening, after Mr. Saipov was charged in federal court in Manhattan, it appeared the Trump administration would not declare him an enemy combatant, said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina. Earlier in the day, Mr. Graham had told a news conference that Mr. Saipov should be held and interrogated as a military detainee for at least 30 days, rather than being read the Miranda warning and given a defense lawyer.

“he Trump administration missed an important opportunity to send a strong message to terrorists and make America safer,”r. Graham said in an evening Twitter post. “his is a huge mistake. Very sad.”

In the criminal complaint charging Mr. Saipov, the F.B.I. said it had read him the Miranda warning, but he had voluntarily waived those rights and told interrogators that he had been inspired to carry out the attack after watching Islamic State propaganda videos. It did not say whether or how long investigators had questioned him before reading the warning.

While Mr. Graham was focused on interrogation, Mr. Trump seemed to be more interested in punishment. On Wednesday, he called the civilian criminal justice system “ joke”nd “ laughingstock”hen it came to prosecuting terrorism cases.

“e also have to come up with punishment that’ far quicker and far greater than the punishment these animals are getting right now,”he president said. “hey’l go through court for years. And at the end, they’l be —ho knows what happens. We need quick justice and we need strong justice —uch quicker and much stronger than we have right now.”

Since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, the Justice Department has successfully prosecuted hundreds of terrorism-related cases in civilian court. Last month, for example, it convicted Ahmad Khan Rahami, who was arrested in September 2016 for setting off bombs in New York City and now faces a life sentence. (Mr. Graham had called on the Obama administration to transfer Mr. Rahami to military custody, too.)

By contrast, the military commissions system at Guantáamo has repeatedly plunged into chaos. It has struggled to bring contested cases to trial, and several of its few convictions were overturned on appeal.

On Wednesday, for example, a judge at Guantáamo, Air Force Col. Vance Spath, held in contempt the chief defense counsel in the commissions system, Brig. Gen. John Baker. General Baker was fined  $1,000 and sentenced to 21 days confinement.

The dispute centered on General Baker’ refusal to rescind his dismissal of three civilian defense lawyers from the death penalty case against a Saudi detainee, Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, who is accused of orchestrating the 2000 bombing of the American destroyer Cole. The lawyers had asked to quit for ethical reasons, in connection with alleged violations of attorney-client confidentiality in a matter where details remain classified.

Mr. Nashiri was charged in 2011, but his case remains mired in pretrial hearings. The departure of most of his defense team, which Colonel Spath rejected, has threatened to derail the case, underscoring the military trial system’ struggle to function.

Several legal complexities would be raised by a decision to transfer Mr. Saipov to military custody. First, while the Supreme Court in 2004 upheld the wartime detention of an American arrested in Afghanistan to prevent his return to the battlefield, it also said “ndefinite detention for the purpose of interrogation is not authorized.”he court also has not addressed whether holding people arrested inside the United States is similarly lawful.

In addition, the United States is not legally at war with every radical Islamist in the world. Rather, it is at war with groups covered by Congress’ 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force against the perpetrators of the 9/11 attacks.

Despite his apparent enthusiasm for the Islamic State, there is no public evidence Mr. Saipov —ho has been in the United States since 2010 —as part of that extremist organization. Whether the 2001 law legitimately covers the Islamic State, as the government claims, is the subject of a dispute that no court has addressed.

Follow Charlie Savage on Twitter @charlie_savage.

Adam Goldman contributed reporting.

* Trump Officials Renew Effort to Expand Use of Prison at Guantáamo

* American Held as \b ISIS\b0  Suspect, Creating a Quandary for the Trump Administration

* Sessions Says Guantáamo Is a ‘ery Fine Place’or New Suspects

* Donald Trump ‘ine’ith Prosecuting U.S. Citizens at Guantáamo

* G.O.P. Lawmakers Push to Have Boston Suspect Questioned as Enemy Combatant

President Trump spoke about the truck attack in New York during a meeting of his cabinet on Wednesday. | Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171102edb200002



Asia and Australia Edition
Briefing
New York City, South Korea, Duterte: Your Thursday Briefing

By CHARLES McDERMID 
1,356 words
1 November 2017
19:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•he man who sped a rental truck down a riverfront bike path in New York on Tuesday had been planning the attack for a year and “ppears to have followed almost to a T the instructions that ISIS has put out,” city police official said. A second man was being sought.

Witnesses described the rampage as gruesome, grisly and surreal.

The suspect was identified as Sayfullo Saipov, a 29-year-old native of Uzbekistan, which is considered a militant breeding ground. He was living legally in the U.S., but some close to him saw signs of trouble.

President Trump said that he would consider sending Mr. Saipov to the U.S. prison at Guantáamo Bay, Cuba, and called on Congress to cancel the immigration program that granted him entry.

_____

•hina and South Korea abruptly ended more than a year of hostility over a U.S. antimissile system.

The timing suggested that the newly empowered Chinese president, Xi Jinping, wanted to blunt the impact of President Trump’ pending visit to Seoul, part of his 12-day tour of Asia. Analysts said the U.S. will now have to watch how closely the South leans toward China.

President Trump chose the moment to call the U.S. trade deficit with China “mbarrassing”nd “orrible.”

_____

•ome 600 asylum seekers are grappling with dwindling food and water, and no working sanitation, as they hang on in a detention center Australia closed Tuesday on Papua New Guinea’ Manus Island.

The U.N. has said alternative sites are not ready, and the refugees fear both a raid by the P.N.G. naval forces that control the detention center and attacks by hostile local residents.

_____

•awyers for Facebook, Google and Twitter are back on Capitol Hill for a second day of questions about enabling Russian meddling in the 2016 election. Our live briefing has the latest, including the first glance at the divisive Facebook ads linked to Russia.

The tech giants’pacity is hardly the only obstacle to understanding what’ happening. Our media columnist tracked how conservative media outlets, particularly those in Rupert Murdoch’ empire, are operating to confuse and distract the public as the special counsel’ indictments of Trump associates play out.

President Trump called our White House correspondent to assure her that, contrary to reports of his fury over the indictments, he was “ot angry at anybody.”

_____

•ore grisly details emerged in the case of Japan's self-described serial murderer, including social media suicide pacts and connections to Tokyo’ notorious red-light district.

Takahiro Shiraishi, 27, was arrested on Tuesday after the police found dismembered parts of nine bodies in his apartment. He confessed that he had looked on Twitter for suicidal people to lure to his home.

Business

•Sony projected what would be its largest-ever annual operating profit, sending its shares to their highest level in nearly a decade. The Japanese electronics icon, flush after years of restructuring, also announced the return of its mechanical dog, Aibo.

•alaysia is investigating a reported attempt to sell the personal information of more than 46 million mobile phone subscribers, after a data breach that may have affected almost the entire population.

•resident Trump’ ultimate trade goals could be the undoing of global rules, our economics columnist argues: Killing the World Trade Organization could allow the U.S. to address its trade deficit via bilateral agreements.

•he combined value of all cryptocurrencies has hit a record high of around $184 billion. Bitcoin is leading, with a record high exchange rate of $6,500.

•.S. stocks were mixed. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•ustralia will ban climbing on Uluru, the giant sandstone slab revered by the Anangu people, in two years. Management of the popular site has become a symbol of Indigenous rights. [The New York Times]

•ritain’ defense minister, Michael Fallon, stepped down over accusations of sexual harassment. [The New York Times]

•resident Vladimir Putin of Russia met Iranian leaders in Tehran. Ayatollah Ali Khamenei pressed for cooperation to isolate the United States and help stabilize the Middle East, according to state television. [Reuters]

•wo collisions between U.S. Navy destroyers and commercial vessels in the Western Pacific this year were the result of a string of crew and basic navigational errors, the Navy’ top officer said in stinging reports. [The New York Times]

•resident Rodrigo Duterte and his partner, Cielito Avancena, met Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko at the Imperial Palace in Tokyo. [Japan Times]

•ussia is investigating the death of a 14-year-old model who was on a three-month assignment in China. [The New York Times]

•pringer Nature, one of the world’ biggest academic publishers, defended its decision to removed articles on Taiwan, Tibet, human rights and elite politics from its mainland China site. [The New York Times]

•resident Trump’ smile dominates his new official photographic portrait. “t almost looks as if he’ being tickled,”ur reviewer said. [The New York Times]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•rab yourself an accountability partner. (Better than a punch in the nose!)

•ow Google wants to help us all move beyond the password.

•ecipe of the day: White Bolognese sauce is a delicious spin on an Italian classic.

Noteworthy

•“ithout beer, we don’ have life.”hat’ how one local man described the lifeblood of Qingdao, a city in northeastern China where German settlers founded Tsingtao Brewery in 1903. The state took it over in 1949, but never stopped making beer. Wild parties followed.

•am Duc-Hien, a Vietnamese photographer, imagined Iraq to be full of tanks and violence. Instead, he found a timeless peace in its Kurdistan region.

• Texas-size Diwali. One of the grandest Diwali celebrations in the U.S. is Saturday in the Cotton Bowl, in Dallas. An expected 60,000 Indian-Americans will celebrate the Hindu festival of lights with music, fireworks and, especially, food.

Back Story

Sixty years ago this week, the first animal was launched into orbit: Laika, a stray dog found on the streets of Moscow.

On Nov. 3, 1957, Soviet scientists covered Laika in a special spacesuit, placed her in the Sputnik 2 satellite and launched her toward the heavens.

“he barked greetings to her audience into the microphone,”according to a Times report at the time citing Soviet media.

Laika, of course, did not return. Questions about her fate were only resolved in 2002, when it was revealed that she died only hours after launch.

In 1960, another Soviet mission sent canine cosmonauts to space. This time, they returned to Earth safely after orbiting the planet.

The dogs, Belka and Strelka, traveled in separate compartments, connected by a window. Rats, mice and flies were also on their flight.

In 1961, Jacqueline Kennedy, the U.S. first lady, asked the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev about the two dogs, and he ordered one of Strelka’ puppies to be sent to White House as a gift.

One of President Kennedy’ other dogs, a Welsh terrier, soon bonded with the Soviet puppy, and they had four puppies of their own, which Kennedy called “upniks.”

Patrick Boehler contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. Browse past briefings here.

We have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian, European and American mornings. And our Australia bureau chief offers a weekly letter adding analysis and conversations with readers. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.

Sam Hodgson for The New York Times | Pool photo by Thomas Peter | Refugee Action Coalition, via Reuters | Eric Thayer for The New York Times | JIJI Press, via Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Kim Kyung-Hoon/Reuters | Dan Peled/European Pressphoto Agency | Carl Richards | Bryan Denton for The New York Times | TASS, via Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171101edb1006v9



N.Y. / Region
From Truck Driver to Uber Driver to Terror Attack Suspect

By COREY KILGANNON and JOSEPH GOLDSTEIN 
579 words
1 November 2017
03:24
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Sayfullo Saipov’ arrival in the United States in 2010 began unceremoniously in Ohio.

“y dad introduced him as, ‘e’ new to the United States, and he’ going to stay with us,’”aid Bekhzod Abdusamatov, 22.

Mr. Saipov, the suspect in the terrorist attack in Lower Manhattan that killed eight people on Tuesday, arrived from Tashkent —he Uzbek capital and its largest city —nowing little English, Mr. Abdusamatov said.

He spent those early days in the United States looking for a job and trying to improve his English, Mr. Abdusamatov said. But he was also a late sleeper.

At one point, Mr. Saipov made his way to Fort Myers, Fla., where he met a fellow Uzbek immigrant, Kobiljon Matkarov, 37. Mr. Saipov was working as a truck driver at the time.

“e was a very good person when I knew him,”e said. “e liked the U.S. He seemed very lucky, and all the time he was happy and talking like everything is O.K. He did not seem like a terrorist, but I did not know him from the inside.”

As investigators began on Tuesday to look into Mr. Saipov’ history, it became clear that he had been on the radar of federal authorities. Three officials said he had come to their attention as a result of an unrelated investigation, but it was not clear whether that was because he was a friend, an associate or a family member of someone under scrutiny or because he had been the focus of an investigation.

Over the last two years, a terrorism investigation by the F.B.I., the Department of Homeland Security, the New York Police Department and federal prosecutors in Brooklyn resulted in charges against five men from Uzbekistan and one from Kazakhstan of providing material support to ISIS. Several of the men have pleaded guilty. It is unclear whether Mr. Saipov was connected with that investigation.

After a move to New Jersey, Mr. Saipov eventually settled in Paterson and began driving for Uber. On Tuesday night, law enforcement officials converged on an apartment building near Genessee and Getty Avenues that was believed to be Mr. Saipov’ home.

Mr. Saipov had earned a green card, according to a law enforcement official who spoke under the condition of anonymity because the investigation was proceeding, and had entered the country through Kennedy International Airport.

An Uber official said Mr. Saipov had passed the company’ background check.

“e have been in contact with the F.B.I. and have offered our assistance,”he official said. “e will remain in close contact with law enforcement and the F.B.I. to assist with their investigation.

“e are aggressively and quickly reviewing this partner’ history with Uber, and at this time we have not identified any related concerning safety reports.”

* Manhattan Terror Attack Kills 8 and Injures 11

* A Mangled School Bus, Bodies Everywhere; ‘t Was Surreal’

* What We Know and Don’ Know About the Manhattan Truck Attack

* At Halloween Parade, a Thinner Crowd and a ‘ense Environment’

Investigators began looking into the history of Sayfullo Saipov, who they say killed eight people and injured 11 others when he drove a truck through a bike lane in Lower Manhattan on Tuesday. | Chang W. Lee/The New York Times | Sayfullo Saipov | St. Charles County Department of Corrections 

Document NYTFEED020171101edb1000rt



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
Trump, Niger And Making Dots Connect

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
1,147 words
1 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
25
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

It is easy to ignore the recent story of four U.S. servicemen killed in Niger, the giant state in central Africa, because the place is so remote and the circumstances still so murky. That would be a mistake. Niger highlights a much larger problem -- just how foolish, how flat-out dumb President Trump is behaving.

Trump is a person who doesn't connect dots -- even when they're big, fat polka dots that are hard to miss. Rather, he thinks inside narrow little boxes built from his own simplistic impulses and applause lines -- and that tendency is leading us into a web of contradictions abroad. Niger is a perfect example.

I know something about Niger because I did a documentary there last year for National Geographic's ''Years of Living Dangerously'' climate series and wrote several columns about it for The Times. To understand why groups affiliated with ISIS and Al Qaeda are popping up in that region of central Africa, you have to connect a lot of dots, and recognize the linkages between a number of different problems -- not just say, in effect: There are bad guys there. I will call ''my generals.'' They will kill them. I will take credit.

As defense systems expert Lin Wells once put it: To ameliorate problems in places like Niger, you must never think in the box. You must never think out of the box. ''You must always think without a box.''

Why? Because what is destabilizing all of these countries in the Sahel region of Africa and spawning terrorist groups is a cocktail of climate change, desertification -- as the Sahara steadily creeps south -- population explosions and misgovernance.

Desertification is the trigger, and climate change and population explosions are the amplifiers. The result is a widening collapse of small-scale farming, the foundation of societies all over Africa. And that collapse is leading to a rising tide of ''economic migrants, interethnic conflicts and extremism,'' Monique Barbut, who heads the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification and guided me in Niger, explained.

A few numbers: Niger, with rampant poverty and poor access to contraception, has one the highest birthrates in the world: 7.6 children per woman. I met a man there who boasted of 17 kids. Neighboring Nigeria is growing so fast it will replace the U.S. as the third-most-populous country in the world by 2050. Nigeria is a third bigger than Texas.

Meanwhile, climate change in the region is so severe that nearby Senegal's national weather bureau says that from 1950 to 2015, the average temperature there rose two degrees Celsius and the average annual rainfall declined by about two inches. The Paris climate accord was designed to keep global average temperatures from rising two degrees Celsius above preindustrial levels by 2100.

In other words, parts of sub-Saharan Africa are already at heat levels that Paris was supposed to prevent by the end of the century -- and the region is heading for a four-degree rise, which will lead to the collapse of even more small farms and lead to a mad scramble of refugees toward Europe, competition for food and more unemployed males ready to join ISIS for $50 a month.

Barbut, as I reported, reinforced her point by showing me three maps of Africa with dots concentrated in the middle of the continent. Map No. 1: the most vulnerable regions of desertification in 2008. Map No. 2: conflicts and food riots in 2007 and 2008. Map No. 3: terrorist attacks in 2012. All the dots of all three maps cluster around Niger and its neighbors. Hello?

And what is Trump's response to this reality? It's to focus solely on using the U.S. military to kill terrorists in Africa while offering a budget that eliminates U.S. support for global contraception programs; appointing climate-change deniers to all key environmental posts; pushing coal over clean energy; and curbing U.S. government climate research.

In short, he's sending soldiers to fight a problem that is clearly being exacerbated by climate and population trends, while eliminating all our tools to mitigate these trends.

That's just stupid, reckless and irresponsible -- and it evinces no ability to connect the dots or think without a box.

But this is not only in Africa: Trump was obsessed with defeating ISIS in Syria and Iraq -- but with as few U.S. troops as possible. The only way he could do that was by tacitly allying with Iran, Syria's regime, Russia, pro-Iranian Shiite militias, and pro-U.S. Kurds, who were the main anti-ISIS forces on the ground. We could not defeat ISIS or stabilize Syria and Iraq without all of them.

And what is Trump's strategy now? I have no clue. We've distanced ourselves from the Kurds, moved to tear up the nuclear deal with Iran and added U.S. troops in Afghanistan, a country we also can't stabilize without the tacit help of Iran next door. If you know how these dots connect, please write.

Also: How do we stabilize our border with Mexico and maintain our neighbor's cooperation in holding back the main source of illegal immigration today -- refugees from Central America -- while pursuing trade policies that have weakened the Mexican peso and the Mexican economy and could lead that country to elect its own anti-American populist-nationalist?

Nothing Trump ever says has a second paragraph. His whole shtick is just a first paragraph: Build a wall, tear up the Iran deal, tear up TPP, defeat ISIS, send troops to Niger and Afghanistan to kill terrorists, kill climate policy, kill family planning, cut taxes, raise military spending. Every box just marks an applause line he needed somewhere to get elected. Nothing connects -- and we will pay for that.

Indeed, if you want to know what it looks like when a country follows a leader with no second paragraph and no ability to connect dots, visit London. I was there last week. Britain's political system is in turmoil and its economy is facing declining growth prospects, because a bare majority voted to follow leaders with no second paragraph -- we'll just quit the European Union and everything will be fine, they said.

Well, now it's a fine little mess they have. The ruling Conservatives have no clue how to quit the E.U. without doing even more damage to their country's future. That's what happens when you vote for ''disrupters'' who never spent a second thinking through how all of their disruptions connect the morning after the morning after.

Sound familiar?

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Frank Bruni is off today.

Document NYTF000020171101edb10004p



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
OpEd; SECT
For Unesco, America is essential ally

By HUGH EAKIN 
1,123 words
1 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The International New York Times
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

On Oct. 12, the United States announced it will withdraw from Unesco, the cultural and educational arm of the United Nations, because of what it calls the organization's anti-Israel bias.

Unesco's largely symbolic presence in the Palestinian territories -- including the designation of the Old City of Hebron as a World Heritage site -- makes up a tiny part of a global mandate covering 195 member states and 10 associate members and will not be affected by the absence of the United States.

With its misguided decision, the United States is forfeiting its leadership in a cause on which Unesco and its partners in the United States, Europe and beyond are finally making progress: protecting art, sacred buildings and other historic treasures from deliberate attacks during armed conflict.

From the smashing of mud-brick shrines in Timbuktu to the burning of Rohingya villages in Myanmar, assaults on cultural heritage have become a depressingly common feature of contemporary conflict. Even amid its rapid retreat in Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State has continued its destruction. In June, with international forces closing in on Mosul, the group blew up the 12th-century Great Mosque of al-Nuri and its extraordinary minaret, whose leaning, ''humpback'' silhouette has for centuries defined the city's skyline.

For years, Unesco's outgoing director general, Irina Bokova, has sounded the alarm, noting that the attacks are part of campaigns to wipe out entire communities. Ms. Bokova wrote in 2012 that ''we must start seeing cultural heritage as an international security issue.''

In early 2015, the Islamic State showed how real a threat this was in its on-camera rampage through the Mosul Museum and defacement of the colossal Winged Bull of Nineveh. Yet the world stood by months later, when the group occupied the ancient site of Palmyra, blew up its extraordinary temples and decapitated Khaled al-Asaad, the 84-year-old Syrian archaeologist who devoted his career to the site.

Unesco bore some of the blame. By loudly condemning such attacks, the organization gave publicity to would-be destroyers even as it lacked authority to stop them. And because it worked on behalf of sovereign member states, Unesco was unable to reach rebel-held areas where its resources were most needed.

In the final years of the Obama administration, United States officials began to embrace Unesco's call to action. In 2014, John Kerry, then the secretary of state, warned that the Islamic State's campaign against culture was ''purposeful'' and directly connected to attacks on populations.

Meanwhile, the government-administered Smithsonian Institution, working with groups in the United States and the Middle East, began giving emergency training and technical support to Iraqi and Syrian preservationists. This has been crucial to the successful protection of sites and museums in northern Syria, among other places.

And in May 2016, President Barack Obama enacted bipartisan legislation to protect international heritage ''at risk due to political instability, armed conflict, or natural or other disasters'' -- establishing for the first time a body within the executive branch to address the threat.

The American efforts coincided with bold new thinking in the international community. In 2016, recognizing that cultural destruction was directly related to ethnic cleansing, the International Committee of the Red Cross entered an agreement with Unesco, in which it pledged to help evacuate cultural objects ''at imminent risk.'' While the accord has not yet been tested in practice, it is significant because the I.C.R.C. is often on the ground on both sides of a conflict and has unparalleled access to sites.

With Unesco's support, France and the United Arab Emirates established a $75 million fund to provide ''safe havens'' and other forms of protection for objects and monuments under threat of attack. The American investor and philanthropist Thomas Kaplan, who has given $1 million, is chairman of the fund.

Finally, in March, pushed by Unesco and the governments of France and Italy, the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution explicitly linking attacks on cultural heritage to terrorism and calling on member states to provide one another with ''all necessary assistance'' to prevent those attacks.

Over the past year, an independent, United States-based task force -- sponsored by the J. Paul Getty Trust with support from the American Academy of Arts and Sciences -- has been exploring ways to give teeth to these commitments. In a report to be released by the Getty Trust in December, the group draws on the Responsibility to Protect, or R2P, doctrine, adopted by the United Nations in 2005, which provides a basis for intervention to prevent humanitarian atrocities.

The movement to integrate cultural heritage into security policy has quickly gained support from several European governments and leading international institutions. In a landmark August 2016 decision against an extremist in Timbuktu, the International Criminal Court ruled the destruction of cultural heritage a war crime.

The European Union has formally incorporated the protection of cultural heritage in the mandates of 15 E.U. military and civilian missions around the world. And for the first time, the United Nations is including the protection of sites and monuments in an official mandate for armed peacekeepers in Mali.

During the opening of the United Nations General Assembly in September, the Global Center for the Responsibility to Protect convened a group of top Western officials to discuss the new strategies. It was attended by the European Union minister of foreign affairs, Ms. Bokova and her newly appointed successor at Unesco, the former French culture minister Audrey Azoulay.

With its boycott of Unesco, the United States was absent. ''I'm pretty sure the U.S. government hates ISIS. It doesn't want to see the destruction of antiquities in Mosul or Timbuktu,'' Simon Adams, the director of the Global Center, said. ''But at a key moment when Unesco is reshaping this debate, the U.S. opts out.''

The international community has a woeful record of protecting art and monuments in conflict zones. To truly make a difference, the recent breakthroughs will require robust cooperation among Unesco, the Security Council, regional governments, international peacekeepers, NGOs and above all local activists on the ground.

But if the United States, whose military has greater reach than that of any other country, turns its back on these efforts, the chances of success will be slim. And we may find ourselves watching another Palmyra reduced to rubble.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Hugh Eakin, a fellow at the New York Public Library's Culman Center, is working on a book about modern art in the World War II era.

Document NYTF000020171101edb10004l



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Lawlessness in Niger As Landscape Shifts

By DIONNE SEARCEY and ERIC SCHMITT; Dionne Searcey reported from Dakar, and Eric Schmitt from Washington. 
1,464 words
30 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

DAKAR, Senegal -- When United States forces set out on what was ultimately a deadly joint patrol with Nigerien soldiers this month, they were entering terrain crisscrossed by criminal elements and terrorist organizations in a dangerous, yet often forgotten, corner of the world.

The area in Niger, near the border with Mali, is known to host groups loyal to both Al Qaeda and the Islamic State and has long been used as a smuggling route for arms, drugs and people. Just over a week ago, gunmen killed 13 Nigerien soldiers in an attack on their base, not far from where the joint patrol was ambushed, the latest in dozens of assaults unleashed in the past two years.

The chief suspect in the Oct. 4 ambush is a group affiliated with the Islamic State operating in a desolate area that has long suffered from poverty and government inattention.

''They are presenting an alternative to a state that villagers associate with corruption and neglect,'' said Corinne Dufka, a regional director for Human Rights Watch who has studied the area for years.

Questions about the attack, which killed four Americans and five Nigeriens, have emerged because members of the convoy have given conflicting accounts about whether the patrol was simply ambushed or was attacked after it was reassigned to support a separate clandestine counterterrorism mission against Islamic insurgents, according to accounts from military officials from both countries. Americans are deployed there to ''advise and assist,'' military officials have said, not to engage in combat missions.

The United States has about 800 service members in Niger, yet the scale of its military operations there surprised even two high-ranking senators: Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, and Lindsey Graham, an influential South Carolina Republican, said in recent interviews on ''Meet the Press'' that they had not realized the extent of the military's involvement in Niger.

''We don't know exactly where we're at in the world, militarily, and what we're doing,'' Mr. Graham said.

About 6,000 American troops are in Africa, most of them in Djibouti. About one-third of all troops are Special Forces or Special Operations forces, many working on advise-and-assist missions like the patrol in Niger.

Niger and other West African countries have a long history of working with American forces. Niger last hosted major military training exercises carried out by Special Operations forces in 2013 and will do so again early next year.

In Niger, several hundred American troops work at the drone base in the capital, Niamey, and about 200 others have arrived to work at a $50 million drone base under construction at Agadez.

Niger is host to some of the continent's biggest problems. Aside from the terrorist groups operating on its western borders, Niger is fighting the Islamist militant group Boko Haram on its southeastern frontier. The country suffers from overpopulation, with one of the highest birthrates in the world, and ranks as one of the world's poorest nations.

The lack of government attention to rural regions is among the factors thought to have helped spawn militant groups and, in recent years, to have helped the insurgents to recruit.

No group has yet claimed responsibility for the Oct. 4 attack, which occurred near the border village Tongo Tongo. But both the Americans and Nigeriens have said that the chief suspect is ISIS in the Islamic Sahel, an outfit that has pledged allegiance to the Islamic State. They suspect a village leader stalled the convoy when soldiers entered, allowing militants time to assemble and prepare their ambush, which occurred not far from Tongo Tongo.

French security officials say the ISIS branch has 40 to 60 core members, but it is often joined by sympathetic villagers and has temporary alliances with other local groups. The officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of their diplomatic protocols, said that French and Nigerien patrols have in recent months engaged in minor skirmishes with militants in the border region where the Americans were killed.

Militants, including the ISIS fighters, have proved to be adept at staging hit-and-run attacks, with machine-gun-toting fighters on motorcycles and more heavily armed insurgents in pickup trucks launching quick, harassing strikes and then melting into the desert.

The ISIS branch and its leader, Adnan Abu Walid al-Sahraoui, sought the recognition of the Islamic State in 2015, according to the United States Defense Department. Its pledge was acknowledged more than a year later, in October 2016, through a media channel tied to the Islamic State.

Around that time Mr. Sahraoui's group carried out several attacks in the region, including operations against militias loyal to French and United Nations peacekeeping troops deployed in northern Mali.

ISIS in the Islamic Sahel -- Sahel refers to a band of desert that stretches from the Atlantic Ocean to the Red Sea -- has also attacked a customs outpost in Burkina Faso, near the borders with Mali and Niger, and tried a jailbreak in Niger at a building housing suspects from Al Qaeda groups and Boko Haram.

The group is smaller than other organizations in the region, and many security experts suspect that the militants did not realize they were attacking American forces that could easily overpower them in planned operations.

There are no indications that the Islamic State has directed any attacks in Niger or offered any guidance. But analysts said that was not surprising given Mr. Sahraoui's knowledge of the area.

''These guys are experienced fighters,'' said Andrew Lebovich, a visiting fellow at the European Council on Foreign Relations and a researcher on security and political issues in the region. ''They have actively been conducting operations for several years.''

Operating in a vortex of ethnic tension, Mr. Sahraoui has an extensive background in the Islamist insurgent groups active there since the 1990s.

In his late 30s or early 40s, Mr. Sahraoui is believed to have spent some of his childhood in refugee camps in Algeria during the Western Sahara War and later joined the fight to create an independent state in Western Sahara. Eventually he joined Islamist groups that made their way to Mali.

He once referred to himself as ''emir'' of a group with ties to Al Qaeda that in 2012 took control of territory in Mali, instituting its own rule until French troops ousted it in 2013. He has occupied leadership roles alongside another of the region's most-wanted terrorists, Mokhtar Belmokhtar.

Infighting in the region's offshoots of Al Qaeda in recent years has led to mergers, the formation of splinter outfits and eventually the alignment of Mr. Sahraoui's cluster with the Islamic State.

While it does not appear that groups loyal to Al Qaeda are cooperating with ISIS in the Islamic Sahel, they have not fought in the recent past, leading analysts to suspect they are communicating.

''The fact that they both operate in the same regions suggests at least some manner of contact between them,'' Mr. Lebovich said.

Other groups loyal to Al Qaeda are thought to be responsible for a string of attacks in the past two years on hotels, cafes and resorts frequented by Westerners in Mali, Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast. This month, the United States Embassy in Senegal warned Americans to avoid seaside hotels and businesses in Dakar.

The tactics of insurgent groups in the region have shifted in recent years, according to a report from the International Crisis Group. Instead of trying to seize control of major towns, they are now using bases in the countryside to launch strikes. In some areas, the tactic has forced national security forces and local authorities to retreat, leaving large rural areas in the control of insurgents.

The terrorist organizations in the area compete for recruits among the booming population of young people in a region that has enormous unemployment. Niger has joined regional coalitions, which have sent military units to help in its fight against terrorism.

In southeastern Niger, the Chadian military has helped patrol areas as part of a task force of nations that face regular attacks from Boko Haram, which also has a faction that has pledged allegiance to the Islamic State. This month, Chad pulled its troops out of Niger, a move some analysts worry will have violent consequences for hundreds of thousands of people fleeing an insurgent battle that the national military has been ill-equipped to fight.

The burial in Hollywood, Fla., of Sgt. La David T. Johnson, one of the four Americans killed on patrol in Niger this month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE STOCKER/SOUTH FLORIDA SUN-SENTINEL, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020171030edau0004o



Washington, Nov. 16
Times Insider; Insider Events
Live Event: A Conversation With Two New York Times Photojournalists

By INSIDER STAFF 
245 words
27 October 2017
03:19
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Welcome to Times Insider Events —ive programming for Times Insiders and their guests. Times Insider offers behind-the-scenes insights into news, features and opinion at The New York Times.

Join us for a conversation with Todd Heisler, a staff photographer, and Leslye Davis, a video journalist and photographer, as they take us behind the scenes of major news events and the compelling images that capture them.

Mr. Heisler joined The Times in 2006, the same year he won a Pulitzer Prize in feature photography for a project following a Marine casualty assistance officer and the families of Marines killed in Iraq. Ms. Davis is a documentarian and photographer who covered the ISIS-led terrorist attacks in Paris. She also recently reported from Houston, photographing Hurricane Harvey and its aftermath.

Leading the discussion, which will feature photos and videos, is Meaghan Looram, deputy photo editor.

When: Thursday, Nov. 16, from 7:30 to 9:30 p.m.

Where: Dupont Underground, 19 Dupont Circle NW, Washington, D.C. 20036

Tickets are $15 for subscribers with the code CLICK. (General admission is $20.) The ticket price includes one drink.

You may purchase tickets here.

If you are not a Times Insider but would like to receive invitations to Times Insider Events, you can subscribe here.

A resident of Cinco Ranch, Tex., facing the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey. | Todd Heisler/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171027edar000rt



opinion
Seeing Danger in a Face; Op-Ed Contributor

By ALEX BASTIAN 
941 words
27 October 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

San Francisco —very day, American citizens are detained in windowless rooms at international airports with little to no scrutiny. I am not referring to airports in some foreign country; I am referring to our airports here in the United States. I know, because it happened to me.

Earlier this month, I was returning to San Francisco from a trip to Armenia and Greece. Without a single question, but with careful scrutiny of my face and Middle Eastern features, an agent from the Department of Homeland Security at San Francisco International Airport ordered me to a room in the back of the terminal. As I headed to the detention area, I had many thoughts racing through my head. The biggest one, however, was practical: How does detaining, based on his appearance, a San Francisco prosecutor who has spent most of his professional career advancing public safety, make America safer?

After about an hour of waiting, my interrogator came to ask me some questions. He asked me about my trip to Armenia, whether I had attempted to sneak into Turkey or Syria during my vacation, whether I had visited any refugee camps and whether I had joined any groups like ISIS. These are astoundingly ignorant questions. For one thing, I am an Armenian-American whose family escaped the Lebanese Civil War over 35 years ago. As a descendant of the Armenian Genocide, a genocide perpetrated by Turks, there is absolutely no logical reason I would sneak into Turkey from Armenia (especially since Turkey has blockaded that border). Furthermore, as an Armenian, I am a Christian, and as Armenians in Syria and Iraq have experienced, meeting with jihadist groups would have led to my kidnapping and possible beheading.

It wasn’ until some time into my questioning that the officer asked what I did for a living. I told him I was a prosecutor in the San Francisco district attorney’ office, a fact that could have been revealed with a simple Google search. My detention ended shortly after that information came to light. What never came to light, however, is why they detained me in the first place. They never gave me a straight answer, and I have very few avenues for recourse. My detention was well within the rules.

The ham-handed nature of my interrogation is worth recounting, because it points to the nature of racial profiling, and its widespread use at our borders. Even if I had been a Muslim American, what connection would my appearance or religion have to my potential risk to national security?

To answer that question, one must first try to understand why racial profiling occurs. It is born from misplaced and unjustified fear, among other more morally bankrupt reasons. That fear creates racist policies in our country, and not just at our borders: You can see it in the over-policing of predominantly African-American neighborhoods, the over-incarceration of African-Americans, the calls for mass deportations of Latino immigrants and the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II. In each case, one’ identity, or skin color, or religion is taken as sufficient evidence of a dangerous intent. Some will try to disavow the racism by saying that these traits are simply a convenient proxy, but it amounts to the same thing. If you detain Muslims at the airport because of a stereotype about Muslims and terror, the problem isn’ them.

I am not saying there should not be extensive security at airports. As someone in law enforcement, I believe wholeheartedly that there should be. But the current policy of detaining people at airports based on the way they look is not only unconstitutional, it also fails to make us safe. Racial profiling fails all of us because we all know danger comes from people who can look like anyone. Profiling also loses the hearts and minds of the citizens the government is supposed to be working for. It begets the question: If my country does not love me, why should I continue to love my country? And if I as a public servant am beginning to have that question creep in my mind, what are others thinking on our streets and in our airports?

I went back and forth about writing this. Perhaps, it would have been in my best interest to let the incident go. However, I’e been racially profiled at the airport before —nd so have my brother, my father and most likely hundreds if not thousands of other American citizens who look just like me. I’e also been profiled in the streets. These experiences are part of why I became a prosecutor: to find a way to be part of the solution rather than complain about the problem. But these experiences are taxing. I can’ change my face, I can’ change my features, nor should I have to fly overseas in a tuxedo to make airport authorities feel more at ease.

We are a nation of laws, and no policy should be above some level of accountability and scrutiny. And, at the very least, as an American citizen, I should be constitutionally entitled to know why I have been detained. The minute we stop being a nation of laws is when we no longer are the United States of America.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Alex Bastian is the deputy chief of staff at the San Francisco District Attorney’ Office and a native San Franciscan.

Document INHT000020171029edar00008



Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
Twitter Faces Tough Questions Over Troll Accounts and More

By DAVID STREITFELD; Mike Isaac contributed reporting. 
1,522 words
27 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

SAN FRANCISCO -- Fires need fuel. In this era of political rage, a Twitter account that called itself the unofficial voice of Tennessee Republicans provided buckets of gasoline.

Its pre-election tweets were a bottomless well of inflammatory misinformation: ''Obama wants our children to be converted to Islam! Hillary will continue his mission.'' A mysterious explosion in Washington, it said, had killed one of Mrs. Clinton's aides, raising her ''body count'' to six. Another proclaimed, ''Obama is the founder of ISIS.''

The account, @TEN_GOP, eventually reached more than 130,000 followers -- 10 times that of the official state Republican Party's Twitter handle. It was one of the most popular political voices in Tennessee. But its lies, distortions and endorsements came from the other side of the world.

@TEN_GOP was a Russian troll account devoted to stoking division in America, according to a report earlier this month by RBC, a Russian media company with a history of independence. Twitter declined to even discuss the account, which had posted 10,000 tweets by the time it was finally shut down in August. That was more than a year after Republican officials in Tennessee had first complained about its misrepresentations to Twitter.

''It's disappointing and disheartening to see how an outside actor can pinpoint areas of division in America and then exploit them,'' said Brent Leatherwood, the former executive director of the Tennessee Republican Party. ''You think we're getting to a better place and then something like this throws a Molotov cocktail into it.''

Perhaps no form of communication has ever established itself so quickly and so thoroughly as social media. Hundreds of millions of people around the world have grown to rely on it for news and information. Now Twitter and Facebook are facing a moment of reckoning. They, as well as Google, are being called to account for their role in the deception and chicanery that has surrounded the 2016 campaign, especially from accounts linked to Russia.

How much damage did those accounts do in the months leading up to the presidential election? No one knows, not even the companies themselves, which are slowly and grudgingly releasing data about what happened. Next week, they will send executives to testify at congressional hearings, the beginning of an attempt to calculate an answer.

Google and Facebook are powerful and wealthy companies that are skilled enough to ride out this controversy. But for Twitter -- influential, yet smaller and far less financially successful -- the situation is more vexing. Its devotion to open discourse is drawing an abundance of troublemakers who threaten to drive out the well-intentioned.

Many of Twitter's users have long been frustrated with the site's scattershot efforts at preventing abuse and harassment. Twitter's critics have counted at least a half-dozen times over the last few years when the company has said it was taking an issue seriously but little seemed to change.

The debate about abuse and harassment has even fed complaints about Twitter's most prominent fan, President Trump, and his use of the site as a cudgel against everyone from Kim Jong-un of North Korea to Jemele Hill of ESPN. Twitter's guidelines forbid ''threats of violence'' and ''targeted abuse'' prohibitions that some users have tried to hold up against the rhetoric coming from Mr. Trump's account.

In recent weeks, Twitter has updated its terms of service to better fit the company's evolving views on hosting the president. That includes allowing tweets under the ''newsworthy'' label it might otherwise ban. But the platform was forced to apologize for the confusion it generated in trying to explain the changes, tweeting ''We need to do better.''

Twitter declined to comment this week on President Trump. Biz Stone, a Twitter co-founder, was dismissive of concerns over the president's Twitter habits in an interview shortly before rejoining the company in the spring. ''It's too early to say we're all going to die because Trump has a smartphone and can say what he wants to a lot of people,'' he said.

There are already signs that Twitter's bottom line is feeling the effects. An analysis by the research firm eMarketer this week anticipated the number of worldwide Twitter users growing ever more slowly in the years to come: 4 percent this year, 3 percent in 2018, 2.5 percent in 2019. Since other parts of social media -- most notably Facebook -- are growing faster, fewer than one out of 10 social media users will be on Twitter by 2019, eMarketer suggested.

''Hate speech and harassment are real impediments to attracting new users,'' said Michael Pachter, managing director of the investment firm Wedbush Securities. ''If you think about why are people alcoholics, it's because they don't acknowledge they're alcoholics.''

He added about Twitter, ''It has never managed to come to grips with harassment.''

Twitter said Thursday that it added four million users in the third quarter of this year. But it also said that it had overstated its user base by two million in the previous quarter, meaning the total user base rose by only two million, to 326 million, in the third quarter.

Its revenue dropped in the quarter from 2016, the company said, but not quite as much as expected. Its net loss narrowed, however, and the company suggested that a profitable quarter may come soon, pushing the stock up more than 20 percent in midday trading.

Twitter's acting general counsel, Sean Edgett, will represent the company in at least one congressional hearing next week. When the company originally briefed congressional investigators a month ago, the reviews were bad. Senator Mark Warner, the ranking Democrat on the Intelligence committee, called it ''inadequate at every level.'' He added that Twitter had ''failed to understand how serious this issue is.''

On Tuesday, Twitter said it would ''dramatically'' increase ad transparency on the platform while also allowing people to report inappropriate ads or ads they simply do not like. Political ads will be specially marked. Mr. Warner called Twitter's plan ''a good first step.''

On Thursday, Twitter banned all advertising by two Russian news outlets, Russia Today and Sputnik, saying they ''attempted to interfere with the election on behalf of the Russian government.''

But the real problem facing Twitter is less with ads than with trolls, who take advantage of the anonymity the platform provides to wreak havoc. The still-incomplete history of @TEN_GOP bears out how reluctant or unable Twitter is to police such activity.

@TEN_GOP sprang to life in November 2015 bearing the seal of the state. It billed itself as the ''Unofficial Twitter of Tennessee Republicans'' but from the beginning, state Republican leaders knew something was fishy.

''We thought the handle, @TEN_GOP, was particularly weird,'' said Mr. Leatherwood. ''That's not how you abbreviate Tennessee. Also, Tennessee law prohibits using the seal for political purposes.''

The real problem, though, was the vitriol it spewed. ''It was using anti-immigrant and outright racist sentiments,'' Mr. Leatherwood said. ''It offended me as a conservative and a Christian, and went counter to what we were trying to do here.''

Since the account did not represent the Republican Party, even unofficially, Mr. Leatherwood twice reported it to Twitter for misrepresentation. He said others had as well. He never heard back.

After the election, the account ridiculed the idea that Russia had tried to affect the voting, celebrated President Trump's firing of F.B.I. director James Comey by suggesting that Mrs. Clinton be arrested, and tweeted, ''I love my whiteness. And yours.''

@TEN_GOP was a hot topic in Tennessee political circles.

''I can't tell you how many conversations I had with editors, colleagues, political types about who was behind this crazy troll account,'' said Cari Wade Gervin, a reporter with Nashville Scene who said she had also told Twitter that @TEN_GOP was misrepresenting itself. ''But it never occurred to me it was the Russians.''

Twitter is, as ever, a work in progress. After it was harshly criticized this month for temporarily banning the actress Rose McGowan when she was speaking out about sexual harassment, chief executive Jack Dorsey pledged, ''We need to be a lot more transparent in our actions in order to build trust.''

When asked about troll sites like @TEN_GOP, however, a Twitter spokeswoman declined to comment. Instead, she pointed to a few recent company blog posts for background. One of them presented the company's long-held philosophy: ''We, as a company, should not be the arbiter of truth.''

Twitter's headquarters in San Francisco. The company is being called to account for its role in chicanery surrounding the 2016 election. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON HENRY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B1); Democratic senators Amy Klobuchar and Mark Warner speaking about foreign interference in American elections last week on Capitol Hill. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AL DRAGO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B7) 

Document NYTF000020171027edar00077



Foreign Desk; SECT
As  ISIS  Is Driven From Iraq, Sunnis Remain Alienated

By DAVID ZUCCHINO; Falih Hassan contributed reporting. 
1,572 words
27 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KARMAH, Iraq -- After the Islamic State was finally driven from the central Iraqi city of Karmah last year, Sirhan Sallom returned to his home to find it demolished.

Mr. Sallom, 70, has since waited in vain for help. In Iraq's deeply sectarian system, he doesn't expect much from the Shiite-dominated government in Baghdad. But he is angry that local and national Sunni politicians haven't come to the aid of his Sunni Muslim city either.

''These politicians are Sunni -- they are supposed to help us,'' he said. ''They're useless.''

Fourteen years after the American invasion ended decades of Sunni dominance in Iraq, Iraq's Sunni Arabs are struggling to reclaim relevance and influence. After they were ousted from government jobs and from the military by the post-Saddam Hussein government, their powerlessness and rage gave rise to Sunni militant movements like Al Qaeda in Iraq and the Islamic State.

Now that those militants are being driven from the Sunni heartland, how the government responds to Sunnis trying to rebuild their lives is likely to have long-term consequences for the country's stability and security.

More than 3.1 million Iraqis, the vast majority Sunni, remain displaced from their homes after three years of occupation and battles with the Islamic State. Another 2.3 million have returned. As Sunni towns like Karmah await rebuilding, Sunni leaders have not been able to wring much help from a cash-strapped central government more focused on battling the militants and, more recently, the Kurds.

Since 2003, Sunnis, who make up about a quarter of the population, have lost out to Shiites and Kurds, who were both brutally repressed by an elite Sunni minority under Saddam Hussein. With Iraq's government now controlled by Shiites, and the Kurds governing their own autonomous area in the north, the Sunnis are in a political no-man's land.

There were high expectations when Haider al-Abadi became prime minister in 2014 that he could turn the page after the divisive sectarian rule of his predecessor, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, and win the confidence of the Sunnis.

Instead, Sunni leaders say, he has forsaken them as he forged closer ties with Iran, the hard-line Shiite theocracy next door. Iran now wields tremendous influence over Iraq's economy, military and government.

Hamid al-Mutlaq, who represents Karmah in Parliament, said the government was more focused on working with Iran and Iranian-armed Shiite militias than helping Sunnis rebuild.

''We are now a displaced people, a completely marginalized people -- and it's getting worse by the day,'' he said.

''We have a corrupt government controlled by a foreign power, at the expense of Sunnis,'' he added.

But Sunni politicians are mired in local feuds. They can hardly advance their own case when they can't even agree on where to meet to patch up differences. At a Baghdad conference two years ago, Sunni politicians threw chairs at each other as their bodyguards traded punches.

''Our politicians do nothing for us,'' said Ismail Jassim, 39, who relies on donations from neighbors in Karmah to survive in his home, which was burned by militants. ''We never see them, except on TV at election time.''

The power of Sunni politicians was greatly diminished by the power-sharing agreement adopted after the American invasion. Under its formula, the prime minister's post, along with the interior and foreign ministries, are reserved for Shiites. Kurds get the presidency and finance ministry. Sunni Arabs get Parliament speaker and defense minister, but the prime minister is commander in chief, and Shiite army commanders and militia leaders wield significant influence.

Iranian-trained Shiite militias are part of Iraq's armed forces and have battled Islamic State militants since they seized nearly a third of Iraq in 2014. The militias have been accused of atrocities against Sunni civilians, and their presence near Sunni areas has alarmed many residents. A Shiite religious flag fluttered last week at an Iraqi military checkpoint outside Karmah.

Kurds have their own army as well, known as the pesh merga. But Sunnis have no national armed force, only tribal militias blended into Iraqi security forces to fight the militants.

Some Sunni politicians have advocated an autonomous Sunni region, but those proposals have gone nowhere amid partisan bickering.

''Sunnis have no unified leadership,'' said Wathiq al-Hashimi, the head of the Iraqi Group for Strategic Studies, an independent research group in Baghdad. ''And Sunni politicians seem to care only about narrow personal interests.''

A Kurdish referendum on independence last month further divided Sunnis. Most opposed it, preferring to keep Kurds inside Iraq as a counterweight against Shiite domination; virtually all Iraqi Kurds are Sunni. Many Sunnis cheered the government takeover of contested areas, where Sunni Arabs had seethed under Kurdish control.

But even Sunnis opposed to the Kurdish vote were alarmed when Iraqi forces conducted military maneuvers with Iranian troops inside Iran along the Iraq border.

''We won't tolerate that kind of foreign interference on top of everything else,'' said Sheikh Ahmed al-Karim, a Sunni lawmaker who generally supports the government of Mr. Abadi, the prime minister.

In Parliament, the Sunni-led bloc has 78 seats, roughly proportionate to their share of the population, but is dwarfed by the Shiite bloc, with 182. The Kurdish bloc has 65 seats. Parliament has fallen increasingly under the sway of Iran, which is locked in a regional power struggle with Sunni countries led by Saudi Arabia.

Mithal al-Alusi, a Sunni lawmaker, has called the government ''a cardboard state'' because of its ties to Iran. He has asked, acidly, whether Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, the commander of Iran's elite overseas military forces who has advised Iraq's Shiite militias, had a proper visa to enter Iraq.

Shiites seem driven by a sense of religious grievance and a pan-Shiite destiny. Kurds are motivated by nationalism and dreams of independence. And Sunnis?

''For the Sunnis, there's a lack of political cohesion about exactly what they want,'' said Maria Fantappie, a senior analyst for Iraq at the International Crisis Group.

David L. Phillips, a former State Department adviser who has worked on Iraq for 30 years, said Sunnis had failed to organize as effectively as Shiites and Kurds.

''Baghdad is perfectly content to see the Sunnis in disarray,'' he said.

There are a few hopeful signs. Because some Shiite factions will oppose Mr. Abadi in April, and Kurdish politics are in upheaval, he will have to court the Sunni bloc to help ensure re-election.

''The Abadi government has never needed the Sunnis more than now,'' Ms. Fantappie said.

But Sunnis could suffer political losses in April if hundreds of thousands of displaced Sunni constituents are unable to vote. If hard-line Shiite populists prevail, some reconstruction funds could end up going to poor Shiite regions rather than liberated Sunni areas.

The post-Saddam era has proved ruinous for many Sunnis. After 2003, a de-Baathification program stripped hundreds of thousands of soldiers and civil servants of their jobs, including doctors and teachers. Many sacked Sunni army officers joined the Al Qaeda insurgency against American forces, though Sunni tribes later helped drive out the militants in the so-called Sunni Awakening.

Elements of de-Baathification continued, however. Mr. Mutlaq, the Sunni lawmaker who had been a general in Mr. Hussein's army, said a de-Baathification commission had barred him three times since 2010 from running for Parliament. ''Pure political harassment,'' he said.

(He appealed, and now sits on Parliament's security and defense committee.)

Under Mr. Maliki, who was prime minister from 2006 to 2014, many Sunnis who had reclaimed their jobs were purged from the military and government, some for the second time. Festering Sunni resentment helped spur the rise of the Islamic State and allowed its fighters to take over Sunni towns and cities in 2014 with relative ease.

The militants promised a new era of Sunni dominance, drawing widespread support from disenfranchised Sunnis. But they failed to deliver, and the reign of terror they imposed ultimately turned many Sunnis against them.

Now Sunni towns like Karmah, where residents initially welcomed the militants, feel abandoned by their politicians. Karmah, with a population of about 95,000, was liberated in May 2016. The United Nations has provided some aid, rebuilding schools and making emergency infrastructure repairs.

But the only sign in Karmah of the Iraqi agency charged with rebuilding liberated areas is the beginning of construction work on five schools. Mustafa al-Hiti, a Sunni pharmacist who directs the agency, said that just $140 million had been allocated by Baghdad this year for rebuilding all of the areas that had been under Islamic State rule. He estimated total costs for that job at more than $100 billion.

He said international donors had allocated billions of dollars, but much of that money has been slowed by audits amid donor concerns about Iraq's reputation for corruption.

So Mr. Sallom is rebuilding his home in Karmah using his life savings and the help of his son, Ali Sirhan. Mr. Sirhan, 44, was asked whether he thought Sunni politicians would soon offer help.

''Help?'' Mr. Sirhan asked. ''Forget help. They don't even come visit, even if it's just to say, 'God help you.'''

Document NYTF000020171027edar0006u



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Red Cross Warns of 'Dehumanizing'  ISIS  Detainees

By ANNE BARNARD 
731 words
27 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- It may not be politically popular to raise concerns about the human rights of Islamic State fighters and their families. But the International Committee of the Red Cross, which has monitored the treatment of the wounded, prisoners and civilians in wartime for a century and a half, sought to do just that in a strongly worded statement on Thursday.

The organization is concerned about rhetoric that ''dehumanizes'' and ''demonizes'' the enemy or suggests that a particular adversary is ''outside the bounds of humanity'' and can be treated ''as if humanitarian law doesn't apply,'' the group's deputy director for the Middle East, Patrick Hamilton, told reporters via a telephone conference call.

Language that could appear to justify or encourage war crimes and illegal treatment of detainees has become more common on all sides of the sprawling conflicts in Syria and Iraq, Mr. Hamilton said, to the point that the Red Cross felt it necessary to remind all combatants that international law requires due process and humane treatment of detainees ''with no exceptions.''

His comments come as the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, ISIL and Daesh, is surrendering more territory to an array of government and militia forces. Several Western officials have said that it would be best if their citizens who have fought with the Islamic State died in combat.

The Red Cross has a longstanding policy of not singling out governments or groups for criticism, because it seeks to preserve access to all sides in order to carry out missions such as monitoring the treatment of detainees and prisoners. The organization said its warning was directed at all combatants as well as countries that might receive returning Islamic State fighters.

''It's not that we are going to name no one,'' Mr. Hamilton said of his warning against inflammatory rhetoric. ''We name everyone.''

France's defense minister, Florence Parly, said last week that if Islamic State fighters ''perish in this fight, I would say that's for the best.'' Rory Stewart, a British government minister, said of British ISIS members that ''unfortunately the only way of dealing with them will be, in almost every case, to kill them.''

And Brett McGurk, the American envoy to the anti-ISIS coalition, said the mission was to make sure foreign fighters ''die here in Syria.'' Earlier this year, Trump administration officials referred to ''annihilating'' ISIS.

To be sure, none of those statements called for extrajudicial killings or any other war crime. But in an already tense and dangerous atmosphere -- punctuated by atrocities carried out by insurgent and militia groups in the past -- all parties need to ''de-escalate their language,'' Mr. Hamilton said.

''These are emotive, difficult issues but the law does provide a sober mechanism for dealing with all of this,'' he said, noting that the Red Cross has been advising governments on handling detainees and civilians through 154 years of conflicts and world wars. ''These events are not without historical precedent.''

The Red Cross has visited 44,000 detainees in Iraq this year, and is currently providing humanitarian assistance to 1,300 women and children from around 20 nationalities, detained near Mosul as suspected relatives of Islamic State fighters. The Red Cross also is seeking to expand access to detainees throughout the region.

Risks of violations are increased by the complexity of the fight, with more than 20 states involved and often in partnerships with nonstate militia groups, which Mr. Hamilton said had created ''a diffusion of responsibilities'' for following the laws of war.

Another risk arises from the enormous humanitarian crises spawned by recent battles, with millions of people affected and chaotic scenes as people flee across deserts.

Little is known about the numbers and conditions of Islamic State members detained in the Syrian city of Raqqa as the American-backed Syrian Democratic Forces took over last week. Nor has any information surfaced about the many people who had long been held prisoner in Raqqa by Islamic State and have not been found.

The Red Cross is currently setting up an office in northeastern Syria to work on such issues.

Suspected ISIS members at a security screening center near Kirkuk, Iraq. The Red Cross says all detainees must be treated humanely, ''with no exceptions.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171027edar0006d



Foreign Desk; SECTA
What's Left Under the Islamic State's Control

By SARAH ALMUKHTAR, TROY GRIGGS, K.K. REBECCA LAI and TIM WALLACE 
673 words
27 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The Islamic State, born of an insurgency, quickly seized control of much of Iraq and Syria. Now, having lost much of its territory but far from defeated, the militant group is returning to its roots.

Until 2014, the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, was affiliated with Al Qaeda. By that time, the Islamic State, which got its start in Iraq, had established a foothold there and in Syria. It shocked the world in June 2014 as it took over more than 50 places, including Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city.

In the past four years, the Islamic State has carved out a sprawling territory across Iraq and Syria through military dominance of over 127 critical places. The group governed the residents of dozens of cities and towns, and it benefited from their taxes. The militants also had control over strategic locations, like military bases and border crossings, as well as economic assets, like oil fields and dams.

United States-backed forces pushed the Islamic State out of Raqqa, the group's de facto capital, last week, dealing a heavy blow to the militants in a year in which they lost much of their territory.

The offensive in Raqqa began in June and left widespread destruction, displacing about 270,000 residents. United States-led coalition airstrikes there were ''reportedly killing hundreds of trapped civilians every month,'' wrote Samuel Oakford in a report for Airwars, a nonprofit group that tracks reports of civilian deaths in Iraq and Syria. According to the report, the coalition has confirmed four civilian deaths in the battle for Raqqa.

With the fall of Raqqa, the Islamic State has lost two of its most important cities in three months.

In July of this year, the Iraqi government announced that it had finally retaken control of Mosul after three years of Islamic State rule and a brutal nine-month battle. Iraqi forces faced stiff resistance from Islamic State militants there, often in dense urban areas that were difficult to navigate. Much of the city was destroyed.

Mosul held huge symbolic value for the group. It was there, in June of 2014, that Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State, declared a caliphate after his fighters took control of Mosul and swept through other parts of northern Iraq and Syria, seizing dozens of cities.

The Islamic State's remaining strongholds in Iraq fell quickly after Mosul was retaken. Tal Afar, near Mosul, was captured by Iraqi forces in an offensive that lasted just 11 days. And this month, the militants barely put up a fight in Hawija.

The remaining area of Islamic State control in Iraq stretches across the Qaim border crossing into Syria, where the Islamic State maintains a shrinking swath of territory along the Euphrates River.

Downstream of Raqqa, in resource-rich Deir al-Zour province, the group is under pressure from two sides.

The United States-backed forces that seized Raqqa have been advancing southeast into the province. And last month, the Syrian government broke a nearly three-year siege by the militants of a government-held pocket of territory in Deir al-Zour city. Government forces, backed by Russia and Iran, have since advanced to retake Mayadin, where coalition officials believed many of the Islamic State's leaders had relocated from Raqqa.

Despite these sharp losses, analysts say that the Islamic State is not defeated. An estimated 6,000 to 10,000 militants remain in Iraq and Syria.

The Islamic State has been shifting tactics and returning to its insurgent roots. Analysts say it will continue to have some local support and the ability to lodge attacks throughout the region.

''The networks will survive and the insurgency will continue in these areas, probably under a different brand,'' says Columb Strack, a principal analyst at IHS Markit.

CHART; MAP (Sources: Conflict Monitor by IHS Markit (control); Landsat via Google Earth (satellite image).) 

Document NYTF000020171027edar00057



FACT CHECK
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Niger Claims Vary From Premature to Conspiratorial

By LINDA QIU 
1,279 words
27 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Some of President Trump's liberal critics are characterizing the Oct. 4 ambush in Niger that killed four American soldiers as ''Benghazi on steroids'' -- a reference to the yearslong partisan uproar over the 2012 attacks on two United States compounds in Libya.

A few parallels can be drawn between the incidents. In each, four Americans died at the hands of Islamic extremists. After the Benghazi attacks, the Obama administration struggled to explain exactly what happened, and why. And now, President Trump and his top officials have yet to satisfy questions from Congress about the deaths in Niger, Republicans and Democrats said on Thursday.

But popular allegations about Mr. Trump's role in Niger have ranged from premature to conspiratorial.

American troops' presence in Niger predates Russia's military agreement with the country.

Liberal blog posts, shared online tens of thousands of times, falsely claim that Mr. Trump sent American troops to Niger to aid Russia. One, for example, reads: ''Four U.S. soldiers were killed in Niger two weeks ago, and no one knows what they were doing there -- except that it came shortly after Niger curiously signed a military cooperation agreement with Russia.''

Russia and Niger did agree in August to ''interact in the war on terror, exchange information on military and political issues and the issues of strengthening international security,'' according to Tass, Russia's news agency. But the United States' presence in Niger predates this agreement by years. In 2013, President Barack Obama announced that American troops had been sent to Niger's capital, Niamey, to set up a new drone base.

The ambush was not the 'direct result' of Chad's inclusion in the travel ban.

An image widely shared on Facebook and Twitter states: ''Trump arbitrarily bans Chad with travel ban. Chad withdraws troops fighting ISIS from Niger. ISIS promptly returns to Niger when Chad leaves. Four Green Berets die as a direct result.'' But the facts do not support this.

Two of the four soldiers killed in the ambush -- Staff Sgt. Dustin M. Wright and Staff Sgt. Bryan C. Black -- were Green Berets. The two others were Staff Sgt. Jeremiah W. Johnson and Sgt. La David T. Johnson.

Chad was added to Mr. Trump's updated travel ban in late September. In October -- around the same time as the ambush -- Chad withdrew troops from the Diffa region of Niger. But these troops were fighting Boko Haram in the east, while the American soldiers were fighting a different Islamic militant group in Tongo Tongo, a village hundreds of miles to the west.

''These are two completely different conflicts,'' said Laura Seay, a professor of African politics at Colby College. Geography aside, she said, there is little evidence that the militants operating in the west were emboldened by Chad's withdrawal in the east as ''they were carrying out attacks pretty regularly'' before the Oct. 4 ambush.

It's too early to conclude whether there was misconduct by the Trump administration.

Viral social media posts have called the Niger attack ''Benghazi on steroids,'' pointing to alleged misconduct by the Trump administration.

For example, one post that claims the journalist Dan Rather said that ''the Trump Pentagon gave these men bad intel, no support, outsourced rescue people.'' But there is no evidence that Mr. Rather made these remarks, and many details about the Niger ambush have yet to emerge. The Pentagon and F.B.I. are investigating the operation, including discrepancies between American and Nigerien troops' accounts about what prompted the attack.

Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in a news conference on Monday that officials on the ground believed that ''contact with the enemy was unlikely'' before American forces set out with a Nigerien unit on a routine reconnaissance mission on Oct. 3.

''We owe you more information,'' General Dunford said, including whether forces had ''adequate intelligence, equipment and training'' and whether ''the pre-mission assessment of the threat in the area'' was accurate.

The viral posts are correct that a contractor evacuated the bodies of three soldiers killed in action, while the French flew out the wounded. Asked why American troops relied on a contractor for evacuation, Lt. Gen. Kenneth F. McKenzie Jr., the director of the Joint Staff, said last week that the United States relied on contract support around the world, but declined to give specifics about the ambush.

But it is inaccurate to suggest American troops played no role at all in the rescue mission. They, alongside French and Nigerien troops, searched for Sergeant Johnson until his body was recovered two nights later, General Dunford said.

Responses to the tragedies have differed.

Beyond the allegations about the causes of the deaths, observers like Daily Kos and the conservative commentator S.E. Cupp have pointed to the disparity between the two administrations' responses to Niger and Benghazi. The Trump administration has been more tight-lipped about the Niger attack than the Obama administration was about Benghazi, though some of the Obama administration's initial claims turned out to be incomplete.

In September 2012, militants linked to the extremist group Ansar al-Shariah attacked the United States diplomatic mission and a C.I.A. installation in Benghazi, killing Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens and three other Americans. Obama administration officials initially rejected the notion of a premeditated terrorist attack and, in the immediate days that followed, made repeated references to an anti-Muslim video as causing the unrest -- a rationale soon revealed to be not entirely accurate.

Trump officials, on the other hand, have been largely silent in the three weeks since the Niger ambush. Beyond defending his remarks to Sergeant Johnson's widow, Mr. Trump said on Wednesday afternoon that he did not specifically order the Niger mission, though he gave generals ''the authority to do what's right so that we win.'' Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, has repeatedly declined to give details about the raid during news conferences.

As for inquiries, the F.B.I. began an investigation two days after the Benghazi attacks, and the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee held a hearing about a month after. Congress conducted eight investigations of the circumstances surrounding the violence in Benghazi, the last of which concluded last year. In the end, lawmakers broadly chided the State Department for being inadequately prepared but did not find any clear misconduct that caused the deaths.

The Pentagon said the Niger incident was under investigation six days after the deadly attack. Lawmakers in both the House and Senate were briefed by two senior Pentagon officials about the details of the attack in a classified session on Thursday, and appeared divided along party lines as to whether the deaths could have been avoided.

But senators from both parties agreed that their questions have not been answered. ''They owe us more information, and I think we'll get it,'' Senator Roger Wicker, Republican of Mississippi, told CNN.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

The coffin, top, of Sgt. La David T. Johnson last week in Florida. Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., above, on Monday at the Pentagon. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOE RAEDLE/GETTY IMAGES; MANUEL BALCE CENETA/ASSOCIATED PRESS); The soldiers killed in Niger on Oct. 4, from left: Staff Sgt. Bryan C. Black, 35; Staff Sgt. Jeremiah W. Johnson, 39; Sgt. La David T. Johnson, 25; and Staff Sgt. Dustin M. Wright, 29. (PHOTOGRAPH BY U.S. ARMY) 

Document NYTF000020171027edar0004b



Europe Edition
Briefing
Catalonia, Syria, Emmanuel Macron: Your Friday Briefing

By PATRICK BOEHLER 
1,450 words
27 October 2017
06:03
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•atalonia’ separatist leader, Carles Puigdemont, said that he would let regional lawmakers decide on independence from Spain. Their vote could come as early as today, just as the Spanish Senate approves emergency measures to impose Madrid’ direct rule on the region.

“ow each side is backed in a corner,”a reader commented. Here are three books (including one by our correspondent) that explore the dispute’ roots.

(Lee nuestra cobertura en españl aquí. Y aquía opinió del periodista Martí Caparró, que señla que la grieta “legóara quedarse”)

_____

•ecretary of State Rex Tillerson said that President Bashar al-Assad of Syria must go. The comments came after Mr. Tillerson met in Geneva with the U.N. special envoy on Syria.

A U.N. investigative panel said that Mr. Assad’ forces used lethal sarin gas in an attack on a rebel-held village in April. The finding was likely to be disputed by Russia.

Meanwhile, in Iraq, Sunni Arabs told our correspondent how they were struggling to reclaim relevance under Baghdad’ Shiite-dominated government.

As the Islamic State surrenders more territory in both countries, the Red Cross has forcefully warned all sides that detained ISIS fighters and their families deserve humane treatment.

_____

•resident Trump announced that he was directing his administration to declare the opioid crisis a public health emergency. These maps show how the epidemic of drug overdoses has spread.

New details emerged on the deadly ambush on U.S. and Nigerien soldiers in Niger three weeks ago. French helicopters swooped in to the rescue but left behind four Americans who had lost radio contact. It is unclear whether they were still alive at the time.

Separately, House Republicans narrowly cleared a budget blueprint that would cut taxes by as much as $1.5 trillion. And the White House sent Congress a list of possible targets of future sanctions on Russia. The list reads like a who’ who of the Russian defense and intelligence sectors.

_____

•Twitterbanned all advertising by two Russian news outlets, RT and Sputnik, saying they attempted to “nterfere”n the U.S. presidential election last year on behalf of the Russian government.

A Russian troll account, popular in the U.S. state of Tennessee, shows how easily social media fanned the flames of outrage. Meanwhile, Reddit, the popular internet forum, has moved to shut down Nazi, racist and far-right forums, among others.

Consumers don’ seem to care about Silicon Valley’ political quandary. Amazon, Microsoft and Alphabet reported glowing quarterly profits on Thursday.

_____

•he satellite imagery above shows a glacier in Antarctica shedding massive amounts of ice into the sea. The ice’ flow at the Pine Island glacier has accelerated 75 percent from 1973 to 2010.

Its movement offers scientists a window into how Antarctic ice shelves respond to climate change, raising global water levels and threatening coastal cities.

Separately, our reporters in India met farmers whose lives have been uprooted by a hotter, drier climate. And temperatures are expected to rise further.

Business

•n France, President Emmanuel Macron is betting that economic revival will come from workers accepting new risks in an overhaul of labor laws.

But economists doubt that the Scandinavian model he has proposed can be transplanted to a country where strikes are a cherished ritual.

•he European Central Bank provided a cautious timetable for rolling back purchases of government and corporate debt. Some governments may be in for a shock.

•ecent extreme weather has hit European reinsurers’rofits. That means higher premiums for many homeowners.

•acing Silicon Valley to develop cars of the future, automakers are showing a new sense of bottom-line discipline.

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•n Kenya, deadly protests and an opposition boycott marred the presidential election rerun. Voting was postponed until Saturday in some protest-hit counties. [The New York Times]

•n Britain, a senior Conservative Party lawmaker’ letter to universities asking how they teach “rexit”as ignited an uproar and accusations of McCarthyism. [The New York Times]

•he new Dutch government is seeking to fend off challenges from the right by embracing more conservative policies. [The New York Times]

•ustralia’ High Court has disqualified the deputy prime minister and four senators from Parliament in a ruling over their dual citizenships that could cost the government its parliamentary majority. [The New York Times]

•n an Op-Ed, an Italian columnist writes about the state of feminism in Italy. [The New York Times]

•ovaya Gazeta, Russia’ most prominent independent news outlet, intends to arm its journalists with guns that fire rubber bullets amid security fears. [Associated Press]

• tiny Swiss company quietly amassed exclusive broadcast rights to the soccer World Cup in much of the Americas. It is now under scrutiny amid a wide-ranging corruption probe. [The New York Times]

•n Bangkok, our correspondent was among the hundreds of thousands of people who lined the streets to witness the funeral procession of King Bhumibol Adulyadej. [The New York Times]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ecipe of the day: An overnight stay in the fridge makes classic brioche even better.

•ou don’ need to drain your battery before recharging. Here’ some other tech myths people still believe.

•ap desks, headphones and more: Our latest newsletter focuses on inexpensive ways to improve your home office.

Noteworthy

•ur chief film critic analyzed how movies helped fuel an American obsession with conspiracy theories on the assassination of John F. Kennedy. (Above, Kevin Costner in the 1991 thriller “.F.K.” Our journalists pored over the newly released U.S. government files. Here’ what they found.

•n movie news: 2017 is horror’ biggest year ever at the box office.

•inland has more than three million saunas for its 5.5 million people —nd you. Here are some of Helsinki’ best public options for sweating like a local.

•nd the European Court of Justice ruled that bridge, the card game, is not a sport, because it was “haracterized by a physical element that appears to be negligible.”

Back Story

On the lunar calendar, Saturday is the ninth day of the ninth month, and a traditional Chinese holiday: the Double Ninth Festival.

Also referred to as the Chongyang Festival, the celebration has roots that stretch back centuries.

One legend tells of a hero who defeated a disease-spreading river demon with the help of chrysanthemum wine and dogwood.

Mountain climbing, chrysanthemums and dogwood displays are still a tradition on the day, which has a focus on good health and longevity. In fact, China designated the date Seniors’ay in 1989. (Taiwan named it Senior Citizens’ay in 1966.)

Japan, which adopted the Gregorian calendar in 1872, honors the holiday on the ninth day of September, the ninth month.

A common link is the chrysanthemum, a flower native to China but that has long been celebrated in Japan. (The country’ royal family is metaphorically referred to as the Chrysanthemum Throne.)

A Times article in 1958 described a centuries-old festival dedicated to the flower: “he ancient court fete became the heritage of lords and nobles. Attired in gorgeous robes, and well provided with sake, they composed poems in honor of the chrysanthemums’eauty.”

Charles McDermid contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

This briefing was prepared for the European morning. Browse past briefings here.

We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.

Samuel Aranda for The New York Times | Pool photo by Alex Brandon | Matt Rourke/Associated Press | Jugal K. Patel/The New York Times. Source: Sentinel 2 | Delft University of Technology | Dmitry Kostyukov for The New York Times | Siegfried Modola/Reuters | Jim Wilson/The New York Times | Naonobu Noda/NARO | It’ the deadliest drug crisis in American history. It kills about 90 Americans every day. Here are answers to some key questions about the crisis. | By YOUSUR AL-HLOU, JOSH KATZ and DREW JORDAN | The New York Times chief film critic A.O. Scott analyzes how movies such as Oliver Stone’ “.F.K.”elped fuel America’ interest in conspiracies. | By AINARA TIEFENTHÄER and A.O. SCOTT 

Document NYTFEED020171027edar001e2



World; Europe
Venezuelan Opposition Receives E.U.’ Sakharov Freedom Prize

By MILAN SCHREUER 
537 words
26 October 2017
16:10
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BRUSSELS —he European Parliament awarded the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought, Europe’ most prestigious human rights award, to the democratic opposition in Venezuela on Thursday.

The announcement, made by Antonio Tajani, the Parliament’ president, before a plenary session in Strasbourg, France, was repeatedly interrupted by applause.

“oday we are supporting a nation’ freedom to struggle,”r. Tajani said. “e hereby express our full support for the National Assembly of Venezuela, the only democratically elected Parliament.”

For several years, Venezuela, an oil-producing nation, has been going through a harsh economic crisis as energy prices have dropped. President Nicolá Maduro’ government has also led a crackdown on opposition parties, their leaders and their supporters as part of a plan to consolidate power.

He has tried to close the country’ National Assembly to limit its power and influence, and has created a superseding, all-powerful constitutional assembly.

“he ruling party has steadily limited the rule of law of and the constitutional order, and in March 2017, the Supreme Court stripped the democratically elected National Assembly of legislative power,”a statement by the European Parliament said.

Hundreds of Venezuelans have been arbitrarily arrested and dozens been killed over the past year alone, European officials said. Scores of protesters were killed this year during months of street demonstrations against the Maduro government.

The official laureate is the “emocratic opposition in Venezuela,”s represented by the country’ National Assembly and its president, Julio Borges, and the political prisoners listed by Foro Penal, a human rights organization, Mr. Tajani said.

Mr. Borges will be invited to receive the prize, which comes with 50,000 euros, about $59,000, at a ceremony in Strasbourg this year.

Mr. Tajani pledged to protect rights and freedom of opinion within and outside Europe. He noted that on the same day, two activists had been freed by Turkey —n part because of pressure from the European Union.

“e want people who are fighting for human rights or freedom of opinion anywhere in the world to know that they can count on this parliament,”r. Tajani said.

The prize is named after Andrei Sakharov, a Soviet physicist and political dissident, and it has been awarded every year since 1988.

Other finalists for this year’ prize were Aura Lolita Chavez Ixcaquic, an activist from Guatemala who fights to protect indigenous peoples from the expansion of agro-industry on their territory; and Dawit Isaak, a Swedish-Eritrean journalist and writer who has been arbitrarily detained by the Eritrean authorities since 2001.

Last year, the Sakharov Prize was awarded to Nadia Murad and Lamiya Aji Bashar, two young Yazidi women who escaped captivity and sexual slavery under the Islamic State.

Kirk Semple contributed reporting from Caracas, Venezuela.

* In Venezuela, Cooking With Firewood as Currency Collapses

* Venezuela’ New, Powerful Assembly Takes Over Legislature’ Duties

* 2 Yazidi Women Who Fled \b ISIS\b0  Slavery Receive E.U.’ Sakharov Prize

Julio Borges, president of Venezuela’ National Assembly, will be invited to accept the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought on behalf of the country’ democratic opposition. | Andres Martinez Casares/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020171026edaq00439



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Islamic State Is 'on the Run,' Says American Commander in Iraq

By DAVID ZUCCHINO; Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington, and Falih Hassan from Baghdad. 
997 words
26 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
12
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- The American commander of the international military campaign against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria said Wednesday that the militants were ''on the run'' and facing defeat as the American-led coalition made plans to kill or capture several thousand remaining insurgents.

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS, ISIL or Daesh, is clinging to roughly 5 percent of the territory it controlled in the two countries three years ago, the commander, Lt. Gen. Paul E. Funk II, said in an interview.

''Daesh has no chance to win,'' General Funk said. ''The outcome is not in doubt.''

He said only about 1,500 to 2,500 militants remain in western Iraq near the Syrian border, and another 2,500 to 5,500 in the Euphrates River valley in eastern Syria. The coalition said that the territory controlled by the Islamic State in both countries had dropped from a peak of more than 40,000 square miles in 2014 to about 2,700 square miles today, split roughly between Iraq and Syria.

''They cannot hold territory,'' General Funk said. ''They cannot hold any viable cities. Their leaders have abandoned them.''

But he warned that Islamic State militants in both countries are likely to mount terrorist attacks and maintain underground cells even after losing control of territory. He said the coalition planned to turn soon to training Iraqi security forces to combat any Islamic State resurgence.

The Trump administration and the Pentagon have not specified how long the American train-and-assist mission would last, but they have emphasized they would not repeat the Obama administration's decision in 2011 to withdraw.

Col. Ryan Dillon, the coalition spokesman in Baghdad, said timelines for the mission's future have not been discussed in detail with the Iraqi government. He said previous American commanders have recommended keeping an American military presence in Iraq to assist in training even after the Islamic State was defeated.

Iraq's prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, warned during a state visit to Turkey on Wednesday that driving the militants from their territory would not eliminate the threat. ''ISIS is very dangerous, and if given any chance they will return,'' he said.

General Funk said the coalition would continue to hunt down foreign Islamic State fighters before they can return to their home countries.

''The real problem is the virtual caliphate that continues to recruit,'' he said.

Counterterrorism officials said last week that the number of combat-hardened Islamic State fighters returning home to Europe and North Africa was much smaller than anticipated. They said American efforts to prevent fighters from leaving liberated cities such as Mosul in Iraq and Raqqa in Syria have been successful.

Within Iraq, General Funk said, the conflict between Kurdish fighters and Iraqi security forces had shifted Iraq's focus away from fighting the Islamic State. A Kurdish vote for independence last month prompted an Iraqi military campaign that has driven Kurdish forces from almost all the contested areas they had held since 2014, including the oil-rich province of Kirkuk.

The two sides were part of a nine-month coalition effort that evicted the militants from the Iraqi city of Mosul in July. The United States has armed and trained both Iraqi security forces and Kurdish fighters, known as pesh merga.

The pesh merga are not involved in the coalition operation in western Iraq because their forces are in northern Iraq. But General Funk said the Kurds should focus on holding and securing territory taken from the Islamic State in northern Iraq rather than battling Iraq's military.

''We don't need Iraqis killing Iraqis when we have Daesh to kill out in the west,'' General Funk said. ''It's Iraqis versus Iraqis here, and I cannot emphasize enough that they need to handle this issue peacefully.''

''Now, at the 11th hour, they are letting up,'' he added. ''I want them to keep their foot on the neck of ISIS.''

General Funk said he has met regularly with military commanders on both sides to urge them to settle the dispute and focus on the Islamic State, but added, ''They don't always take my advice.''

Asked about remarks this week by Secretary of State Rex Tillerson that Iranian-armed Shiite Muslim militias serving with the Iraqi military should be disbanded, General Funk said some of the militias ''have to be dealt with.''

He added, ''There are groups that publicly threaten the coalition, and that needs to stop.'' The militias were recruited and incorporated into the Iraqi military in 2014, when the Islamic State seized control of nearly a third of Iraq. They have been accused of attacking civilians in liberated areas.

In western Iraq, coalition forces continued mobilizing Wednesday for a planned assault that would begin soon, General Funk said. Iraqi security forces said Wednesday they had dropped leaflets intended for residents of the Rawa and Anah districts in western Iraq.

The leaflets instructed civilians to stay as far as possible from Islamic State fighters and to place white flags on rooftops once coalition forces begin attacking.

''We are coming to you,'' the leaflets read, according to the Iraqi military. ''God is with us in our last battle against the apostates of Daesh.''

In Syria, Syrian Democratic Force fighters supported by coalition airstrikes, artillery and intelligence, had advanced to the east side of the Euphrates River and had attacked the Islamic State as far south as the Omar oil field east of the city of Mayadin, Colonel Dillon said. Mayadin is about 50 miles from the Iraq border.

Coalition-backed forces declared victory on Oct. 17 over the Islamic State in Raqqa, which had been claimed by the insurgents as the capital of their caliphate.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020171026edaq00052



Home Leave
Reader Center
A Times Correspondent Describes Meeting  ISIS  Militants in Iraq

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
836 words
25 October 2017
17:37
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The Reader Center is a newsroom initiative that is helping The Times build deeper ties with our audience.

Rod Nordland, The New York Times’ International correspondent at large, first went to Iraq in the 1980s, during the Iran-Iraq war. In the years since, including several as a correspondent for The Times in Baghdad, Mr. Nordland has covered the complex political and social currents of a nation seemingly in perpetual turmoil.

Earlier this month, the Iraqi army freed the city of Hawija from control by the Islamic State, leading 1,000 militants, who had operated a regime of comprehensive violence in the city, to surrender to Kurdish authorities. Mr. Nordland was able to interview some of the men in detention —n experience he described on Facebook Live on Oct. 24.

Mr. Nordland, who had been visiting The Times in New York City during his scheduled “ome leave,”poke with Herbert Buchsbaum, The Times’ Middle East editor, while viewers submitted questions for Mr. Nordland about his career. Here are edited excerpts from the Facebook Live broadcast.

Were you afraid?

He was unarmed and his hands were tied behind his back, yet even so, we’e been nurtured on this image of the ISIS boogeyman, and I think it affects all of us —side from his physical presence, just the idea of what these people had been capable of. But the more I talked to him, the more that went away. I had that impression with a lot of the guys I talked to. They start out kind of scary-looking, but once you talk to them you reduce them to just another person.

It was just dawning on them that what was going to happen to them was that they were going to a court, and probably to jail for having been in ISIS. And this guy was concerned. His wife was very pregnant, about to have their first child, and he realized in the course of my talking to him that he was not going to see his wife. He was pretty beaten down by that.

So he has some human feelings after all.

They’e human beings —uman beings that took an ugly path, but still human beings.

The question I think a lot of people have is: Is ISIS finished? Are we seeing the end of them?

I think, in some ways, yes. The ISIS prisoners we talked to said they had been ordered by their leaders to surrender themselves and to escape. They were also very bitter and their morale was at a real low point. They felt that they had been betrayed by ISIS leadership, that their leaders were just saving themselves and that the whole organization was finished. And it’ true that they have basically lost all their important territory.

But, they started out as an underground organization, and there’ every reason to believe that they’l continue in that capacity. They still have a lot of ability to wreak havoc in that form.

Why are there so few news organizations in Iraq and Syria? Did you see reporters from other organizations there?

It was a fairly large media presence. But it’ expensive to cover wars —specially to do it in a conscientious way, in which you take a lot of precautions. A freelancer who, for instance, went to Kurdistan would find himself facing fixer/translator fees of $500 a day typically. A driver would cost maybe $200 a day. And if you’e going for anybody on assignment they should be providing you with some sort of security. And that’ very expensive. That can be as much as $1,000 a day from some companies.

Do you travel with armed guards?

We don’ usually. In general, the principle that most journalists follow is that the lower your profile, the safer you are. In Afghanistan, where I work a lot, there are typically embassies and international organizations that move around in armored car convoys. We never do that because when you move like that, you’e making yourself a target. You can protect yourself against gunshots, but gunshots are not what we’e worried about these days. It’ bombs. Roadside bombs. And no amount of armor is going to protect you much against those.

When you’e in a place like Iraq, in a war zone for weeks at a time, is there stuff that you miss?

Nowadays we can pretty much get everything everywhere. Like in Kurdistan, one night a couple of us were sitting around and said “et’ go to the movies.”o we went to the mall with a multiplex with 15 screens and we watched a movie. “he Hitman’ Bodyguard.”

* \b ISIS\b0  Fighters, Having Pledged to Fight or Die, Surrender en Masse

Suspected Islamic State fighters received food at a security screening center near Kirkuk. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171025edap004v2



Reader Center
Wildfires in Portugal, Fighting  ISIS  and Exotic Animal Hunting: The Times’ Digital Highlights From the Last Month

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
337 words
24 October 2017
20:04
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Two masthead editors at The Times, Steve Duenes and Sam Dolnick, have highlighted some of our best digital journalism from the last few weeks and have provided some insight into how the stories were produced.

Then and Now

Raphael Minder, The Times’ Spain and Portugal correspondent, wrote about wildfires in Portugal last summer, and he wrote about the same subject last week. It’ not hard to see the design difference between last year and this year. Take a look.

The International desk routinely creates this kind of coverage now. In this case, it originated from the London bureau, courtesy of editors Anna Holland and Anne-Sophie Bolon, and Mona Boshnaq, a photo editor.

Different Ads, Same Car

Our reporter covering advertising, Sapna Maheshwari, realized that different ads were running to promote the same car, and she wanted to highlight each ad. She and Ashwin Seshagiri, a digital editor on Business Day, sketched the layout of the piece, and she then wrote it through with another editor, Connor Ennis.

Photo Correspondents

Photographers are earning frequent bylines these days, often as part of our International report. In this case, an editor on International, Sewell Chan, speedily steered a visual piece from Ivor Prickett, a freelance photographer for The Times who has covered the conflicts in Iraq and Syria. Ivor had spent many days with a militia fighting the Islamic State to retake Raqqa. And after a long drive to Erbil, Iraq, he filed his images and an accompanying document (subject line: Text).

Hunting Ranches

A story from Texas Hill Country by our Houston bureau chief, Manny Fernandez, was also a stunning visual package, driven by a photo editor, Meghan Petersen. After coming across Ox Ranch, she did some initial reporting and got the National desk interested. Meghan edited Daniel Berehulak’ photos into a visual sequence, and Manny wove the narrative together.

Document NYTFEED020171024edao00669



Foreign Desk; SECTA
YouTube Gave Russian Outlet Portal Into U.S.

By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI and NICHOLAS CONFESSORE 
1,813 words
24 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

SAN FRANCISCO -- When the state-backed Russian news channel RT became the first news organization to surpass one billion views on YouTube in 2013, it marked the achievement with a retrospective of its most popular videos and a special guest -- one of the Google-owned site's senior executives.

Robert Kyncl, a YouTube vice president who has since become its chief business officer, joined an RT anchor in a studio, where he praised RT for bonding with viewers by providing ''authentic'' content instead of ''agendas or propaganda.''

But now, as investigators in Washington examine the scope and reach of Russian interference in United States politics, the once-cozy relationship between RT and YouTube is drawing closer scrutiny.

YouTube -- the world's most-visited video site, owned by one of the most powerful and influential corporations in America -- played a crucial role in helping build and expand RT, an organization that the American intelligence community has described as the Kremlin's ''principal international propaganda outlet'' and a key player in Russia's information warfare operations around the world.

While Kremlin-aligned agents secretly built fake Facebook groups to foment political division and deployed hordes of Twitter bots to stoke criticism of Hillary Clinton, RT worked out in the open, bolstered by one of the largest online audiences of any news organization in the world and a prominent presence on YouTube's search results.

As the presidential election heated up in the spring of 2016, RT consistently featured negative stories about Mrs. Clinton, according to United States intelligence officials. That included claims of corruption at her family foundation and ties to Islamic extremism, frequent coverage of emails stolen by Russian operatives from Mrs. Clinton's campaign chairman, and accusations that she was in poor physical and mental health.

[Video: US media accused of burying concerns over Clinton health Watch on YouTube.]

''More than half of American adults say they watch YouTube, and younger viewers are moving to YouTube at staggering numbers,'' said Senator Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia and vice chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, which is investigating Russia's exploitation of social media platforms based in the United States. ''YouTube is a target-rich environment for any disinformation campaign -- Russian or otherwise -- that represents a long-term, next-generation challenge.''

Much like the Russian-controlled pages on Facebook, RT's YouTube videos comply with YouTube's community guidelines, which cover things like nudity, copyright violations and promoting violence against a group based on race or religion. But not propaganda.

YouTube carries ''a wide variety of news channels'' that represent ''an array of viewpoints across the political spectrum,'' said a spokesman for the company, Chris Dale.

RT's reach on YouTube -- 2.2 million subscribers, just slightly behind CNN -- stemmed from a long and mutually beneficial relationship between the news channel and the video site, according to current and former RT employees and technology industry analysts.

YouTube had the vast audience and global reach that RT needed as it set out to become a worldwide alternative news source with influence and viewers beyond Russia's own borders. RT has YouTube channels in a number of foreign languages including Arabic, Spanish, German, French and Chinese.

''RT management did view YouTube as hugely important to spreading content,'' said Liz Wahl, a former correspondent in the United States for RT who quit on the air in 2014 over concerns that the network was whitewashing the Russian annexation of Crimea. ''Traditional television ratings weren't important because the aim was to get the messaging out through various digital and social platforms.''

The Russian channel was among the first news organizations to recognize YouTube's power and developed content intended to perform well on the platform. RT uploads videos frequently, sprinkling in buzzy viral videos of disasters -- plane crashes, tsunamis, a meteor strike -- to earn likes and longer watch times, which YouTube's algorithm rewards with better placement among search results and recommendations.

[Video: Japan Earthquake: Helicopter aerial view video of giant tsunami waves Watch on YouTube.]

The viral videos, which were often borrowed from other sources, help to build up RT's subscribers, and they became part of the Kremlin's audience for more political content.

''People come for the click-bait material,'' said Bret Schafer, an official at the Alliance for Securing Democracy, a bipartisan initiative of the German Marshall Fund, the Washington-based public policy research group. ''And they eventually land on videos that the Kremlin wants them to see.''

While much of RT's traffic stems from nonpolitical videos, the channel's political and foreign affairs content ranks highly in many YouTube searches. Searches on topics on which the Kremlin is typically eager to promote its point of view -- American intervention in Syria, the Ukrainian civil war or the rise of Germany's far-right AfD party -- will often turn up an RT video as one of the top results.

[Video: 'Clinton & ISIS funded by same money' - Assange interview w/John Pilger (Courtesy Darthmouth Films) Watch on YouTube.]

YouTube also provided RT with the kind of perks it reserved for big publishers, including custom backgrounds for its channel in the early days and a ''check mark'' that designated RT as a verified news source. Until recently, RT was also among a select group of news organizations included in Google's ''preferred'' news lineup, granting them access to guaranteed revenue from premium advertisers. Those advertisers, in effect, subsidized Russia's international propaganda arm.

Google dropped RT from the preferred lineup last month. Andrea Faville, a Google spokeswoman, said the decision was unrelated to the congressional inquiry, and that RT had been dropped as part of a ''standard algorithmic update.'' But Google also noted that it was not placing any other limits on RT: The channel could still sell regular ads on its videos and the status downgrade only applied in the United States. Google later clarified that RT was downgraded in other markets, but it would not say which ones.

Kirill Karnovich-Valua, RT's deputy editor in chief, said the organization had not been informed of Google's decision and it was puzzled about why it was dropped despite being ''one of the most watched YouTube channels in the world.''

''This speaks to the unprecedented political pressure increasingly applied to all RT partners and relationships in a concerted effort to push our channel out of the U.S. market entirely, and by any means possible,'' Mr. Karnovich-Valua wrote in an email.

Last month, RT said the Justice Department had demanded that a private company affiliated with RT America register as a ''foreign agent'' -- a term that dates back to a law originally enacted in 1938 to deter Nazi propaganda. On Thursday, after the deadline set by American officials had passed, an RT spokeswoman said that the news organization was ''doing everything possible for RT to avoid having to register.'' Registration could impose voluminous disclosure requirements on RT, a particular burden for a media organization producing frequent content.

Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, responded in more forceful terms: Should the United States impose restrictions on Russian media, Mr. Putin said last week, Russian would act ''symmetrically and quite swiftly.''

RT's use of other technology platforms is also under investigation. Last month, officials at Twitter told a Senate Intelligence Committee that three RT accounts targeting an American audience -- with a combined following of roughly six million users -- had spent $274,100 to promote tweets in 2016.

But none of RT's social media activities or its presence in cable and satellite TV lineups has delivered the impact of its YouTube channel. RT launched its YouTube page in March 2007, roughly four months after Google paid $1.65 billion for the fledgling video site. At the time, YouTube was better known for pirated content and videos of cute animals than news programming, but RT caught on quickly.

The Russian channel recruited talent from within the burgeoning world of YouTube-born media stars, people who had already shown a knack for creating viral or popular video content.

One RT contributor, the British blogger Graham Phillips, built a large following on YouTube with videos from Ukraine's civil war, many of them critical of Ukraine's central government. RT often featured Mr. Phillips and at one point employed him as a part-time freelancer before he was arrested and deported by Ukrainian authorities. His personal YouTube channel has earned more than 60 million views.

Another RT contributor, Lori Harfenist, began her career on public-access television in New York City, and eventually moved her self-produced show, ''The Resident,'' to YouTube. Ms. Harfenist was one of the platform's first revenue-sharing partners, according to a biography on Ms. Harfenist's personal website.

Ms. Harfenist was eventually recruited by RT, which began featuring her on segments with titles like ''America is a Hypocrite.'' During the presidential campaign, RT's Twitter account promoted a video from her that claimed the existence of an anti-Semitic conspiracy involving Hillary Clinton, Google and the Illuminati. (She later claimed the segment was meant as satire.) Ms. Harfenist did not respond to emails and Facebook messages seeking comment.

Today, RT ranks among the top news channels on YouTube for views, subscribers and ''engagement'' such as comments or likes. The most-watched clips on RT are not political or anti-establishment videos, they are snackable content. A clip of a homeless man with a gifted voice for radio is the most popular video on RT, viewed 40 million times since it was uploaded six years ago.

[Video: 'Golden Voice' homeless man finds job, home after viral video success Watch on YouTube.]

Mr. Karnovich-Valua said RT's primary aim is to provide an alternative point of view on current events so its audience can get a full picture of world events. ''Where relevant, RT does present a Russian perspective on current events, but we don't promote the Russian point of view, we explain it alongside with presenting others,'' he said.

Some lawmakers, including Mr. Warner, have called for tighter regulation and disclosure requirements for political advertising on social media platforms. Yet RT's embrace of YouTube shows how difficult it could be to limit foreign influence.

''It's not a secret. It's not rocket science, but they're just doing it much better,'' said Christoph Burseg, who runs VeeScore.com, an analytics and strategic consultancy that tracks YouTube use. ''Unless YouTube decides to manually step in, they will continue to be very present. RT isn't doing anything wrong, they're just riding the algorithms.''

Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter @daiwaka Follow Nicholas Confessore on Twitter @nickconfessore

Robert Kyncl, left, a YouTube executive, helped RT celebrate reaching 1 billion views in 2013. (A18) 

Document NYTF000020171024edao0006q



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Scores of Bodies Found in Syrian Town After  ISIS  Retreats

By ANNE BARNARD; Karam Shoumali contributed reporting from Istanbul, and Hwaida Saad from Beirut. 
540 words
24 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- As pro-government troops drove Islamic State fighters from a central Syrian town over the weekend, the retreating militants killed scores of civilians, dumping some bodies into wells and leaving others in the street, local residents and the Syrian state-run news media said on Monday.

The apparent mass killing is the latest example of the brutal reprisals that have taken place when territory changes hands in Syria's multisided war, with civilians often bearing the brunt of the pain.

The carnage showed how the Islamic State can still spread havoc even as it loses major parts of its territory that once included large areas of Syria and Iraq.

At least 67 bodies had been identified in the town, Qaryatayn, northeast of Damascus, the capital, by Monday afternoon, according to local activists who posted an online list of the victims' names.

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which monitors the conflict, said that as many as 128 civilians had been killed in Qaryatayn in the past several weeks before the Islamic State fighters retreated.

The militants had accused the victims of collaborating with the government, according to residents, who disputed that claim. Local residents said the dead appeared to include many townspeople who had tried to keep their heads down as the town changed hands several times in recent years.

''I knew most of these people -- farmers and electricians and teachers,'' said Abdullah Abdulkarim, a resident and citizen journalist who fled to the northern province of Aleppo a few years ago but keeps in close touch with contacts in Qaryatayn.

''I know for a fact that most of the victims were not involved in anything against ISIS,'' he said, using an acronym for the Islamic State. ''Just 10 of them were collaborators with the regime, but this doesn't justify executing them.''

Mr. Abdulkarim said that the youngest victim was in his teens and the oldest was 57, adding, ''Some of the bodies were dumped in wells, which makes it harder to find them.''

Several were members of his extended family, he said, including five of his father's cousins, one of whom was a local mukhtar, or leader. ''They were all shot and left on the streets for others to take as an example,'' he said. ''They all were accused of collaborating with the regime.''

Qaryatayn, like many places in Syria, has been through many phases of war. Local youths formed makeshift rebel groups early in the uprising, which began in 2011 after the government cracked down violently on largely peaceful political protests.

The groups withdrew in late 2013 to spare the town from the government shelling that had befallen many rebel-held areas; Mr. Abdelkarim, an online advocate for the rebels, fled with them to rebel-held areas farther north.

The government held the town until 2015, when the Islamic State seized it, destroying a 15th-century monastery and prompting thousands of Christians to flee. The town changed hands several more times, with Islamic State fighters seizing it again in late September and the government retaking it last weekend.

Document NYTF000020171024edao00069



Foreign Desk; SECTA
'I Don't Like to Fight. But This Is Our Land.'

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
1,449 words
24 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

DATU SALIBO, Philippines -- The leader of the Islamic State in the Philippines, Isnilon Hapilon, is dead. The city his forces seized, Marawi, on the island of Mindanao, is all but completely back in government hands after months of scorched-earth combat.

But the Islamic State's influence in the Philippines is far from over, and communities on Mindanao are bracing for the next battles.

''I don't like to fight. But this is our land and we will not let them take this like they destroyed Marawi,'' said a veteran Christian militia fighter who goes by the nom de guerre Commander Ilangilang. (She named herself after the tree blossoms that bloom densely around her hometown.)

She says it is only a matter of time before the Islamic State's black flag flutters in the mountainous periphery on the outskirts of Kauran, the farming community where she grew up and where she talked to Times journalists recently, about 90 miles south of Marawi.

''That's why I have these,'' she said, gently tapping her .45-caliber pistol and a separate revolver, both holstered loosely around her thin waist.

The commander said she picked up her first gun when she was 13, in the early 1970s, and her family was embroiled in fighting Muslim separatist rebels in the area.

That separatist movement, and the sectarian and political resentment that drove it, never really went away. It evolved into Muslim militant groups that fought the government for decades, and in recent years proved to be fertile ground for the Islamic State ideology and recruiters, as that Middle East-based movement sought to extend its influence around the globe.

That the old and resilient militant cells here are now being strengthened by the brand and resources of the Islamic State's international network has people worried all over Mindanao -- including even some of the Muslim militants whose former comrades joined the Islamic State.

In a twist that would have been unimaginable even after they signed a peace deal with the Philippine government three years ago, members of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, or MILF, are now leading their former enemies in the army against what some believe could become the next big Islamic State uprising.

They are fighting in the forbidding marshlands of the town of Datu Salibo, about a 130-mile drive south from Marawi.

Local Islamist groups claiming to represent the Islamic State have been trying to recruit the young with promises of cash and adventure, according to Commander Asiong. He is the self-appointed spokesman of the same Christian militia unit that Ilangilang belongs to: Red God's Army.

Asiong, 60, a former soldier turned community leader, said that even with the militants in Marawi close to total defeat, the Islamic State's reach on Mindanao has spread. It has been aided by operatives in the Middle East who have posted well-produced videos of the so-called religious war, he said, and particularly by how the Islamic State loyalists in Marawi managed to fight off the government for months.

''They may be close to being defeated in Marawi, but they can spread out,'' Asiong said in his tiny shed in Kauran.

His years of army service, spent fighting Muslim militants, have left him with deep scars in his neck and torso, and his left leg was all but cut away to save it after several bullets hit him there.

''They can regroup, join other I.S. allied groups here,'' he said, using the initials for the Islamic State. ''While we have guns, our community is no match for them. So we pray that the government finishes them in Marawi. If not, there is nothing we can do except to protect ourselves and fight to the death. We will defend our land until troops arrive.''

(On Monday, the Philippine defense secretary declared an end to the fighting in Marawi, saying that the ''last group of stragglers'' in the siege there had been killed.)

Asiong and Ilangilang spoke to journalists for The New York Times over goat meat stew in Asiong's hut. As we talked, the sound of explosions kept coming across the distance -- mortar fire from an army camp targeting local rebels in a swampy region miles away.

On Christmas Day two years ago, a breakaway faction from the MILF called the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, or BIFF, attacked several areas, including Kauran, and killed 11 Christian farmers, Asiong said.

While BIFF says it is not officially affiliated with the Islamic State loyalists who fought in Marawi, the local authorities think otherwise.

The rebel force has welcomed the Marawi offensive and has helped divert the army's attention by attacking nearby civilian communities. In June, as heavy fighting was going on in Marawi, BIFF militants briefly held more than 30 students in the remote town of Pigkawayan, about 50 miles south, forcing the military to spread its forces even more thinly.

A spokesman for the group, Abu Misry Mama, said in a brief telephone interview: ''The fighting in Marawi is a good distraction. All I can say is, they do not belong to our group, which continues to fight for a separate homeland. But the enemy of my enemy is my friend.''

Another of those jihadist friends, a group that has explicitly pledged loyalty to the Islamic State, is fighting government and MILF forces in the marshlands near Datu Salibo.

The Islamic State militants here are headed by the militant commander Abu Turaipe and are believed to number a few hundred. He was once allied with MILF, but broke away in protest over the peace deal with the government.

The swamp battle with the Islamic State militants has been going on since August, but has gotten little press coverage, largely because the area is inaccessible and much of the attention has been focused on Marawi.

Von al-Haq, the MILF's military commander, said that his fighters were ''swimming while attacking, because the swamp waters are very deep.''

But the MILF and army alliance has slowly been winning, and in one offensive last month reported that it had recovered at least 20 improvised bombs and a number of black Islamic State flags.

Nassrolah Gani, a 35-year-old police officer whose unit is helping the military in recovering casualties from the crocodile-infested marshland, said his men would be easily lost in the swamps were it not for their MILF guides.

Boots get sucked off by the mud, and thorny bushes are a natural impediment to moving faster. Their assault rifles often get wet, making them less reliable.

''It's an open mostly flat marshland, where you are open to sniper fire,'' Mr. Gani said. ''When you enter the swamps, you've already dug your own grave.''

Mr. Gani said the latest intelligence data they received indicated that there were several Malaysian fighters who had joined Abu Turaipe's group.

Whether they had escaped from Marawi to this new front was hard to tell, but he believes their presence has bolstered the enemy force.

''We used to fight the MILF, but they are now fighting alongside us. So what is the bigger enemy? It is the Daesh-inspired groups,'' he added, using another name for the Islamic State.

Rommel Banlaoi, a security analyst who heads the Philippine Institute for Peace, Violence and Terrorism Research, says that other southern cities are at increased risk of attack by energized Islamic State loyalists.

''They have won the battle strategically, as they have proven how long they can endure the fight against government forces,'' he said, adding that the Marawi battle will stand as an example of ''martyrdom that can inspire others.''

After the spectacle of the Marawi siege, more foreign fighters will be attuned to the fight on Mindanao, where past government efforts had aimed at ousting Muslims in favor of the Christian majority.

''Mindanao will continue to suffer the challenges of armed conflicts and violence because of many issues associated with the struggle of the people there for self-determination'' being advocated by the Muslim forces, Mr. Banlaoi said. ''It has simply become the new land of jihad.''

Members of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front preparing to battle Islamic State-inspired militants last month in the marshlands of Datu Salibo, south of Marawi.; Commander Ilangilang, above, said she picked up her first gun when she was 13, in the early 1970s, and her family was embroiled in fighting Muslim separatist rebels. Below, an ISIS fighter killed in a firefight with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JES AZNAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171024edao0005b



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Posture to Isolate Iran Complicates Tillerson's Mission in Iraq

By GARDINER HARRIS; David Zucchino contributed reporting. 
1,249 words
24 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson slipped into Iraq Monday night after having spent the morning in Afghanistan, but his welcome in Baghdad was far less effusive as the Trump administration pushes to isolate Iran, an important Iraqi ally.

The diplomatic challenges for the United States in Iraq have become a minefield of competing interests as the Islamic State surrenders the last of its Iraqi territory and a host of squabbling groups fight to fill the vacuum.

After meeting with Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq, Mr. Tillerson called for unity in the country, long troubled by sectarian and tribal divisions.

Last week, the Iraqi military seized Kirkuk, wresting the contested city from Kurdish forces, which control much of the northern third of the country. Both sides in the struggle for Kirkuk have been crucial American allies in the fight against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, ISIL and Daesh.

''We are concerned and have been saddened by the recent differences that have emerged between the Kurdistan regional government and the Iraqi central government,'' Mr. Tillerson said in statements made to reporters after he had met with Mr. Abadi.

Asserting that ''we have friends'' in Baghdad and the Kurdish region's capital, Erbil, Mr. Tillerson said ''we encourage both parties to enter into discussion and dialogue.''

Hours before Mr. Tillerson arrived, Mr. Abadi's office released a testy statement rejecting Tillerson's call the previous day for Iranian-backed militias -- known as popular mobilization forces or Hashad al-Shaabi -- to either disband or leave Iraq.

Although the militias may be armed and trained by Iran, the militia members are Iraqis.

''We wonder about the statements attributed to the American secretary of state about the popular mobilization forces,'' the statement from the prime minister's office said.

The militias were recruited and integrated into the Iraqi military in 2014 after Islamic State militants swept through parts of Iraq and seized nearly a third of the country despite years of effort and billions of dollars spent by the United States to train government forces.

A top Iranian commander, Maj. Gen. Qassam Suleimani, has advised the militias inside Iraq, prompting some Iraqi lawmakers to describe them as an arm of Iran's Revolutionary Guards Corps.

The militias maintain individual commands separate from the Iraqi military command and often fly Shiite banners and flags at Iraqi Army checkpoints.

Members of the militias are Iraqi patriots who ''have sacrificed greatly to defend their country,'' Mr. Abadi's statement said. ''No side has the right to intervene in Iraq's affairs or decide what Iraqis should do.''

In a news conference on Sunday with Foreign Minister Adel al-Jubeir of Saudi Arabia, Mr. Tillerson said that ''Iranian militias that are in Iraq, now that the fight against Daesh and ISIS is coming to a close, those militias need to go home. Any foreign fighters in Iraq need to go home and allow the Iraqi people to regain control of areas that had been overtaken by ISIS.''

Aides later tried to clarify his remarks as only meaning that Iraq's military needed a unified chain of command, but the Trump administration's fiercely anti-Iran rhetoric -- President Trump has denounced Iran repeatedly and threatened to renounce the Iran nuclear deal -- has discomfited Iraqis.

A spokesman for the popular mobilization forces, Ahmed al-Assadi, told the Iraqi Parliament in Baghdad on Monday that he considered Mr. Tillerson's comments an ''unacceptable and false accusation.''

Mr. Assadi, a Shiite member of Parliament, said Mr. Tillerson's remarks reflected a ''lack of experience.''

The Americans have encouraged improvements in Iraq's relations with Sunni Arab states in hopes of reducing Iran's influence. Mr. Abadi was in Riyadh on Sunday along with Mr. Tillerson to strengthen ties.

Earlier Monday, Mr. Tillerson made a secret two-hour visit to the main American air base in Afghanistan, arriving in a military transport plane to meet top Afghan officials inside a massive bunker.

His visit to Iraq was similarly unannounced before he landed.

That top American officials must use stealth to enter these countries after more than 15 years of war, thousands of lives lost and trillions of dollars spent was testimony to the stubborn problems still confronting the United States in both places.

Mr. Tillerson would not even risk the short trip to Kabul from Bagram Air Base to visit the heavily fortified United States Embassy or Afghan presidential palace, as his predecessors have done. The change reflects the increasingly uncertain security situation in Kabul and the fact that the United States' presence is now surrounded by vast Taliban-controlled areas.

Mr. Tillerson's visit was his first to Afghanistan as secretary of state, and like nearly every other top American official to visit over the previous two decades, he said the country's predicament was not nearly as dire as his own security precautions suggested.

''But I think if you consider the current situation in Afghanistan, and we were talking about this a few minutes ago, and you look a few years in the past to what the circumstances were, Afghanistan has come quite a distance already in terms of creating a much more vibrant population, a much more vibrant government, education system, a larger economy,'' he said in a small windowless conference room during a hurried eight-minute news conference. ''So there are opportunities to strengthen the foundations of a prosperous Afghanistan society.''

Cloistered in the American military compound, Mr. Tillerson saw none of that hoped-for blooming. Instead, he and his staff exited a huge military transport plane and then piled into a motorcade that drove them the few minutes to the base's bunkerlike headquarters, passing hangars constructed by Russia, another of the foreign forces to be humbled in Afghanistan. Huge concrete blast walls lined much of the route. Helicopters patrolled the perimeter, and two security blimps equipped with long-range cameras hovered.

After eight months of internal discussions, Mr. Trump in August announced his policy for Afghanistan. Commanders will be allowed to request troops as needed, and the administration emphasized that it would increasingly rely on regional partners like India to improve stability.

Mr. Trump also promised to pressure Pakistan, which United States officials have long accused of playing a double game in Afghanistan -- publicly supporting the United States presence while privately protecting the Taliban and other insurgent groups.

The massive air base near Kabul demonstrates why the administration cannot get too tough with Pakistan, since nearly all of the supplies are transported by air or land through Pakistani territory. Soldiers can order supplies and gifts from Amazon, which delivers daily to the base.

Mr. Tillerson will visit Islamabad on Tuesday for his first talks with Pakistani leaders since he delivered a speech last week in which he called for improved ties with India, Pakistan's rival.

On Monday, Mr. Tillerson said that the United States was increasingly concerned about the stability of Pakistan, which has a large nuclear arsenal.

''Pakistan needs to, I think, take a cleareyed view of the situation that they're confronted with in terms of the number of terrorist organizations that find safe haven inside of Pakistan,'' he said.

Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson is greeted as he steps off the plane upon his arrival at Baghdad International Airport on Monday. (POOL  BY ALEX BRANDON) 

Document NYTF000020171024edao0004w



Editorial
Opinion
America’ Forever Wars

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
1,108 words
23 October 2017
02:55
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The United States has been at war continuously since the attacks of 9/11 and now has just over 240,000 active-duty and reserve troops in at least 172 countries and territories. While the number of men and women deployed overseas has shrunk considerably over the past 60 years, the military’ reach has not. American forces are actively engaged not only in the conflicts in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria and Yemen that have dominated the news, but also in Niger and Somalia, both recently the scene of deadly attacks, as well as Jordan, Thailand and elsewhere.

An additional 37,813 troops serve on presumably secret assignment in places listed simply as “nknown.”he Pentagon provided no further explanation.

There are traditional deployments in Japan (39,980 troops) and South Korea (23,591) to defend against North Korea and China, if needed, along with 36,034 troops in Germany, 8,286 in Britain and 1,364 in Turkey —ll NATO allies. There are 6,524 troops in Bahrain and 3,055 in Qatar, where the United States has naval bases.

America’ operations in conflict zones like those in Africa are expanding: 400 American Special Forces personnel in Somalia train local troops fighting the Shabab Islamist group, providing intelligence and sometimes going into battle with them. One member of the Navy SEALs was killed there in a mission in May. On Oct. 14, a massive attack widely attributed to the Shabab on a Mogadishu street killed more than 270 people, which would show the group’ increased reach. About 800 troops are based in Niger, where four Green Berets died on Oct. 4.

Many of these forces are engaged in counterterrorism operations —gainst the Taliban in Afghanistan, for instance; against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria; against an affiliate of Al Qaeda in Yemen. So far, Americans seem to accept that these missions and the deployments they require will continue indefinitely. Still, it’ a very real question whether, in addition to endorsing these commitments, which have cost trillions of dollars and many lives over 16 years, they will embrace new entanglements of the sort President Trump has seemed to portend with his rash threats and questionable decisions on North Korea and Iran.

For that reason alone, it’ time to take stock of how broadly American forces are already committed to far-flung regions and to begin thinking hard about how much of that investment is necessary, how long it should continue and whether there is a strategy beyond just killing terrorists. Which Congress, lamentably, has not done. If the public is quiet, that is partly because so few families bear so much of this military burden, and partly because America is not involved in anything comparable to the Vietnam War, when huge American casualties produced sustained public protest. It is also because Congress has spent little time considering such issues in a comprehensive way or debating why all these deployments are needed.

Congress has repeatedly ducked efforts by Senator Tim Kaine, Democrat of Virginia, and others to put the war against the Islamic State, which has broad popular support but no specific congressional authorization, on a firm legal footing. President Trump, like his predecessor, insists that legislation passed in 2001 to authorize the war against Al Qaeda is sufficient. It isn’. After the Niger tragedy, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Bob Corker of Tennessee, has agreed to at least hold a hearing on the authorization issue. It is scheduled for Oct. 30.

Andrew Bacevich, a retired Army colonel who lost a son in Iraq and is a critic of military operations, says that “ collective indifference to war has become an emblem of contemporary America.”he idea that Americans could be inured to war and all its horrors is chilling, and it’ a recipe for dangerous decisions with far-reaching ramifications. There are many factors contributing to this trend:

During earlier wars, including Vietnam, the draft put most families at risk of having a loved one go to war, but now America has all-volunteer armed forces. Less than 1 percent of the population now serves in the military, compared with more than 12 percent in World War II. Most people simply do not have a family member in harm’ way.

American casualty rates have been relatively low, especially in more recent years after the bulk of American troops were withdrawn from Afghanistan and Iraq. Also, the United States has shifted to a strategy in which Americans provide air power and intelligence, and train and assist local troops who then do most of the fighting and most of the dying. This year, for instance, 11 American service members died in Afghanistan and 14 in Iraq. By comparison, 6,785 Afghan security force members died in 2016 and 2,531 died in the first five months this year, according to the United States and Afghan governments. Tens of thousands of civilians also perished at the hands of various combatants, including in 2017, but the figures get little publicity. Most Americans tend not to think about them.

Since 9/11, American leaders have defined the fight against terrorism as a permanent struggle against a permanent threat. Mr. Obama withdrew significant forces from Afghanistan and Iraq. But the rise of ISIS in Iraq and Syria and a resurgent Taliban in Afghanistan led to renewed engagement, though at lower troop levels. Terror attacks here and in Europe, and Mr. Trump’ scaremongering, have reinforced the public’ sense of siege.

The military is essential to national security, but it is not the only thing keeping America safe. So do robust diplomacy and America’ engagement in multilateral institutions, both of which we have faulted Mr. Trump for ignoring or undercutting. The Pentagon, by contrast, thrives. After some belt-tightening during the financial crisis, it has a receptive audience in Congress and the White House as it pushes for more money to improve readiness and modernize weapons. Senators who balk at paying for health care and the basic diplomatic missions of the State Department approved a $700 billion defense budget for 2017-18, far more than Mr. Trump even requested.

Whether this largess will continue is unclear. But the larger question involves the American public and how many new military adventures, if any, it is prepared to tolerate.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

An American Army helicopter flying over Helmand Province, Afghanistan, last month. | Andrew Renneisen/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171023edan000gp



Asia and Australia Edition
Briefing
Rohingya, Marawi, Xi Jinping: Your Tuesday Briefing

By CHARLES McDERMID 
1,322 words
23 October 2017
20:59
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•hen President Xi Jinpingunveils the top rung of the Chinese Communist Party, expected on Wednesday, the choices will be the clearest clue yet about how long he intends to stay in power.

One proposed lineup, seen by The Times, includes no likely heirs, possibly to guarantee Mr. Xi’ hold on power. A majority are political veterans old enough that they may serve just one term.

Unexpected turns are still possible as the congress wraps up. “i seems to be reshaping the rules of the game,”ne observer said.

_____

•he Philippines declared an end to months of warfare against Islamic State-inspired militants in the city of Marawi.

But \b ISIS\b0  remains in the Philippines —nd is forcing some surprising alliances. South of Marawi, Moro Islamic Liberation Front members, above, are working with their former enemy, the army, against what could become the next big ISIS uprising. U.S. officials, assessing why so few foreign \b ISIS\b0  fighters in Iraq and Syria seem to be returning home, say that many are dead or captured, but that some may have escaped to the Philippines.

The U.S. defense secretary, Jim Mattis, is in the country for today’ meeting of Asean defense ministers, which is expected to be dominated by terrorism, disputes in the South China Sea, and North Korea.

_____

•n Washington, President Trump met with Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong of Singapore at the White House, above, for the signing of a previously announced $13.8 billion deal between Boeing and Singapore Airlines.

He also deepened a bitter controversy, rebutting televised remarks by a soldier’ widow who said that he blundered through his condolence call and seemed not to know her husband’ name. Mr. Trump tweeted that he “poke his name from beginning, without hesitation!”

_____

•ecretary of State Rex Tillerson made a secret two-hour visit to the main American air base in Afghanistan to meet top Afghan officials.

That a top American official had to sneak into Afghanistan after 16 years of war, thousands of lives lost and hundreds of billions of dollars spent testifies to the U.S. stalemate with the Taliban, a foe that appears to be growing stronger.

Mr. Tillerson made a second stop on the unannounced detour of his travels: Iraq. He urged the Baghdad and the Kurdistan region —hose independence Iraqi forces just thwarted —o open talks.

_____

• he United Nations said the number of Rohingya Muslims in Bangladesh who have fled violent persecution in Myanmar will soon pass one million. More than half arrived in the last nine weeks.

The U.N.’ emergency conference in Geneva raised the total international pledges of aid to about $340 million, but Doctors Without Borders, the medical charity, called the health conditions of the refugee camps a “ime bomb.”

_____

•e xual harassment accusations brought new disruptions to Fox News and the Weinstein Company.

Susan Fowler, above, the young engineer whose 2,900-word blog post about sexism and harassment at Uber helped set off the wave of revelations, gave The Times her first post-Uber interview. “ wasn’ going to take it,”he said. “’ worked so hard.”

_____

Business

•hina ’ antipollution effort has grown so intense that it could cool the country’ red-hot growth and alter world markets. Above, a power plant near Shanghai.

• Capital hired Howard Morgan, a veteran of the start-up world, as the venture capital group looks to invest outside of Silicon Valley and China, including in Southeast Asia.

•ingapore will cap the number of cars allowed on its roads next year.

•.S. stocks were lower. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•hina’ Olympic medals in the 1980s and ’0s “ere showered in doping,” former Chinese team doctor, above with her son, seeking political asylum told a German broadcaster. The World Anti-Doping Agency is investigating. [Associated Press]

•he U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency maintained that the deaths of four civilians in an agency drug raid in Honduras in 2012 had come in “n exchange of gunfire.”hrough a Freedom of Information Act request, we obtained video that shows otherwise. [The New York Times]

•n announcer at Russia’ most prominent talk-radio station was stabbed in the throat by a man who broke into the studio’ office. The station is one of few in the country that still broadcast reports critical of the government. [The New York Times]

•rotests continued in Malta over the car-bomb assassination of the country’ best-known journalist. [The New York Times]

•“o be fat in France is to be a loser,”aid the author of a hit memoir in a country that grapples with often overt stigmatization and growing obesity. [The New York Times]

•hinese villagers in Yunnan Province found “he king of mushrooms.”t’ nearly 3 feet high and edible. [South China Morning Post]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ecipe of the day: How to make the perfect bowl of soup. Any soup.

•here are a few simple ways to be better at remembering.

•ive ways to protect yourself against wedding catastrophes.

Noteworthy

• land of coconuts and clean air. That’ one way a Times travel writer described Kerala, an Indian state on the Malabar Coast where young, newly rich Mumbaikars are arriving to roam the spice plantations, tea estates and beaches.

•nd Krtek, a  cartoon mole equivalent to Mickey Mouse behind the Iron Curtain, is at the center of a bitter copyright squabble in the Czech courts, as a venerable icon of Communism adapts to 21st-century capitalism.

Back Story

The Olympic torch is scheduled to be lit today in Greece, beginning the countdown to the next Winter Games.

The flame will travel more than 5,000 miles east to South Korea, arriving Nov. 1 —00 days before the 2018 Olympics begin.

Starting in the city of Incheon, the torch will cross South Korea, with stops in nine provinces and eight major cities before arriving in Pyeongchang for the opening ceremony on Feb. 9.

The torch lighting goes back to the ancient games, but the Olympic flame made its first modern appearance at the 1928 Games in Amsterdam. The relay began with the 1936 Games in Berlin.

The torch itself is designed by the host country. The Times noted in 2010: “he modern Olympic Games have become as much a global contest among designers and architects as among athletes. Each Olympics is expected to produce a logo, a signature building —nd a characteristic torch that symbolizes local tradition and national character.”

The torch for the 1988 Summer Games in Seoul featured a bright metal body and Korean graphic elements. The five-pronged shape of the 2018 torch represents the Korean symbol for Pyeongchang.

Inyoung Kang contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. Browse past briefings here.

We have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian, European and American mornings. And our Australia bureau chief offers a weekly letter adding analysis and conversations with readers. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.

Tyrone Siu/Reuters | Jes Aznar for The New York Times | Pool photo by Jim Lo Scalzo | Pool photo by Alex Brandon | Jorge Silva/Reuters | Damien Maloney for The New York Times | Fishing with a net near a coal-fired power station on the Huangpu River in Shanghai. | Johannes Eisele/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Sim Chi Yin for The New York Times | Karsten Moran for The New York Times | Evan Sung for The New York Times | Petros Giannakouris/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020171023edan006bt



Briefing
Rex Tillerson, Megyn Kelly, Saudi Arabia: Your Monday Evening Briefing

By KAREN ZRAICK and SANDRA STEVENSON 
1,099 words
24 October 2017
00:11
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good evening. Here’ the latest.

1. President Trump said he would oppose reducing the amount that Americans can save in 401(k) retirement accounts, effectively killing with a tweet a plan that Republicans were considering to help pay for a $1.5 trillion tax cut.

The controversial idea: cap worker contributions at $2,400 annually for 401(k) accounts, far less than the current cap of $18,000 a year —r up to $24,000 for those over 50.

Mr. Trump also met with Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong of Singapore at the White House, above, for the signing of a $13.8 billion deal between Boeing and Singapore Airlines.

_____

2. Myeshia Johnson, whose husband, Sgt. La David T. Johnson, was killed in Niger this month, said President Trump had blundered through his condolence call to her last week.

Ms. Johnson, above at Sergeant Johnson’ funeral on Saturday, said in a televised interview that Mr. Trump did not even seem to know her husband’ name. “t made me cry because I was very angry at the tone in his voice and how he said it,”he said.

Mr. Trump responded on Twitter that he “poke his name from beginning, without hesitation!”

_____

3. The D.E.A. has long maintained that the deaths of four civilians in an agency drug raid in Honduras in 2012 had come in “n exchange of gunfire.”

Through a Freedom of Information Act request, we obtained the video above, which shows otherwise. The grainy footage shows a canoe and a party boat colliding on a river in a remote part of the country —nd no sign of gunfire from the party boat.

“e still don’ know why this happened,”aid one woman who was aboard.

_____

4. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson made a secret two-hour visit to the main American air base in Afghanistan to meet top Afghan officials, including President Ashraf Ghani, above.

That top American officials must sneak into the country after 16 years of war is testimony to the U.S. stalemate with the Taliban. We also looked at the C.I.A.’ expanding role in the fight against them.

Mr. Tillerson later flew to Baghdad for a meeting with the Iraqi prime minister, Haider al-Abadi.

_____

5. The Philippines declared victory after months of warfare against Islamic State-inspired militants in the city of Marawi.

But the group still has a presence nearby, and some locals say it’ only a matter of time before its flag flies again. Some Muslim separatists that have battled militias and government forces for years have allied with the army to fight ISIS.

Defense Secretary Jim Mattis is also in the Philippines this week for meetings with military officials from around the region.

_____

6. On her new NBC morning show, Megyn Kelly attacked Bill O’eilly and their mutual former employer, Fox News, following our report over the weekend that Mr. O’eilly paid a former Fox News legal analyst $32 million to settle sexual harassment allegations.

“hat on earth would justify that amount?”he asked. “hat awfulness went on?”

A Times interview with Mr. O’eilly about the claims got heated. Our podcast has the audio.

Separately, New York’ attorney general is investigating the Weinstein Company for civil rights violations.

_____

7. Nearly 400 mysterious stone structures have been discovered in the Saudi Arabian desert using Google Earth. Archaeologists believe they were built thousands of years ago by ancestors of modern-day Bedouins on lava fields, known as harrat.

“lying like a bird all over the Harrat from one enigmatic structure to another! How come we passed by these structures without appreciating their design?”aid an amateur archaeologist.

_____

8. It was a startling experimental procedure: Doctors lifted a woman’ uterus above her body to operate on her fetus.

We witnessed it at Texas Children’ Hospital. The 24-week-old fetus had severe spina bifida, a disabling spine defect that the surgery, performed with tiny instruments through slits in the uterus, can mitigate.

The mother, Lexi Royer, and her high-school sweetheart and now husband, Joshuwa, had always wanted children. Her due date is Jan. 14.

_____

9. In other news about innovations, New York City will phase out MetroCards by 2023, 30 years after they replaced tokens. Customers will pay by waving or swiping cellphones and credit or debit cards at the turnstile.

The announcement comes in a disastrous year for the subway system. The trains are such a mess —lagued with delays, malfunctions and even a derailment —hat the governor declared a state of emergency.

_____

10. Finally, for a while this past week, it looked as if we would have a 12th Dodger-Yankee World Series.

That touched off flashbacks for a generation of Brooklyn Dodgers fans, including our sportswriter George Vecsey, who “uffered terribly from 1947 through 1956,”hen the Dodgers were drubbed by the Yankees five times. Above, Jackie Robinson raced toward home plate in the opening game of the 1955 World Series.

Of course, this is 2017, and now the Los Angeles Dodgers will face the Houston Astros, starting tomorrow night.

“ like the way these Astros play. I like it when different teams win the Series,”r. Vecsey writes. “ut if Curtis Granderson gets his chance —earing Carl Furillo’ No. 6 —ell, that might be different.”

Have a great night.

_____

Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.

Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

Tom Brenner/The New York Times | Mike Stocker/South Florida Sun-Sentinel, via Associated Press | Pool photo by Alex Brandon | Romeo Ranoco/Reuters | Charles Sykes/Invision, via Associated Press | Grant Scroggie | Bétrice de Gé for The New York Times | Alex Wroblewski for The New York Times | Meyer Liebowitz/The New York Times | Surveillance footage from 2012, published for the first time, shows four civilians being killed during a drug operation. Mattathias Schwartz, a journalist working with ProPublica, narrates as boats collide and gunfire erupts. | By NATALIE RENEAU and MATTATHIAS SCHWARTZ 

Document NYTFEED020171023edan00899



World; Asia Pacific
As Mattis Arrives in Philippines, Mop-Up in Marawi Is Declared Over

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
576 words
23 October 2017
10:56
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA —he Philippines on Monday declared an end to months of fighting against Islamic State-inspired militants in the southern city of Marawi, saying that the last “tragglers”ad been killed in a firefight with the army.

The announcement came on the same day that the American defense secretary, Jim Mattis, arrived in the Philippines for an annual meeting of defense ministers in the region.

Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana of the Philippines said more than 40 militants, including at least five foreigners, had been killed when Philippine soldiers stormed a building in Marawi where they were holed up. Forty-two bodies were recovered, said Mr. Lorenzana, who called the militants “he last group of stragglers”n the monthslong siege.

“e now announce the termination of all combat operations in Marawi,”r. Lorenzana said at the Clark Freeport Zone, north of Manila, formerly a sprawling American military base.

Mr. Mattis told reporters before his arrival on Monday that the Philippines had delivered a “ery necessary message to the terrorists”n Marawi. Mr. Mattis and the other defense chiefs were expected to discuss Islamist militancy and other issues affecting the region, including North Korea’ nuclear pursuits and territorial disputes in the South China Sea.

Mr. Lorenzana’ announcement came 154 days after militants led by Isnilon Hapilon, whose Abu Sayyaf group is affiliated with the Islamic State, sacked the southern city of 200,000, burning homes, killing Christians and prompting most residents to flee.

The fighting was set off on May 23, when the Philippine military moved to arrest Mr. Hapilon and was surprised by a huge rebel force that had stockpiled large numbers of weapons.

Since then, much of the city has been devastated as the military, with intelligence support from the United States and Australia, fought to reclaim it. At least 1,000 people have been killed, most of them militants.

President Rodrigo Duterte said last week that Marawi had been “iberated,” though officials later clarified that there were still fighters in the city. Mr. Hapilon was killed last week, as were the last of the Maute brothers, who led a militant group allied with Mr. Hapilon’, and Mahmud Ahmad, a Malaysian who the authorities described as a key financier for the militants and a link to the Islamic State in Syria.

Mr. Lorenzana said the military had crushed the “ost serious attempt to export violent extremism and radicalism”o the southern Philippines.

“hile we submit that these tactical and strategic gains will not annihilate the ideology completely, we declare that this achievement is a clear manifestation of how our regional cooperation can lead to a decisive advance against the proliferation of terrorism in this part of the world,”e said.

* Philippines Calls City ‘iberated,’onths After \b ISIS\b0  Allies Seized It

* Philippines Says It Killed \b ISIS\b0 -Linked Leader in Push to Reclaim City

* In City of Ruins, Philippines’attle Against \b ISIS\b0  Rages On

The southern Philippine city of Marawi on Monday. The government called the city “iberated”ast week, and on Monday, the final militant holdouts were said to have been killed. | Romeo Ranoco/Reuters | Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana, left, said Monday that the “ast group of stragglers”n Marawi had been killed in a firefight with the military. At right is Gen. Eduardo Añ, the head of the Philippine armed forces. | Bullit Marquez/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020171023edan00235



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Tillerson Urges Europe to Avoid Iranian Markets

By GARDINER HARRIS 
901 words
23 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

RIYADH, Saudi Arabia -- Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson warned Europeans on Sunday not to invest in certain Iranian businesses as the Trump administration considers walking away from the Iran nuclear deal and reimposing sanctions against Iran.

Speaking during a visit to Saudi Arabia, Mr. Tillerson said, ''Both of our countries believe that those who conduct business with the Iranian Revolutionary Guard, any of their entities -- European companies or other companies around the globe -- really do so at great risk.'' Mr. Tillerson appeared at a brief news conference in Riyadh, the Saudi capital, with the Saudi foreign minister, Adel al-Jubeir.

The Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps maintains monopoly control over large sectors of Iran's economy.

Mr. Tillerson's remarks were the administration's most pointed warning to date as the Trump administration tries to persuade its European allies to support an effort to reopen the nuclear accord to make it tougher.

European leaders and diplomats from Germany, Britain, France and the European Union have repeatedly insisted that the nuclear deal is working, that Iran is complying with the accord and that no renegotiation is possible. Russia and China, which also signed the agreement, have evinced no interest in a renegotiation. And Iran's foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, has warned that Iran would insist on new concessions, such as a return of its nuclear fuel, in any new agreement.

The quiet struggle between the Trump administration and its most important European allies has been the focus of much of the jockeying after President Trump decided this month not to certify that Iran was complying with all the terms of the agreement. That kicked to Congress the decision about whether to reimpose sanctions and abandon the accord.

Allies of the administration have argued that should Congress decide to reimpose sanctions on Iran, European companies would have little choice but to comply since they would not want to risk being shut out of the $19 trillion American market in favor of Iran's $400 billion one.

With the Europeans on board, Iran would feel the sting of significant sanctions even if Russia and China did not join in. Without the Europeans, however, Iran would feel few effects from sanctions by the United States -- the two countries have little trade -- while potentially being able to pursue nuclear weapons with the nuclear accord ended.

European diplomats have said they would defend their companies against such sanctions, potentially setting up an epic battle between close allies and two of the largest commercial markets on the planet.

Mr. Tillerson's warning, which came as he stood beside the top diplomat of Saudi Arabia -- a fierce foe of Iran -- raised the rhetorical stakes in the looming battle.

''And we are hoping,'' the secretary said, ''that European companies, countries, and others around the world will join the U.S. as we put in place a sanctions structure to prohibit certain activities of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard that foment instability in the region and create destruction in the region, both in terms of their involvement in Yemen but their involvement in Syria as well.''

Mr. Tillerson was in Saudi Arabia in part to encourage a nascent reconciliation between the Saudis and Iraqis as the military struggle against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria nears an end with the recent recapture of Mosul, Iraq, and Raqqa, Syria.

Over the weekend, Saudi companies participated for the first time in 27 years in an international business fair held in Baghdad. Regular commercial direct flights between Riyadh and Baghdad began this year for the first time in many years.

Iraq's prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, attended an inaugural Saudi Arabia-Iraq Coordination Council Meeting. Presided over by King Salman, the meeting was seen as an important effort to help Iraq as it tries to recover from the catastrophic damage wrought during the war. The United States has long been pushing Saudi Arabia and other Sunni countries to embrace Iraq even as Iran's influence in the country has grown.

Mr. Tillerson said bluntly that Iranian-backed militias and groups that had helped in the fight against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, needed to disband, join the Iraqi Army or leave the country. ''Iranian militias that are in Iraq, now that the fight against Daesh and ISIS is coming to a close, those militias need to go home,'' he said, using an Arabic acronym for the Islamic State.

The Americans have warned Saudi Arabia and other Sunni states that unless they invest in Iraq, Iranian influence in the battered country will only grow.

''I think as Iraq looks towards the future,'' Mr. Tillerson said, ''we know that they want a secure, stable economy. They want the capacity to meet the needs of all their citizens. And in particular, they want to develop the governmental capacities to resist any outside influence.''

Mr. Tillerson was also in the region to seek a resolution to a bitter standoff between Qatar and four Arab nations that has threatened a host of American military and diplomatic priorities. But he made little progress.

''There's not a strong indication that the parties are ready to talk yet,'' Mr. Tillerson said at a separate news conference in Doha, Qatar's capital. ''So we cannot force talks on parties that are not ready to talk.''

Document NYTF000020171023edan0005m



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Loses More Ground in Syria as U.S.-Backed Fighters Capture Largest Oil Field

By ANNE BARNARD; Reporting was contributed by an employee of The New York Times in Damascus. 
926 words
23 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- United States-backed militia fighters seized Syria's largest oil field from the Islamic State on Sunday, according to the militia, narrowly beating pro-government forces to an area critical to the war-torn country's economy.

Although it is unclear what the capacity of the oil field is today, after years of airstrikes by the coalition on the Islamic State's makeshift oil operations, its capture is a major blow to the militant group, which is losing both territory and sources of revenue.

The militants were driven last week from the Syrian city of Raqqa, once the de facto capital of their self-declared caliphate, and are now struggling to hold onto their last significant territory in Syria, mostly in the neighboring province of Deir al-Zour along the Iraqi border.

Islamic State fighters are being squeezed between two fronts there, with two rival international coalitions advancing on them from different directions: the Syrian government, backed by Russia and Iran; and the American-backed group, called the Syrian Democratic Forces, which took the oil field.

Those two groups are racing to take over strategic territory as the Islamic State loses ground, to better position themselves in the next chapter of Syria's multilayered war.

Conflicts remain in Syria -- and will continue even if the Islamic State is defeated -- between Mr. Assad's government and an array of mostly Arab rebels, as well as Kurdish groups that have carved out a zone of relative autonomy in northeastern Syria during the war.

The Omar oil field that was seized on Sunday is a major prize in that competition. Local witnesses, as well as conflict monitoring groups, said that pro-government forces had been within a few miles of the oil field but retreated after heavy attacks by the Islamic State.

Now that the Syrian Democratic Forces has seized the oil field, it could find itself facing pro-government forces across a front line, increasing the risk of a clash between them or between their international backers. The American-backed coalition and the Russia-Iran coalition have previously accused each another of firing on their proxy forces in the area.

Pro-government news outlets denied that the S.D.F. had taken control of the oil field, and said fighting was continuing. In the past, they have accused the United States of using the Islamic State as a de facto ally against its enemies -- an accusation also leveled against the government when the Islamic State has attacked rival opposition fighters.

It is unclear how long the S.D.F. -- a Kurdish-led group that has managed in recent months to attract a more diverse coalition, including Arabs and Assyrians -- can maintain control over its areas. The Trump administration does not appear to have a plan to reconstruct the areas or defend them for long after the battle against Islamic State ends. Without United States air support for the rebels, the Syrian government is likely to retake the territory.

The government, led by President Bashar al-Assad, controls around 60 percent of the country and has vowed to retake the rest of it.

Still, a Kurdish official, reached by phone in Qamishli, a Kurdish-controlled city in the northeast, was ecstatic. Speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss politics, he noted that the S.D.F. now controls Syria's largest hydroelectric dams and oil fields as well as sprawling gas fields and agricultural lands.

That, he said, could give Kurds and their allies leverage to get a seat at the table in any future peace talks. Up to now, they have not been recognized as a party to the long-stymied talks held in Geneva between the Syrian government and a coalition recognized by the United States and its allies as the sole representative of the Syrian opposition.

The capture of the Omar oil field could also be an economic boon for the area controlled by the S.D.F. Fuel already sells in its territories at a fraction of the cost as in government-held areas. Now, the Kurdish official said, the local administration could sell the oil not only in its own territory, but also in other areas that Mr. Assad does not control, enlarging its economic base.

A member of an Arab tribe who fled his home in the eastern Syrian city of Mayadeen this month when fighting intensified between the Islamic State and government forces there, and who requested anonymity to avoid reprisals, said he hoped the S.D.F. and Kurds would be more equitable with the reserves than the Syrian government had been.

The man, Riad, a schoolteacher, said the government had given local Sunni Arab tribe members like himself mainly low-level jobs, saving well-paid ones for government cronies and leaving locals to deal with the environmental problems from the industry.

He said that pro-government forces had looted his city when they retook it from the Islamic State. Although he said he did not completely trust the Kurds, he said that at least the S.D.F. had some local tribesmen among its fighters, so the area could get some benefits.

An oil field in Syria controlled by the Syrian Democratic Forces. The Kurdish-led group also includes Arabs and Assyrians. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HUSSEIN MALLA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020171023edan0005h



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Fighters Are Not Flooding Back Home to Wreak Havoc as Feared

By ERIC SCHMITT; Rukmini Callimachi contributed reporting from New York. 
1,382 words
23 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

THE HAGUE -- As recently as a year ago, United States and other Western counterterrorism officials feared that a major surge of Islamic State fighters would return home to Europe and North Africa to commit mayhem after being driven out of their strongholds in Mosul, Iraq, and Raqqa, Syria.

Now, those cities have fallen to American-backed forces, but the number of combat-hardened returnees has been much smaller than anticipated, if still worrisome, counterterrorism officials say. That is in part because the Trump administration intensified its focus on preventing fighters from seeping out of those cities, and more militants fought to the death than expected. Hundreds also surrendered in Raqqa, and some probably escaped to new battlegrounds in Libya or the Philippines.

''We're not seeing a lot of flow out of the core caliphate because most of those people are dead now,'' Lt. Gen. Kenneth F. McKenzie Jr., the director of the Pentagon's Joint Staff, said last week. ''Some of them are going to go to ground.''

Some 40,000 fighters from more than 120 countries poured into the battles in Syria and Iraq over the past four years, American officials say. Of the more than 5,000 Europeans who joined those ranks, as many as 1,500 have returned home, including many women and children, and most of the rest are dead or still fighting, according to Gilles de Kerchove, the European Union's top counterterrorism official.

To be sure, the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, still poses a threat to Western countries, perhaps chiefly in the form of militants who are inspired or enabled by the group to attack at home, as evidenced by the recent attacks in Britain and Barcelona, officials say.

But a combination of factors has suppressed the flow of militants returning from war zones. Many died after allied and local forces cut off most escape routes from Raqqa and Mosul. Since the terrorist attacks in Paris in 2015 and Brussels last year, European nations have tightened border security and increased surveillance. Others are believed to be bottled up in third countries like Turkey.

''I've been saying for a long time that there won't be a 'flood' of returnees, rather a steady trickle, and that's what we are seeing,'' said Peter Neumann, director of the International Center for the Study for Radicalization at King's College London. ''Many of them are stuck in the Turkish border areas, where they are contemplating their next move.''

As it becomes harder for the Islamic State to plan attacks from Iraq and Syria, some plotters may have also moved to the Philippines or to Libya. The bomber who killed 22 people at a pop concert in Manchester, England, in May had met in Libya with members of an Islamic State unit linked to the Paris attacks, according to current and retired intelligence officials.

''We're worried as the campaign in eastern Syria and Iraq winds down, we'll continue to see fighters move into'' Libya and northern Africa, Mike Pompeo, the C.I.A. director, said at a security conference at the University of Texas this month.

Western counterterrorism and intelligence officials warn that even if the volume of fighters returning to the West has so far been relatively small, tracking them remains essential to preventing attacks.

''It only takes one or two fighters to slip through the cracks back to Europe -- armed with militant knowledge or even instructions by their handlers -- to wreak havoc and bring ISIS back to the TV screens,'' said Laith Alkhouri, a director at Flashpoint, a business risk intelligence company in New York that tracks militant threats and cyberthreats.

That cold reality is pressuring European politicians and policymakers to erect or strengthen the legal frameworks and institutions needed to identify, arrest, prosecute and imprison foreign fighters before they can build new networks or join existing ones, wherever they end up.

After much criticism prompted by the Paris and Brussels attacks that European intelligence and law enforcement agencies were not cooperating with each other, those organizations have made significant improvements -- with considerable United States help -- in identifying and tracking fighters who have returned, American and European officials say.

As for the attackers in France and Belgium, ''that cell is largely gone, but there are still pieces to be found,'' Manuel Navarrete, chief of the European Counterterrorism Center, said in an interview here at the headquarters of Europol, an intelligence-sharing arm of the European Union.

European intelligence services, along with Interpol, have created major new databases of suspected foreign fighters; European spy agencies and Europol have also created counterterrorism hubs in the Netherlands for sharing information and mapping out strategy.

And a classified American military program in Jordan called Operation Gallant Phoenix is scooping up data collected in commando raids in Syria and Iraq and funneling it to law enforcement agencies in Europe and Southeast Asia. ''That's our intelligence- and information-sharing architecture,'' Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in describing the program to Congress in June.

Despite these advances, homegrown or inspired jihadists who have never traveled to war zones remain perhaps the largest threat.

''The continuing efforts of ISIL followers in Europe to conduct attacks demonstrate the potential for ISIL to recruit and motivate followers in Europe,'' said a United Nations report in August. ''Those attacks involved both individuals who were prevented from traveling to the conflict zones and individuals who had no prior intention to travel.''

Several American and European officials also voiced concern about Turkey, a country that has the trappings of a modern state but where the Islamic State has been allowed to operate almost unchecked, until recently.

In an aborted plot in Australia this summer, parts of a roadside bomb were sent through international air cargo from Turkey through Islamic State operatives in Syria to one of the suspects in Australia. The suspects planned to assemble the explosive device into a bomb to be placed on the plane, but the plot was disrupted.

Even as Turkish authorities have increased security along their border with Syria, the center of gravity of foreign fighters is shifting to Turkish cities like Sanliurfa and Gaziantep, where the Islamic State has carried out executions of Syrian activists and journalists with what appears to be impunity.

If the Islamic State fighters regroup in Turkey, they can return in small groups to Europe or elsewhere via the old refugee route, which is less fluid than it was but still penetrable. A Belgian was recently arrested in Turkey, suspected of plotting a terrorist attack there, after spending years in Syria.

Some fighters leaving conflict zones seem to have been briefed in detail on how to act when they encountered government authorities, in an apparent attempt to ensure that they would not be deported to countries where they may be arrested, the United Nations report noted. That might indicate a deliberate attempt by Islamic State leaders to establish a presence in different regions, the report concluded.

The report said people returning from these conflict zones fell into three broad categories: First, those who were disenchanted by their experiences in Iraq or Syria and were good candidates to be reintegrated into society.

Second, a much smaller group who return intending to conduct terrorist attacks. And third, individuals who have cut ties with the Islamic State and are disillusioned by the organization, but who remain radicalized and are ready to join another terrorist group should the opportunity arise.

''It is an incredibly difficult adversary,'' Mr. Pompeo said at a security conference in Washington last week. ''They still have the capacity to control and influence citizens all around the world.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Displaced men suspected of being members of the Islamic State were searched and washed, above, recently at a security screening center near Kirkuk, Iraq. At left, people were escorted to safety during an ISIS-linked attack on a concert in Manchester, England, in May. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; DAVE THOMPSON/GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020171023edan00046



Briefing
Catalonia, John Kelly, Donald Trump: Your Weekend Briefing

By MAYA SALAM and LANCE BOOTH 
1,527 words
22 October 2017
12:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Here are the week’ top stories, and a look ahead.

1. Two very different, very intense debates are dominating the news.

First, how did President Trump’ condolence call to the widow of Sgt. La David Johnson go so far off the rails? Above, his coffin. The administration has been swept up into a feud that pits Mr. Trump and his chief of staff, John Kelly, against Frederica Wilson, a Democratic congresswoman who sharply criticized the call as insensitive.

The bitter exchanges raised new questions about exactly how Sergeant Johnson died. The Pentagon and, unusually, the F.B.I. are investigating the conflicting accounts surrounding the Oct. 4 ambush in Niger that claimed his life, along with those of three other Americans and four Nigerien soldiers.

____

2. The second sweeping phenomenon: the groundswell over sexual harassment, which has spread far beyond Hollywood.

The undoing of Harvey Weinstein underscored the increasing gravity of women’ accusations. Big-name actresses like the Oscar winner Lupita Nyong’, above, have come forward with long-withheld accounts of his behavior. “ow that we are speaking, let us never shut up about this kind of thing,”he writes in an Op-Ed.

Actresses like Jennifer Lawrence and Reese Witherspoon discussed other perpetrators, and hundreds of thousands of women posted #MeToo messages.

In California’ capital, more than 140 women —ncluding legislators and lobbyists —enounced pervasive sexual misconduct in the legislature. France, after a #MeToo-style outburst, is considering fines for catcalls.

And The Times reported a previously undisclosed sixth settlement over sexual harassment allegations against Bill O’eilly, the former Fox News host. A month after the $32 million deal in January, Fox extended his contract.

____

3. Meanwhile, the wheels of government are turning, if slowly. Republicans, still striving for a single marquee legislative achievement in the Trump presidency, narrowly secured Senate approval for a budget blueprint paving the way for a $1.5 trillion tax cut.

The House takes it up this week, shadowed by news from the Treasury Department: the largest annual budget deficit in four years.

Republicans aim to pass the tax bill by Christmas, but few on or off Capitol Hill have seen even a draft. Here are the mechanics of the effort.

____

4. Senator Mitch McConnell and President Trump made a show of togetherness, moving to fill scores of federal court vacancies with conservatives. Above, Mr. McConnell, center left, with Senator Cory Gardner of Colorado.

On health care, Mr. Trump walked back his endorsement of a bipartisan effort to save insurance subsidies. Conversely, the I.R.S. announced a move that would bolster Obamacare: It will enforce the individual mandate, declining 2017 tax returns that do not disclose the filer’ health insurance status.

At the same time, the E.P.A. has been moving to ease restrictions on toxic chemicals, under the direction of a former industry lobbyist.

____

5. Without speaking President Trump’ name, two former presidents, George W. Bush and Barack Obama, in separate speeches implicitly condemned the president and the powers that thrust him into office. “ullying and prejudice in our public life sets a national tone, provides permission for cruelty and bigotry and compromises the moral education of children,”r. Bush said.

And George Soros, the billionaire hedge fund manager and a major Democratic donor, revealed that he had transferred $18 billion to his Open Society Foundations. A lightning rod for conservative critics, he is now squarely in the middle of the social and political debates convulsing the country.

____

6. Disaster recovery continues: A month after Hurricane Maria, 80 percent of Puerto Rico remains without electricity. “e need trucks, we need poles, we need crews, we need lines, we need more people,”aid a local utility employee.

In Northern California, some businesses are reopening as investigators dig through debris to determine what set off the region’ staggering outbreak of wildfires, whose toll includes 40 lives and almost 8,000 structures. The findings will help decide who pays for damages that are estimated to have surpassed $1 billion.

The mass shooting in Las Vegas continues to mystify investigators. Using forensic analysis, we mapped 30 videos on a timeline to reconstruct the attack minute by minute, above, drawing perhaps the most complete picture to date of what happened when Stephen Paddock rained an estimated 900 rounds onto concertgoers.

____

7. Abroad, Spain ’ prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, in an unexpectedly forceful move, said he would seek the removal of Catalonia’ leader, Carles Puigdemont, to halt the region’ secessionist movement.

The question of independence is particularly complex in Barcelona, which is divided between its identity as a global city and as Catalonia’ capital.

_____

8. In the Middle East, our photographer accompanied some of the U.S.-backed forces that drove the Islamic State from its de facto capital, Raqqa, Syria. That capped the group’ ouster from most of Syria and Iraq, but at the cost of unfathomable destruction. Above, fighters in Raqqa.

And counterterrorism officials say \b ISIS\b0  could morph into a new, lethal incarnation.

To the west, the Iraqi military vanquished Kurdish forces to reclaim Kirkuk, checking the Kurds’ove toward independence. The U.S., despite its long reliance on the Kurds in the fight against ISIS, sat by,  lining up with Iran’ priorities.

____

9. While world attention has been on North Korea’ nuclear program, the country has nurtured a secretive hard-currency trade that nets $1 billion annually, and built a cyberwar program capable of stealing millions and unleashing global havoc.

Elsewhere on the world stage, Nikki Haley, President Trump’ U.N. ambassador, made strident denunciations of Iran and urged tougher action by the Security Council against its “utlaw behavior.”

(She also received something of a tutorial on statecraft at a panel discussion with the former secretaries of state Condoleezza Rice and Madeleine Albright.)

____

10. In Africa, some are referring to the twin truck bombings in Mogadishu that killed more than 270 people as Somalia’ 9/11.

Kenyans are on edge as the redo of their presidential election approaches on Thursday. The warring between parties led an official to say that the repeat might not be credible, either.

In West Africa, a health implication resulting from the 2013-16 Ebola outbreak is shocking doctors: Many survivors have cataracts, even children as young as 5. Above, a child preparing to undergo eye surgery in Sierra Leone.

____

11. President Xi Jinping’ dominance in China has been on display at the Communist Party congress, which culminates this week with a reshuffle of the powerful Politburo.

Here are the five takeaways from Mr. Xi’ marathon, 205-minute opening speech, which projected military and economic power.

And the extraordinary security clampdown on Beijing for the congress further emphasized his message: Nothing can stand in my way.

____

12. The Houston Astros are back. They face the Dodgers in L.A. on Tuesday for Game 1 of the World Series.

The Yankees lost the chance Saturday night, after the Astros —elebrating above —eld them to three hits and no runs to win the American League Championship Series.

Lance McCullers Jr. spun curve after curve —4 in a row to end the game.

_____

13. Finally, ready for a bit of escapism? For those who stream, here are 11 underappreciated TV shows now on Hulu. For those who’ rather scream, “he Walking Dead”eturns tonight for Season 8. Here’ a look back at where the horror series left off.

For a more erudite diversion, curl up with George Saunders’ experimental first novel, “Lincoln in the Bardo,”hich just won the Man Booker Prize, or this year’ T Magazine Greats issue. Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, above, a defining voice on race and gender for the digital age, is featured.

Have a great week.

_____

Your Weekend Briefing is published Sundays at 6 a.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Evening Briefing, weeknights at 6 p.m. Eastern.

Want to look back? You can browse past Morning and Evening Briefings.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

* John Kelly, Puerto Rico, Catalonia: Your Evening Briefing

Joe Raedle/Getty Images | Jesse Dittmar for The New York Times | Pablo Martinez Monsivais/Associated Press | Al Drago for The New York Times | Seth Wenig/Associated Press | Jack Taylor/Getty Images | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | Ed Jones/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Jane Hahn for The New York Times | Kevin Frayer/Getty Images | Ben Solomon for The New York Times | Carrie Mae Weems. Styled by Malina Joseph Gilchrist | The shots began at 10:05. Twelve bursts of gunfire later, the police broke down Stephen Paddock’ door at the Mandalay Bay. The Times mapped 30 videos to draw perhaps the most complete picture to date of what happened. | By MALACHY BROWNE, DREW JORDAN, NICOLE FINEMAN and CHRIS CIRILLO 

Document NYTFEED020171022edam001e3



TGreats; SECTM2
Joshua Cohen

681 words
22 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
122
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Joshua Cohen

Author of ''Moving Kings''

Think about a conversation you'd only have with family. The doors are shut. The windows are down. You can get away with anything. You can goad and prick, you can accuse and insult, not just because a high fence separates you from the neighbors, but also because: Your family will forgive you. There's food on your plate and drink in your glass; you'll always have a seat at the table.

Now, think about a talk you might have with strangers. Out in the street. Among other strangers. In broad daylight. Suddenly, you're worried. Suddenly, you have to explain yourself. You have nothing to rely on. No mutual history, or not much. No mutual culture, or not much. All you have in common is a language, whose words seem to mean different things to different people, who all speak them with different accents that seem to signify different experiences of class and education and ethnicity and race -- though any judgments you wind up making, you'll have to ignore, or else accept as manifestations of your own prejudice.

In America, now more than ever, I'm convinced that we Jews have to hold our family conversations out in the open; we have to say the private things that might publicly shame; the narrow things that might widely offend; and we have to do all this not just in our school and work existences, but also on social media -- which isn't quite a safe space, let alone a warm kitchen wafting with unconditional love.

Still, our table talk must aspire to become our national talk; all of our dirty laundry, and dirty manners, must be aired. Take it from a writer: Broadcasting your parochial disputes relieves psychic pressures and disarms your enemies by forcing them to engage you as an individual. Converting shame into strength upholds the primacy of the self while vanquishing all haters.

Here is how it's done: In my opinion, the great Jewish Question in America today is whether Jared Kushner should be excommunicated -- and whether Ivanka Trump should be too. Of course, every family's table since Eden has had its share of bad apples (Sheldon Adelson), and every family member has, or should have, a different idea of who's the worst (Netanyahu). For example, I suspect that my parents, at this moment, are finding themselves far fonder of my brother and sister.

Jews in America are always being called upon to declare their loyalties -- which of our identifiers do we put before the hyphen, and which do we put after: ''Jewish'' or ''American''? This recurrent query -- which Jews in America ask themselves with all the breeziness of an online test, and anti-Semites in America ask with all the gravity of an Ellis Island examination -- is inevitable but pointless. Jews are more secure in contemporary America than they have been in any other country in Jewish history. This is because America is a country in which the citizens define the ideologies, not the other way around. This, ultimately, is what the fundamentalists hate: America's constitutive capacity for change, which they regard as the evil face of self-determination. Nazis, Klansmen, ISIS -- all fundamentalists resent the mutability of human life and the fact that, in a technologized world, no manner of racial or ethnic or religious or cultural purity can ever be guaranteed, as if an ''inalienable'' right.

The country I dream of is a place in which all humans are free to take their indoor voices out into the streets, both as proud members of families -- however myriad, however defined -- and as their own liberated individual selves. America has been this country only rarely; Israel has been this country almost never. The one country I've ever lived in that's consistently fulfilled this dream has been the Novel.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Cohen in the Negev, in southern Israel, around 1993. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOSHUA COHEN; JOSHUA SCOTT) 

Document NYTF000020171022edam0009n



World; Middle East
Iraqi Forces Overpower Kurds, but Public Relations Battle Rages

By DAVID ZUCCHINO 
1,199 words
22 October 2017
07:16
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD —ilitary operations in Iraq this past week were one-sided, with Iraqi government forces using superior numbers and firepower to reclaim disputed areas that had been controlled by separatist Iraqi Kurds since 2014.

But in the public relations war, the two American allies are vying on a more level battlefield to win international support and sympathy just days after Iraq drove Kurdish fighters from almost all of the contested areas.

The Kurds and Baghdad traded accusations after a battle on Friday in which Iraqi government forces reclaimed the last Kurdish-held area in oil-rich Kirkuk Province.

The two sides blamed each another for firing the first shots, and for using weapons supplied by the American-led coalition that were intended for use against Islamic State militants. Kurdish fighters known as pesh merga ultimately withdrew from the town of Altun Kupri and retreated into the Kurdish autonomous region, Iraq’ military said.

And the two sides —hich, backed by American airstrikes and artillery, have driven Islamic State militants from most of Iraq —ave traded broader charges as well.

Massoud Barzani, president of the Kurdish regional government, accused Baghdad late Friday of imposing “ blockade and collective punishment”n Kurds. The military command in Baghdad responded on Saturday by saying that the Kurdish leadership had engaged in “xaggerations and lies.”

The United States has called on both sides to coordinate its troop movements in order to prevent further clashes. “e urge the central government to calm the situation by limiting federal forces’ovements in disputed areas to only those coordinated with the Kurdistan Regional Government,”Heather Nauert, a State Department spokeswoman, said in a statement.

Last Monday, Baghdad launched a military operation in areas that had been seized by Kurdish forces in 2014 after Iraqi troops fled an Islamic State assault. The move was seen as retaliation for the Kurds’ vote last month, over the objections of Baghdad and the United States, to seek independence from Iraq.

Kurdish forces withdrew without a fight from the city of Kirkuk and other areas after members of a Kurdish faction opposed to Mr. Barzani negotiated an agreement with government officials. Analysts said that a prominent Iranian military commander, Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, helped broker the deal.

Iraqi Shiite militias, armed by Iran and advised by General Suleimani, played an important role in the government operation.

The United States said it had not taken sides in the conflict, but it did not object to or interfere with the Iraqi government operation. American troops were in the area, but had no role in the conflict, the coalition said.

Analysts said Washington was expressing its displeasure that Mr. Barzani had spurned American proposals to cancel the independence vote and enter negotiations with Baghdad. American officials told Mr. Barzani after the vote that he had forfeited the good will of the United States, according to a senior official who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the matter publicly.

Kurdish leaders have criticized the United States, saying Washington abandoned the Kurds after some 1,700 pesh merga died fighting the Islamic State. Mr. Barzani’ communications director, Vahal Ali, has accused the United States of “iving Iraq to Iran as a present.”

“he deafening silence from the international community has emboldened Iraq and neighboring countries to attack Kurdistan,”he Kurdish regional government said in a statement. The week’ events, it said, “onfirmed Kurds’egitimate fears about our future in this country.”

Mr. Barzani urged Kurds in the United States and Europe to mount peaceful demonstrations in support of Iraqi Kurdistan. On Saturday, Iraq’ foreign ministry said demonstrators in Erbil had attacked and damaged the Iranian consulate there.

The State Department called on both sides to “ngage in dialogue”n the disputed areas. “he reassertion of federal authority over disputed areas in no way changes their status —hey remain disputed until their status is resolved in accordance with the Iraqi Constitution,”t said.

The Iraqi military command said Saturday that pesh merga fighters in Altun Kupri had fired a German-supplied missile that struck an American-supplied Abrams tank, killing two Iraqi soldiers. The command denied Kurdish claims that the pesh merga had destroyed 10 Humvees and two Abrams tanks. A coalition spokesman said he could not confirm the battlefield reports.

Local hospitals said that five government militia fighters were also killed in the battle. Three civilians, including a child, were killed as well, they said. Six pesh merga fighters were killed, said Kamal Karkokly, a senior pesh merga commander.

Elsewhere, a leader of the Kurdish faction in Kirkuk, Aras Sheikh Jangi, said pesh merga intelligence officers were working alongside the federal and local police in the disputed city, home to Kurds, Arabs and Turkmens. In a statement on Saturday, Mr. Jangi said all Shiite militias had left the city two days ago.

Shiite militias dominate the so-called popular mobilization forces incorporated into the Iraqi Army. They have been accused of instigating attacks against Kurdish civilians in the disputed areas.

The United Nations said Thursday it had received reports that 150 Kurdish homes  in the city of Tuz Khurmatu had been burned by armed groups. After pesh merga fighters withdrew last Monday, the city came under the control of Shiite Turkmen fighters who are part of the popular mobilization forces.

Lise Grande, humanitarian coordinator for the United Nations mission in Iraq, said more than 30,000 civilians had fled Tuz Khurmatu.

In all, the United Nations said, 100,000 civilians have fled from the contested areas, including tens of thousands who left the city of Kirkuk after Monday’ operation, some of whom have returned. Most of those who fled were believed to be Kurdish supporters of Mr. Barzani.

In Baghdad and in Erbil, the capital of the Kurdish region, comments by local residents reflected the enmity between the two sides.

“ell done, Abadi,”aid Firas Abbas, 42, a businessman in Baghdad, referring to Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi. “aw and order has to be imposed in all provinces.”

In Erbil, Ahmed Sharif, 53, a retiree, blamed the United States for “n international conspiracy”gainst the Kurds, who he said had been America’ best friend in the region. “he only beneficiary in this conspiracy is Iran,”e said.

Margaret Coker contributed reporting from London, Falih Hassan and Omar al-Jawoshy from Baghdad and Muhammed Nashat from Erbil, Iraq.

* With Loss of Its Caliphate, \b ISIS\b0  May Return to Guerrilla Roots

* Struggle Over Kirkuk Puts the U.S. and Iran on the Same Side

* Captured \b ISIS\b0  Fighters’efrain: ‘ Was Only a Cook’

* Catalans and Kurds Discover the Hard Truth About Secession

The flag of the Kurdish autonomous region was taken down in Kirkuk last week as Iraqi forces gained control of the city. | Ahmad Al-Rubaye/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Kurdish forces withdrew from the town of Altun Kupri on Friday. | Khalid Mohammed/Associated Press | People who fled Hawija in 2014 returned there last week after the town was retaken by Iraqi forces. | Ahmad Al-Rubaye/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171022edam0012x



Foreign Desk; SECTA
As Role of  ISIS  in Syria Dissipates, Other Conflicts Take the Stage

By ANNE BARNARD and HWAIDA SAAD; Nada Homsi contributed reporting from Beirut, and Helene Cooper from Washington. 
1,489 words
20 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- American-backed forces have barely begun to clear the land mines from Raqqa after pushing the Islamic State from the city, the de facto capital of its self-declared caliphate.

But the militants' defeat there is already setting the stage for a new round of conflict and instability in Syria's long civil war.

Fleeing jihadists are already regrouping in remote areas, rearming with the help of desert smugglers. Tensions are brewing over who will ultimately control Raqqa, where American-backed Kurdish and Arab forces declared victory on Tuesday.

And as the Islamic State threat wanes, the Syrian government is expected to return its military attention to the Syrian rebels, intensifying the kind of bombardment that has led to mass civilian casualties, with no sign of a political solution in sight.

To defeat Islamic State, myriad international and Syrian combatants -- many of them sworn enemies -- banded together or put their conflicts on the back burner. Now, even as they close in on Islamic State's last territories near the Iraqi border, their submerged tensions are rising to the surface.

Raqqa was taken by an American-backed militia made up of Syrian Kurds and Arabs. Soon after, celebrating Kurdish fighters raised flags adorned with the face of Abdullah Ocalan, a Kurdish militant leader. Many of Raqqa's Arab residents, who considerMr. Ocalan a terrorist, were appalled. Some are calling the Kurds new occupiers.

Others downplayed the prospect of tensions between Arabs and Kurds. The American-backed militia says it will soon hand formal control of Raqqa to a civilian city council made up of representative local residents.

''We are all on the same ship,'' said Hassan Mohammad Ali, a Raqqa resident involved in rebuilding the local government. Both Arabs and Kurds want ''a democratic, pluralistic Syria,'' he said, and would not try to impose their will on each other.

But the Syrian government has no intention of letting that arrangement stand.

The government of President Bashar al-Assad now controls most of the country, having taken back much of the territory once held by rebel groups who took up arms after the government cracked down on protests in 2011.

Backed by Russia and Iran, Mr. Assad has vowed to recapture all of Syria, including Raqqa and the areas beyond it where the Kurds have established a semiautonomous zone.

It remains unclear how far the United States would go to stop him.

Pentagon officials say that, for now, the American military will continue to defend areas like Raqqa, which American-backed forces reclaimed from the Islamic State. In June, the military shot down two Syrian drones that American officials said were threatening American-backed troops.

That posture has not changed, the officials said, and Syria experts say they expect it to continue for the next few months. What happens after that -- and how willing the United States is to become engaged in a war against the Assad government and its international backers -- is an open question.

''The issue of self-defense will certainly continue as long as the fight against ISIS continues,'' said Andrew J. Tabler, a Syria expert with the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. ''But what goes on after that with the political process, I don't know.''

Trump administration officials acknowledge privately that the military campaign in Syria has by far outstripped the diplomatic campaign, to the point now where there is no real plan for what to do in a post-Islamic State Syria.

That is not for lack of trying by John Kerry, the secretary of state under President Barack Obama who sought a political solution for a post-Islamic State Syria, and Brett H. McGurk, the Trump administration's point man on Syria.

With the Islamic State far from defeated the American-backed coalition is ''not quite ready to take their foot off the gas pedal yet,'' said Eric Robinson, an analyst with the RAND Corporation.

The militant group still controls close to 4,000 square miles of territory on either side of the Iraq-Syria border, harboring an estimated 6,000 to 10,000 fighters.

As its fighters are pushed out of their strongholds, many are going underground, vowing to continue their battle as hit-and-run insurgents. There are growing pockets of them in the eastern desert areas of at least three Syrian provinces, including many hiding in areas under government control, according to fighters and residents of the areas.

But thousands of Islamic State fighters have been allowed to simply hand in their weapons and go free under an odd loophole that has become a trademark of this conflict. Just before the final assault on a militant-controlled town or village, it is not unusual to see lines of buses pulling up, loading hundreds of fighters and their families, and driving them off the battlefield, sometimes to other Islamic State-controlled territory.

Both the Syrian government forces and the American-backed militias have afforded this privilege mainly to Syrian militants, some of whom say they were forced to join the Islamic State, but also to foreigners who came to Syria to wage jihad.

While the practice has truncated battles, saving lives on both sides, it has also had a balloon effect, squeezing fighters out of Raqqa, for instance, and inflating their numbers in Deir al-Zour, a province along the Iraqi border that is now the site of the biggest battle against the Islamic State.

In Raqqa, at least four people, Raqqa residents or aid workers, said they had seen fighters boarding the buses. Two aid workers said at least 15 buses had departed for Deir al-Zour.

Others move on to government-held areas, like the southern province of Sweida. Fleeing Syrian Islamic State fighters are turning themselves in to the government there daily, says Nour al-Shami, a former Sweida resident who lives in exile in Turkey.

But then, he said, many of the fighters then slip away to the caves of province's eastern badlands, and buy weapons from smugglers, who have in some cases bought them from government forces.

Fugitive Islamic State fighters are also gathering near the Palmyra ruins, in the north, that were retaken twice from Islamic State by pro-government forces. One fighter, reached by text message, said he now belongs to a group called Soldiers of the Caliphate that hopes to recruit foreign fighters from Islamic State and rival Qaeda-linked groups to continue the struggle.

The fighter, who gave only a first name, Yehya, said he was with scores of others, mainly foreigners who preferred to fight to the death in Syria than risk arrest by heading home to Central Asia, Europe and other places.

''What choice do they have?'' he said.

Six years of war has left Syria a wreck: whole cities have been laid waste, the economy is devastated, an estimated 100,000 people remain in government detention or disappeared after being arrested. The government is heavily beholden to Iran and Russia, which saved Mr. Assad's rule in exchange for unprecedented influence.

Government warplanes are bombing Idlib Province, where hundreds of thousands of civilians are trapped along with rebel groups and hard-core Qaeda-linked jihadists.

Mr. Assad has made virtually no concessions even to his unarmed, political opponents, whose street protests calling for more rights and an end to corruption started the unrest in 2011. That leaves, as the Syria analyst Peter Harling put it recently, ''minimal prospects of reform, reconciliation or reconstruction, let alone closure.''

Any prospects for a coherent, unified reconstruction are complicated by the fact that the United States and its allies are still refusing to work with Mr. Assad, and the government rejects the presence of any groups that don't work through it.

In Raqqa, international aid groups, considered illegal by the Assad government, are trying to rejuvenate the mostly agricultural economy, telling residents to ''forget the fighting and remember the shovel,'' as one aid worker put it.

Members of the councils set up by the Syrian Democratic Front to rebuild civilian government say they want to prevent the government from returning to power in Raqqa unless there is deep reform that gives them a greater say over their affairs, an unlikely prospect.

''We have no plans to give up Raqqa to anyone, not to the regime, not to anyone,'' said Nazmi Mohammad, a member of the council that is to soon take over the city's governance. ''We are not scared of the regime. The regime is not stronger than Islamic State.''

American-backed forces have largely driven Islamic State fighters from Raqqa, Syria, their de facto capital, above. The question now is who will rule the city next. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171020edak0006i



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Key  ISIS  Operative 'Taken' in Gunfight, Manila Says

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
842 words
20 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA -- A high-level Islamic State operative who funneled money and foreign fighters to the Philippines, helping militants seize territory there, was ''taken'' during a gunfight on Thursday, President Rodrigo Duterte announced.

The operative, Mahmud Ahmad, 39, a Malaysian former university lecturer, helped finance the siege of the southern city of Marawi, which jihadists stormed in May, killing scores of peoples and sending thousands of residents fleeing. After a fierce battle to retake the city, Mr. Duterte on Tuesday declared Marawi liberated.

Mr. Duterte said on Thursday that Mr. Ahmad had been ''taken,'' but did not specify whether that meant he had been captured or killed.

Hours earlier, the head of the armed forces, Gen. Eduardo Añ, said Mr. Ahmad was among 13 militants who died in gun battles that raged late Wednesday and into Thursday morning. Six soldiers were wounded in the fighting, General Añ said. A mother and her teenage daughter who had been taken hostage were rescued, he said.

''One of the rescued hostages revealed that Mahmud was dead and was buried last night,'' the general said.

Officials were not immediately available to reconcile the different accounts.

In public remarks on Thursday, Mr. Duterte portrayed the Islamic State as an existential threat, and defended his decision in May to declare martial law on Mindanao, the southern island that includes Marawi.

''We have to finish this or we go kaput,'' Mr. Duterte said.

He said the police and the military had warned about ''retaliation'' from the Islamic State in the face of their defeat in Marawi.

He said of Mr. Ahmad, ''He was taken this afternoon and that completes the story.''

According to analysts, Mr. Ahmad had acted as a link to the ISIS central command in Syria, helping funnel money and foreign fighters to local militants trying to seize territory in the Philippines.

Mr. Mahmud was also a close associate of Isnilon Hapilon, one of Asia's most-wanted terrorists and the leader of Abu Sayyaf, a terrorist group linked to the Islamic State. Mr. Hapilon was killed in a gunfight with government forces on Monday along with another militant leader, Omarkhayam Maute.

After their deaths, Mr. Ahmad assumed leadership of about 30 militants still fighting government forces in Marawi.

Mr. Ahmad trained at camps run by Al Qaeda in Afghanistan in the 1990s while studying at Islamabad Islamic University in Pakistan. He was a former lecturer of Islamic studies at the University of Malaya in Kuala Lumpur, one of the country's top schools.

Analysts say Mr. Ahmad had helped organize and finance the travel of recruits from Indonesia before the Marawi siege in May to join in the fighting. The Philippine authorities have said that about 30 foreigners took part in the monthslong battle.

According to Philippine military intelligence, Mr. Ahmad also facilitated the travel of at least four Malaysians to join the Islamic State in the Middle East, including in Syria. He arrived on Mindanao, in the Philippines' restive south, in 2014, where he sought out Mr. Hapilon and helped plan the Marawi siege and organize local terrorist cells.

A video released by the military showed him in a meeting with Mr. Hapilon and Mr. Maute as they meticulously planned the siege, which began on May 23. Mr. Ahmad reportedly funneled 30 million Philippine pesos, or about $580,000, to militants for the attack, according to intelligence officials.

Rommel Banlaoi, a terrorism expert who leads the Philippine Institute for Peace, Violence and Terrorism Research, said the funds went to help Mr. Hapilon's group stockpile firearms, weapons and other logistical items for the siege.

''Mahmud, also called Abu Hanadzalah, was being sought by the Malaysian authorities for ties to global terrorists,'' Mr. Banlaoi said. ''He has been identified as a militant recruiter for the I.S.,'' he added, using the initials of the Islamic State.

He said that among the people Mr. Ahmad had helped to go to the Middle East was Ahmad Tarmimi Maliki, who drove a car packed with bombs into an Iraqi police headquarters, killing 25 people in 2014.

While Mr. Ahmad and Mr. Hapilon may have died, there are other militant leaders waiting to emerge, Mr. Banlaoi said.

''I.S. may have lost a very valuable conduit in Mindanao with the reported death of Mahmud,'' he said. ''His death can severely affect financing terrorism in the region. However, threats of attacks from other terror groups remain imminent. It's not yet over.''

More than 200,000 residents are crammed into refugee camps, waiting for the military to declare an official end to the operation.

The battle in Marawi has been financially draining and has tested the abilities of one of the region's most poorly equipped armies. After Mr. Hapilon's death, Mr. Duterte flew there and declared the area ''liberated from terrorist influence.''

Soldiers in Marawi, a southern city in the Philippines that President Rodrigo Duterte declared liberated from militants on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROMEO RANOCO/REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020171020edak00064



Foreign Desk; SECTA
What Does Victory Over  ISIS  Look Like? Hollowed-Out Cities

By MEGAN SPECIA 
1,229 words
20 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The declarations of victory played out across Iraq and Syria: The long campaigns to retake city after city from Islamic State militants had come to an end.

But the hard-won battles left vast destruction in their wake, and the celebrations from atop the rubble of once-grand buildings are ringing hollow for hundreds of thousands of displaced residents.

Iraqis and Syrians return to cities that are ghosts of their former glory, lacking the infrastructure for normal life to begin again. Now they must grapple with how to rebuild.

Raqqa, Syria

The ousting of Islamic State militants this week from Raqqa was filled with symbolism. Raqqa was the de facto capital of the militants' self-declared caliphate, and now it has fallen from their grasp.

But there wasn't much city left to save.

While the full extent of the damage is still being assessed, drone footage and satellite images reveal mile after mile of damaged buildings, rubble-filled streets and destroyed landmarks.

Raqqa was once home to 300,000 people, but tens of thousands fled when the militants solidified control of the city in early 2014 and began staging public executions of those who ran afoul of their strict interpretation of Islam. By the dwindling days of the group's rule, only about 25,000 residents remained.

At least 1,000 civilians were killed in the airstrikes, according to tallies by local activists and international monitors. American officials put the civilian casualties much lower, and say coalition strikes have killed at least 735 civilians in Iraq and Syria since operations against the Islamic State there began in 2014.

Five months of American-led airstrikes left conditions in the city dire, knocking out water and electricity. American officials have promised to help bring back basic services, but the scale of the damage is clear.

When soldiers of the Syrian Democratic Forces, a coalition of rebel militias, raised their yellow flags in one of Raqqa's central junctions this week, all that was left of the buildings that once surrounded it were bombed-out shells.

Mosul, Iraq

Similar scenes played out in Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city.

Backed by American-led coalition airstrikes, Iraq government forces celebrated their recapture of the city in July. But Mosul's recovery is a tale of two cities.

In the eastern portion, somewhere between 80 and 90 percent of the population that fled during initial fighting over the city have already returned to their homes. But nine months of fighting in the west of Mosul, where militants holed up during their final stand, left the area virtually uninhabitable.

From medical centers to centuries-old mosques, major structures were reduced to rubble and whole neighborhoods wiped off the map. Some fell at the hands of militants who demolished infrastructure as the Iraqi military moved in, including the iconic Al Nuri mosque and its leaning minaret, and some were casualties of coalition airstrikes. Before the Islamic State captured the city, Mosul was home to 1.1 million people. United Nations officials estimate that just restoring basic services there could cost more than $1 billion.

Leila Jane Nassif, the United Nations refugee agency's assistant representative in Iraq, said the damage in the western part of the city had left hundreds of thousands of people displaced. It is unclear when they will be able to return.

''It will take time for the infrastructure to be in place and for people to be able to rebuild their lives there with so much housing that has been damaged,'' Ms. Nassif said in a telephone interview.

Falluja, Iraq

Large areas of this city, home to some 300,000 people before the militants seized control, were spared damage from airstrikes. But Islamic State fighters fleeing Falluja when it was retaken last year laid bombs, complicating the rebuilding efforts.

This tactic, Ms. Nassif said, was used by the group in several Iraqi cities once under its control. The bombs, often improvised explosive devices, have delayed the return of displaced residents and caused death and destruction even after the militants were rooted out. American officials warned of the same problem in Raqqa.

''There has been such a large demining effort,'' Ms. Nassif said, ''and it is going to be a major focus in some communities. There are a lot of I.E.D.s that are still present, and people are concerned about returning to their neighborhoods and homes.''

There are other concerns, as well. Ms. Nassif said that some of the displaced residents in Iraq feared there might be clashes between rival groups when they return to the communities they left amid the upheaval.

''They are worried about retribution,'' she said. ''Unfortunately, in some situations, problems that were not faced before the takeover by insurgents have not necessarily been addressed and tensions may still exist.''

Ramadi, Iraq

When Islamic State militants were pushed from Ramadi, a predominantly Sunni Muslim city, it was a ruin. The group had entrenched itself in the city, occupying homes, digging tunnels and laying explosives.

By the time the group was driven out in January 2016, Ramadi, the capital of Anbar Province, had been bombarded by coalition airstrikes for months. And ISIS fighters blew up bridges as they fled.

Ms. Nassif said the scale of the devastation in some formerly occupied cities means recovery will not just involve helping individual families rebuild. There must to be a coordinated plan to restore basic services to those homes.

''If you have to go back and rebuild roads and sewer systems and put in utilities and so on, that is going to take a major effort by the government,'' Ms. Nassif said.

Iraq's government, however, is ill-equipped to deal with the destruction. The United Nations Funding Facility for Stabilization has been helping in Falluja and Ramadi. Its plan to rebuild 30,000 homes began over the summer and will cost at least $70 million, and take 18 months.

Kobani, Syria

This city may offer a glimpse into what lies ahead for those areas where the Islamic State only recently was driven out.

Kurdish militia fighters -- backed by coalition airstrikes -- fought fiercely to repel an Islamic State invasion of Kobani, located near the Turkish border, early in 2015. At the time, the extremist group held sway over vast territory and was still on the march.

The city, also known by its Arabic name, Ain al-Arab, came under attack for only a short period, but the hundreds of airstrikes that helped it fend off the militants left many of its buildings leveled.

Some people who returned had trouble even locating their homes, the destruction was so extensive. An estimated 80 percent of buildings were damaged.

Nearly three years later, roads are still being repaved and buildings are being reconstructed by the Kurdish forces that control the city, and some services have been restored. But the Syrian government is not active there, and the work has been left up to the Kurdish administration currently in control.

Reconstruction has been slow, and there is still a long way to go. And only a fraction of the prewar population has returned.

Kobani, Syria, near the Turkish border, after an invasion by the Islamic State was repelled in 2015. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171020edak00050



Washington; SECT
Full Transcript and Video: Kelly Defends Trump's Handling of Soldier's Death and Call to Widow

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
3,070 words
20 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

John F. Kelly, President Trump's chief of staff, delivered an emotional statement on Thursday in the White House briefing room, defending Mr. Trump's call to the widow of a slain soldier and responding to criticism from Representative Frederica S. Wilson, Democrat of Florida.

The following is a transcript of those remarks, as prepared by the White House.

For further coverage of Mr. Kelly's statement, read here »

_______

JOHN F. KELLY, White House chief of staff: Well, thanks a lot. And it is a more serious note, so I just wanted to perhaps make more of a statement than an -- give more of an explanation in what amounts to be a traditional press interaction.

Most Americans don't know what happens when we lose one of soldiers, sailors, airmen, Marines, our Coast Guardsmen in combat. So let me tell you what happens:

Their buddies wrap them up in whatever passes as a shroud, puts them on a helicopter as a routine, and sends them home. Their first stop along the way is when they're packed in ice, typically at the airhead. And then they're flown to, usually, Europe where they're then packed in ice again and flown to Dover Air Force Base, where Dover takes care of the remains, embalms them, meticulously dresses them in their uniform with the medals that they've earned, the emblems of their service, and then puts them on another airplane linked up with a casualty officer escort that takes them home.

A very, very good movie to watch, if you haven't ever seen it, is ''Taking Chance,'' where this is done in a movie -- HBO setting. Chance Phelps was killed under my command right next to me, and it's worth seeing that if you've never seen it.

So that's the process. While that's happening, a casualty officer typically goes to the home very early in the morning and waits for the first lights to come on. And then he knocks on the door; typically a mom and dad will answer, a wife. And if there is a wife, this is happening in two different places; if the parents are divorced, three different places. And the casualty officer proceeds to break the heart of a family member and stays with that family until -- well, for a long, long time, even after the internment. So that's what happens.

Who are these young men and women? They are the best 1 percent this country produces. Most of you, as Americans, don't know them. Many of you don't know anyone who knows any one of them. But they are the very best this country produces, and they volunteer to protect our country when there's nothing in our country anymore that seems to suggest that selfless service to the nation is not only appropriate, but required. But that's all right.

Who writes letters to the families? Typically, the company commander -- in my case, as a Marine -- the company commander, battalion commander, regimental commander, division commander, Secretary of Defense, typically the service chief, commandant of the Marine Corps, and the President typically writes a letter.

Typically, the only phone calls a family receives are the most important phone calls they could imagine, and that is from their buddies. In my case, hours after my son was killed, his friends were calling us from Afghanistan, telling us what a great guy he was. Those are the only phone calls that really mattered.

And yeah, the letters count, to a degree, but there's not much that really can take the edge off what a family member is going through.

So some Presidents have elected to call. All Presidents, I believe, have elected to send letters. If you elect to call a family like this, it is about the most difficult thing you could imagine. There's no perfect way to make that phone call.

When I took this job and talked to President Trump about how to do it, my first recommendation was he not do it because it's not the phone call that parents, family members are looking forward to. It's nice to do, in my opinion, in any event.

He asked me about previous Presidents, and I said, I can tell you that President Obama, who was my Commander-in-Chief when I was on active duty, did not call my family. That was not a criticism. That was just to simply say, I don't believe President Obama called. That's not a negative thing. I don't believe President Bush called in all cases. I don't believe any President, particularly when the casualty rates are very, very high -- that Presidents call. But I believe they all write.

So when I gave that explanation to our President three days ago, he elected to make phone calls in the cases of four young men who we lost in Niger at the earlier part of this month. But then he said, how do you make these calls? If you're not in the family, if you've never worn the uniform, if you've never been in combat, you can't even imagine how to make that call. I think he very bravely does make those calls.

The call in question that he made yesterday -- or day before yesterday now -- were to four family members, the four fallen. And remember, there's a next-of-kin designated by the individual. If he's married, that's typically the spouse. If he's not married, that's typically the parents unless the parents are divorced, and then he selects one of them. If he didn't get along with his parents, he'll select a sibling. But the point is, the phone call is made to the next-of-kin only if the next-of-kin agrees to take the phone call. Sometimes they don't.

So a pre-call is made: The President of the United States or the commandant of the Marine Corps, or someone would like to call, will you accept the call? And typically, they all accept the call.

So he called four people the other day and expressed his condolences in the best way that he could. And he said to me, what do I say? I said to him, sir, there's nothing you can do to lighten the burden on these families.

Well, let me tell you what I told him. Let me tell you what my best friend, Joe Dunford, told me -- because he was my casualty officer. He said, Kel, he was doing exactly what he wanted to do when he was killed. He knew what he was getting into by joining that 1 percent. He knew what the possibilities were because we're at war. And when he died, in the four cases we're talking about, Niger, and my son's case in Afghanistan -- when he died, he was surrounded by the best men on this Earth: his friends.

That's what the President tried to say to four families the other day. I was stunned when I came to work yesterday morning, and brokenhearted at what I saw a member of Congress doing. A member of Congress who listened in on a phone call from the President of the United States to a young wife, and in his way tried to express that opinion -- that he's a brave man, a fallen hero, he knew what he was getting himself into because he enlisted. There's no reason to enlist; he enlisted. And he was where he wanted to be, exactly where he wanted to be, with exactly the people he wanted to be with when his life was taken.

That was the message. That was the message that was transmitted.

It stuns me that a member of Congress would have listened in on that conversation. Absolutely stuns me. And I thought at least that was sacred. You know, when I was a kid growing up, a lot of things were sacred in our country. Women were sacred, looked upon with great honor. That's obviously not the case anymore as we see from recent cases. Life -- the dignity of life -- is sacred. That's gone. Religion, that seems to be gone as well.

Gold Star families, I think that left in the convention over the summer. But I just thought -- the selfless devotion that brings a man or woman to die on the battlefield, I just thought that that might be sacred.

And when I listened to this woman and what she was saying, and what she was doing on TV, the only thing I could do to collect my thoughts was to go and walk among the finest men and women on this Earth. And you can always find them because they're in Arlington National Cemetery. I went over there for an hour-and-a-half, walked among the stones, some of whom I put there because they were doing what I told them to do when they were killed.

I'll end with this: In October -- April, rather, of 2015, I was still on active duty, and I went to the dedication of the new FBI field office in Miami. And it was dedicated to two men who were killed in a firefight in Miami against drug traffickers in 1986 -- a guy by the name of Grogan and Duke. Grogan almost retired, 53 years old; Duke, I think less than a year on the job. (Editor's note: The F.B.I. agent for which the building is named was named Jerry L. Dove, not Duke.)

Anyways, they got in a gunfight and they were killed. Three other FBI agents were there, were wounded, and now retired. So we go down -- Jim Comey gave an absolutely brilliant memorial speech to those fallen men and to all of the men and women of the FBI who serve our country so well, and law enforcement so well.

There were family members there. Some of the children that were there were three or four years old when their dads were killed on that street in Miami-Dade. Three of the men that survived the fight were there, and gave a rendition of how brave those men were and how they gave their lives.

And a congresswoman stood up, and in the long tradition of empty barrels making the most noise, stood up there and all of that and talked about how she was instrumental in getting the funding for that building, and how she took care of her constituents because she got the money, and she just called up President Obama, and on that phone call he gave the money -- the $20 million -- to build the building. And she sat down, and we were stunned. Stunned that she had done it. Even for someone that is that empty a barrel, we were stunned.

But, you know, none of us went to the press and criticized. None of us stood up and were appalled. We just said, O.K., fine.

So I still hope, as you write your stories, and I appeal to America, that let's not let this maybe last thing that's held sacred in our society -- a young man, young woman going out and giving his or her life for our country -- let's try to somehow keep that sacred. But it eroded a great deal yesterday by the selfish behavior of a member of Congress.

So I'm willing to take a question or two on this topic. Let me ask you this: Is anyone here a Gold Star parent or sibling? Does anyone here know a Gold Star parent or sibling?

O.K., you get the question.

Q Well, thank you, General Kelly. First of all, we have a great deal of respect -- Semper Fi -- for everything that you've ever done. But if we could take this a bit further. Why were they in Niger? We were told they weren't in armored vehicles and there was no air cover. So what are the specifics about this particular incident? And why were we there? And why are we there?

GENERAL KELLY: Well, I would start by saying there is an investigation. Let me back up and say, the fact of the matter is, young men and women that wear our uniform are deployed around the world and there are tens of thousands, near the DMZ in North Korea [sic], in Okinawa, waiting to go -- in South Korea -- in Okinawa, ready to go. All over the United States, training, ready to go. They're all over Latin America. Down there, they do mostly drug and addiction, working with our partners -- our great partners -- the Colombians, the Central Americans, the Mexicans.

You know, there's thousands. My own son, right now, back in the fight for his fifth tour against ISIS. There's thousands of them in Europe acting as a deterrent. And they're throughout Africa. And they're doing the nation's work there, and not making a lot of money, by the way, doing it. They love what they do.

So why were they there? They're there working with partners, local -- all across Africa -- in this case, Niger -- working with partners, teaching them how to be better soldiers; teaching them how to respect human rights; teaching them how to fight ISIS so that we don't have to send our soldiers and Marines there in their thousands. That's what they were doing there.

Now, there is an investigation. There's always an -- unless it's a very, very conventional death in a conventional war, there's always an investigation. Of course, that operation is conducted by AFRICOM that, of course, works directly for the Secretary of Defense.

There is a -- and I talked to Jim Mattis this morning. I think he made statements this afternoon. There's an investigation ongoing. An investigation doesn't mean anything was wrong. An investigation doesn't mean people's heads are going to roll. The fact is they need to find out what happened and why it happened.

But at the end of the day, ladies and gentlemen, you have to understand that these young people -- sometimes old guys -- put on the uniform, go to where we send them to protect our country. Sometimes they go in large numbers to invade Iraq and invade Afghanistan. Sometimes they're working in small units, working with our partners in Africa, Asia, Latin America, helping them be better.

But at the end of the day, they're helping those partners be better at fighting ISIS in North Africa to protect our country so that we don't have to send large numbers of troops.

Any other -- someone who knows a Gold Star fallen person.

John?

Q General, thank you for being here today and thank you for your service and for your family's sacrifice. There has been some talk about the timetable of the release of the statement about the -- I think at that point it was three soldiers who were killed in Niger. Can you walk us through the timetable of the release of that information? And what part did the fact that a beacon was pinging during that time have to do with the release of the statement? And were you concerned that divulging information early might jeopardize the soldiers' attempt to be (inaudible)?

GENERAL KELLY: First of all, that's a -- you know, we are at the highest level of the U.S. government. The people that will answer those questions will be the people at the other end of the military pyramid.

I'm sure the Special Forces group is conducting it. I know they're conducting an investigation. That investigation, of course, under the auspices of AFRICOM, ultimately will go to the Pentagon. I've read the same stories you have. I actually know a lot more than I'm letting on, but I'm not going to tell you.

There is an investigation being done. But as I say, the men and women of our country that are serving all around the world -- I mean, what the hell is my son doing back in the fight? He's back in the fight because -- working with Iraqi soldiers who are infinitely better than they were a few years ago to take ISIS on directly so that we don't have to do it. Small numbers of Marines where he is working alongside those guys. That's why they're out there, whether it's Niger, Iraq, or whatever. We don't want to send tens of thousands of American soldiers and Marines, in particular, to go fight.

I'll take one more, but it's got to be from someone who knows -- all right.

Q General, when you talk about Niger, sir, what does your intelligence tell you about the Russian connection with them? And the stories that are coming out now, they're --

GENERAL KELLY: I have no knowledge of any Russian connection, but I was not, in my position, to know that. That's a question for NORTHCOM or for -- not NORTHCOM -- for AFRICOM or DOD.

Thanks very much, everybody.

As I walk off the stage, understand there's tens of thousands of American kids, mostly, doing their nation's bidding all around the world. They don't have to be in uniform. You know, when I was a kid, every man in my life was a veteran -- World War II, Korea, and there was the draft. These young people today, they don't do it for any other reason than their selfless -- sense of selfless devotion to this great nation.

We don't look down upon those of you who that haven't served. In fact, in a way we're a little bit sorry because you'll have never have experienced the wonderful joy you get in your heart when you do the kinds of things our service men and women do -- not for any other reason than they love this country. So just think of that.

And I do appreciate your time. Take care.

Document NYTF000020171020edak0004d



World; Middle East
This Is What Victory Over  ISIS  Looks Like

By MEGAN SPECIA 
1,302 words
19 October 2017
18:28
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The declarations of victory played out across Iraq and Syria: The long campaigns to retake city after city from Islamic State militants had come to an end.

But the hard-won battles left vast destruction in their wake, and the celebrations from atop the rubble of once-grand buildings are ringing hollow for hundreds of thousands of displaced residents.

Iraqis and Syrians return to cities that are ghosts of their former glory, lacking the infrastructure for normal life to begin again. Now they must grapple with how to rebuild.

Raqqa, Syria

The ousting of Islamic State militants this week from Raqqa was filled with symbolism. Raqqa was the de facto capital of the militants’elf-declared caliphate, and now it has fallen from their grasp.

But there wasn’ much city left to save.

While the full extent of the damage is still being assessed, drone footage and satellite images reveal mile after mile of damaged buildings, rubble-filled streets and destroyed landmarks.

Raqqa was once home to 300,000 people, but tens of thousands fled when the militants solidified control of the city in early 2014 and began staging public executions of those who ran afoul of their strict interpretation of Islam. By the dwindling days of the group’ rule, only about 25,000 residents remained.

At least 1,000 civilians were killed in the airstrikes, according to tallies by local activists and international monitors. American officials put the civilian casualties much lower, and say coalition strikes have killed at least 735 civilians in Iraq and Syria since operations against the Islamic State there began in 2014.

Five months of American-led airstrikes left conditions in the city dire, knocking out water and electricity. American officials have promised to help bring back basic services, but the scale of the damage is clear.

When soldiers of the Syrian Democratic Forces, a coalition of rebel militias, raised their yellow flags in one of Raqqa’ central junctions this week, all that was left of the buildings that once surrounded it were bombed-out shells.

Mosul, Iraq

Similar scenes played out in Mosul, Iraq’ second-largest city.

Backed by American-led coalition airstrikes, Iraq government forces celebrated their recapture of the city in July. But Mosul’ recovery is a tale of two cities.

In the eastern portion, somewhere between 80 and 90 percent of the population that fled during initial fighting over the city have already returned to their homes. But nine months of fighting in the west of Mosul, where militants holed up during their final stand, left the area virtually uninhabitable.

From medical centers to centuries-old mosques, major structures were reduced to rubble and whole neighborhoods wiped off the map. Some fell at the hands of militants who demolished infrastructure as the Iraqi military moved in, including the iconic Al Nuri mosque and its leaning minaret, and some were casualties of coalition airstrikes. Before the Islamic State captured the city, Mosul was home to 1.1 million people. United Nations officials estimate that just restoring basic services there could cost more than $1 billion.

Leila Jane Nassif, the United Nations refugee agency’ assistant representative in Iraq, said the damage in the western part of the city had left hundreds of thousands of people displaced. It is unclear when they will be able to return.

“t will take time for the infrastructure to be in place and for people to be able to rebuild their lives there with so much housing that has been damaged,”s. Nassif said in a telephone interview.

Falluja, Iraq

Large areas of this city, home to some 300,000 people before the militants seized control, were spared damage from airstrikes. But Islamic State fighters fleeing Falluja when it was retaken last year laid bombs, complicating the rebuilding efforts.

This tactic, Ms. Nassif said, was used by the group in several Iraqi cities once under its control. The bombs, often improvised explosive devices, have delayed the return of displaced residents and caused death and destruction even after the militants were rooted out. American officials warned of the same problem in Raqqa.

“here has been such a large demining effort,”s. Nassif said, “nd it is going to be a major focus in some communities. There are a lot of I.E.D.s that are still present, and people are concerned about returning to their neighborhoods and homes.”

There are other concerns, as well. Ms. Nassif said that some of the displaced residents in Iraq feared there might be clashes between rival groups when they return to the communities they left amid the upheaval.

“hey are worried about retribution,”he said. “nfortunately, in some situations, problems that were not faced before the takeover by insurgents have not necessarily been addressed and tensions may still exist.”

Ramadi, Iraq

When Islamic State militants were pushed from Ramadi, a predominantly Sunni Muslim city, it was a ruin. The group had entrenched itself in the city, occupying homes, digging tunnels and laying explosives.

By the time the group was driven out in January 2016, Ramadi, the capital of Anbar Province, had been bombarded by coalition airstrikes for months. And ISIS fighters blew up bridges as they fled.

Ms. Nassif said the scale of the devastation in some formerly occupied cities means recovery will not just involve helping individual families rebuild. There must to be a coordinated plan to restore basic services to those homes.

“f you have to go back and rebuild roads and sewer systems and put in utilities and so on, that is going to take a major effort by the government,”s. Nassif said.

Iraq’ government, however, is ill-equipped to deal with the destruction. The United Nations Funding Facility for Stabilization has been helping in Falluja and Ramadi. Its plan to rebuild 30,000 homes began over the summer and will cost at least $70 million, and take 18 months.

Kobani, Syria

This city may offer a glimpse into what lies ahead for those areas where the Islamic State only recently was driven out.

Kurdish militia fighters —acked by coalition airstrikes —ought fiercely to repel an Islamic State invasion of Kobani, located near the Turkish border, early in 2015. At the time, the extremist group held sway over vast territory and was still on the march.

The city, also known by its Arabic name, Ain al-Arab, came under attack for only a short period, but the hundreds of airstrikes that helped it fend off the militants left many of its buildings leveled.

Some people who returned had trouble even locating their homes, the destruction was so extensive. An estimated 80 percent of buildings were damaged.

Nearly three years later, roads are still being repaved and buildings are being reconstructed by the Kurdish forces that control the city, and some services have been restored. But the Syrian government is not active there, and the work has been left up to the Kurdish administration currently in control.

Reconstruction has been slow, and there is still a long way to go. And only a fraction of the prewar population has returned.

* From Playground to Killing Ground: An \b ISIS\b0  Legacy

* ‘ome Out and Surrender’ Inside Raqqa, With the Fighters Who Drove Off \b ISIS\b0 

Kobani, Syria, after an invasion by the Islamic State was repelled in 2015. | Tyler Hicks/The New York Times | A militia fighter who died fighting the Islamic State was buried at a martyrs’emetery in Hukumya, near Raqqa. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | A Falluja neighborhood in June 2016. | Bryan Denton for The New York Times | Members of an Iraqi counterterrorism unit on patrol in Ramadi in December 2015. | Ahmad Al-Rubaye/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171019edaj005se



Podcasts
Get to Know ‘he Daily,’ New York Times Podcast

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
347 words
20 October 2017
01:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

This moment demands an explanation. “he Daily”s on a mission to find it.

Twenty minutes a day, five days a week, “he Daily”elps you understand the day’ biggest stories. It’ hosted by the veteran reporter Michael Barbaro and is powered by New York Times journalism.

Listen to the latest episode and subscribe here. Or start with one of our favorites:

Disappearing Factory Jobs

Shannon Mulcahy’ job at an Indiana steel plant moved to Mexico after President Trump vowed to keep factory jobs inside the United States. Listen to this episode.

A Conversation With a Former White Nationalist

Derek Black was poised to help lead the white nationalist movement. And then he left, betraying his family and friends in the process. Listen to this episode.

Haunted by ISIS

After Mosul, Iraq, was liberated, two Times reporters encountered a group of women who had been enslaved by the Islamic State and still believed that it had taken over the world. Listen to this episode.

Life as a G.O.P. Congressman in the Trump Era

A frank interview with Representative Tom Rooney of Florida about what it’ like to be a congressman when the House, Senate and presidency are controlled by your party —ut just about nothing is getting done. Listen to this episode.

An Oval Office Interview

In April, two Times reporters went to the White House to interview the president. Their conversation veered off into allegations of spying and sexual harassment claims against Bill O’eilly. Listen to this episode.

Planning the Perfect Death

Days before he was scheduled to die, John Shields had a surprising idea. He wanted to have a wake for himself. And he would be there. Alive. Listen to this episode here.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet Michael Barbaro at @mikiebarb. And if you’e interested in advertising with “he Daily,”rite to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.

Michael Barbaro 

Document NYTFEED020171019edaj00a9h



Asia and Australia Edition
Briefing
Xi Jinping, Catalonia, Islamic State: Your Friday Briefing

By CHARLES McDERMID 
1,402 words
19 October 2017
21:02
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•resident Xi Jinping’ dominance has made it difficult to forecast who will be elevated to the Politburo at the culmination of the Chinese Communist Party congress. One likely candidate is Wang Yang, a Guangzhou official credited with fostering greener economic growth.

He may also be a sign of a turn toward economic reform. China’ G.D.P. expanded by 6.8 percent in the third quarter, but debt has soared.

We charted how Mr. Xi used key terms in his marathon opening address at the congress. And WeChat came up with an app to applaud him that’ been clapped a billion times so far.

_____

•yanmar’ once-celebrated transition toward democracy is hardening into a democratic-authoritarian hybrid, our Interpreter columnists report, and governance often resembles mob rule.

The country’ crackdown on Rohingya Muslims, meanwhile, continues to draw global condemnation.

For our South Asia bureau chief, the story of the Rohingya mother above was as painful to cover as genocide in Sudan and children being blown apart in Iraq.

_____

•he liberation of Syrian and Iraqi cities from the Islamic State came at a terrible cost.

Drone footage and satellite images reveal mile after mile of damaged buildings, rubble-filled streets and destroyed landmarks. Above, what victory over ISIS looks like in Kobani, Syria.

Our podcast “he Daily” examines whether the Islamic State losing its war, or starting a new one.

_____

•n Washington, Senator John McCain and two Democratic colleagues moved to force Facebook, Google and other internet companies to disclose who buys online political advertising, the kind Russian-linked operatives used to sway the 2016 presidential election.

A far more emotional battle is playing out over President Trump’ handling of military deaths. In the latest twist, John Kelly, the White House chief of staff, defended Mr. Trump’ call to the widow of a slain soldier, drawing the trauma of his own son’ death in Afghanistan.

_____

•he Spanish government said it would convene an urgent cabinet meeting on Saturday and take emergency measures to halt Catalonia’ secessionist drive, after its leader made new warnings of independence.

Above, a pro-independence protest in Barcelona.

_____

•ew Zealand’ youngest prime minister in more than 150 years is preparing to take office.

Jacinda Ardern, 37, will take over next week from Bill English, reversing the Labour Party’ long-flagging fortunes.

Unconventional and intensely focused, she says she wants to build an economy that works “or all New Zealanders”hile protecting the environment.

_____

•nd a book battle is brewing in Australia.

Amazon, the mammoth online retailer, is moving in, and domestic booksellers are nervous. But disrupting Australians’eading habits might not be so easy to do —hey rejected Borders right into bankruptcy.

And our latest Australia newsletter takes a look at live journalism, history and Taylor Mac, above, the celebrated American performance artist, who performed at the Melbourne Festival.

Business

•Kobe Steel stocks rebounded after Toyota, Honda and Mazda called its aluminum products safe, despite the scandal over its fabricated quality data.

•Nissansuspended production at all six of its domestic factories, acknowledging that uncertified technicians had conducted inspections even after a previous disclosure of the practice led to a recall of 1.2 million vehicles.

•udian, an Alibaba-backed online lender, held up in trading a day after its $900 million Wall Street opening, the biggest I.P.O. in a new wave of Chinese fintech firms.

•HNA Group, the Hainan-based giant that has drawn the scrutiny of Western regulators, is investing $7.5 billion to bring together its hospitality, aviation and financial sectors on a digital platform, HiApp, by the end of the year.

•.S. stocks were mixed. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•iwali, the annual festival of light for Hindus, Sikhs and Jains, has been marked by a fierce debate over the Indian Supreme Court’ fireworks ban for air quality. Outraged critics compare it to banning Christmas trees. [BBC]

•“ knew enough to do more than I did” The Hollywood director Quentin Tarantino said was ashamed that he’ known for decades about Harvey Weinstein’ alleged misconduct toward women but continued to work with him. [The New York Times]

•akistan’ ousted prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, was indicted on corruption charges stemming from revelations in the Panama Papers related to luxury property holdings in London. [The New York Times]

•resident Rodrigo Duterte said that Mahmud Ahmad, a high-level Islamic State operative who funneled money and fighters to the Philippines, was “aken”uring a gunfight. [The New York Times]

•yphoon Lan is gathering force east of the Philippines and could threaten Okinawa this weekend and more of Japan early next week. [The Weather Channel]

•n entire Afghan Army unit was nearly wiped out in a Taliban attack that used an increasingly common tactic: ramming bomb-packed, captured vehicles into security compounds. [The New York Times]

•he Malaysian government picked a U.S. company that offered no-find, no-fee terms to start a new search for MH370. [ABC]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ecipe of the day: Lemon-spice cake is perfect for guests.

•ere’ everything you need to know about having a microwedding.

•xercise isn’ just good for your body, a new study suggests. It also protects your brain against dementia.

Noteworthy

•“. Butterfly,” play inspired by the historical story of a long affair between a French Embassy employee and a male Beijing opera singer who was also a spy, is being revived on Broadway. Five Asian-American actors and playwrights describe how David Henry Hwang’ play, rich with the complications of gender identities, geopolitics and race, changed them.

•ur sister briefing, New York Today, interviewed two of the only 20 North Korean refugees to legally resettle in New York since 2001.

•nd our c rossword editor, Will Shortz, reports from the 12th World Sudoku Championship, in Bangalore, India, where the Chinese team won and Japan took second. Full results and sample puzzles are here.

Back Story

“hen something outrages you,”e wrote, “s Nazism did me, that is when you become a militant, strong and engaged.”

Born on this day in 1917, Stéhane Hessel, a French Resistance hero and Holocaust survivor, became an unlikely publishing phenomenon in 2011 at the age of 93, topping best-seller lists with “ndignez-Vous!”

At only about 4,000 words, “ndignez-Vous!”“ime for Outrage!” was more of a pamphlet. But it resonated with French readers who were gearing up for a presidential election, and those abroad who were protesting the eurozone crisis, participating in the Arab Spring uprisings and occupying Wall Street.

Mr. Hessel, above, urged young people to revive the spirit of the resistance by peacefully protesting the financial markets, France’ treatment of illegal immigrants, the influence of the rich on the news media and Israel’ treatment of Palestinians.

“ndignez-Vous!”old more than three million copies in Europe in less than a year and was translated into more than a dozen languages. (The Nation magazine published the full text in English.)

Mr. Hessel died in 2013, but his call to outrage endures: “ou join the movement of history,”e wrote, “nd the great current of history continues to flow only thanks to each and every one of us.”

Inyoung Kang contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. Browse past briefings here.

We have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian, European and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.

Roman Pilipey/European Pressphoto Agency | Sergey Ponomarev for The New York Times | Tyler Hicks/The New York Times | Al Drago for The New York Times | Pau Barrena/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Nick Perry/Associated Press | Damien Cave/The New York Times | Franck Robichon/European Pressphoto Agency | Altaf Qadri/Associated Press | Gentl and Hyers for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Amy Wilson. | Sara Krulwich/The New York Times | Boris Horvat/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171019edaj007hh



The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
Listen to ‘he Daily’ Big Losses for  ISIS 

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
486 words
19 October 2017
12:19
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device : Via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

Its de facto capital is falling. Its territory has shriveled to a handful of outposts. Its surviving leaders are on the run, and its fighters are surrendering.

Is the Islamic State losing its war, or starting a new one?

On today’ episode:

•Rod Nordland, The New York Times’ bureau chief in Kabul, Afghanistan, discusses the militant group’ recent losses in Iraq.

•Rukmini Callimachi, who covers terrorism and the Islamic State for The Times, talks about what’ next for the militant group.

Background reading:

•ore than 1,000 militants fleeing the former Islamic State stronghold of Hawija, Iraq, turned themselves in to the Kurdish authorities. Many claim to have been only cooks or clerks.

•fter losing territory, the Islamic State may return to its guerrilla roots.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if you’e interested in advertising with “he Daily,”rite to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

From your mobile device:

You can listen and subscribe to “he Daily”rom any podcast player. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to listen in Stitcher or this link to listen in RadioPublic.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, managing producer; Christopher Werth, senior producer; Annie Brown, producer; Lynsea Garrison, producer; Rachel Quester, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director.

Rod Nordland and Rukmini Callimachi contributed reporting.

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

Men who fled the last few Islamic State-controlled areas in Hawija, Iraq, waiting to be questioned in Kirkuk. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171019edaj0035x



Foreign Desk; SECTA
From Playground to Killing Ground: An  ISIS  Legacy in Raqqa

By MEGAN SPECIA 
967 words
19 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
12
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

It was never just a traffic circle.

Not before Syria fell into civil war and the Islamic State moved into Raqqa, when there was lush grass and a fountain at its center, and children splashed in the heat of the summer and visited the Cafe al-Naem ice cream shop.

And not after, when it became a symbol of the battle for Raqqa, and, the militants decided, an ideal spot for public executions.

The traffic circle is known as Naem -- Arabic for ''paradise.''

The final days of summer, August 2013

When a summer heat wave hit Raqqa, nestled on the banks of the Euphrates River, children jumped into the fountain at the center of the Naem traffic circle to get some relief. The fountain, installed just three years earlier, had a colorful light display and a speaker that played music on holidays.

At the time, several rebel groups, including a number of Islamist brigades, had already wrested the city from government control. But Raqqa was still largely intact and full of residents.

The Islamic State, though, was quickly gaining power. By the fall of 2013, it controlled most of Raqqa. By early the next year, the group, also known as ISIS, had solidified its grasp on the city, and began imposing its strict form of Islam on all the residents.

ISIS flexes its muscles, June 2014

In the summer of 2014, the Islamic State went on an offensive, seizing territory across large parts of Syria and neighboring Iraq, and declaring its own caliphate. At the center of its newly formed pseudo-state was Raqqa, and at the center of that capital, the Naem roundabout.

The militants paraded through the streets of Raqqa on June 30, 2014, centering their demonstrations on Naem Square. Footage posted by a local group of media activists showed the fighters waving flags and doing ''doughnuts'' with their tanks as they circled the streets.

By then, the park at the center of the traffic circle had been enclosed by a fence. The fountain, no longer pumping water, was encircled by the black flags of the extremist group. Things were changing elsewhere in the city, too. Women were required to cover themselves head to toe in black abayas; cigarettes and alcohol were banned; and the militants targeted anyone who spoke out against their authority.

The public executions begin, July 2014

By later that summer, the roundabout known as Paradise had become more like hell.

The site became a regular location for public executions. Local media activists recorded images in July of the bodies of dozens of men, believed to have been members of the Syrian Army's 17th Division, strewn along the square. Some of them had been decapitated, their severed heads placed on the fence.

In November 2014, Islamic State fighters prompted a crowd of local residents, including dozens of children, to trample three Syrian soldiers to death. Then they tied their bodies to motorcycles and dragged them around the circle.

The ice cream shop was still open -- but it was now frequented by foreign fighters who had surged to the city to support the Islamic State's cause, and their families.

Government airstrikes and a new normal, August 2014

On Aug. 29, 2014, activists posted footage of local residents cleaning up debris from an airstrike around the traffic circle. The storefronts of the shops around the circle were all blown out, and the fence toppled.

The airstrike represented the beginning of what would be years of intermittent strikes, part of halfhearted bids to retake the city. All the while, the Islamic State continued to crack down on residents, and its power grew and contracted in other portions of its far-flung territory.

It was not until earlier this year that the American-led coalition of local forces, made up of Kurdish and Arab fighters, began an offensive to retake the city.

A city in ruins, October 2017

Drone footage taken on Oct. 10 shows the ruins of once-bustling city streets stretching out from the square. They are empty. The bombed-out shells of buildings stand like ghosts around the traffic circle. As far as the eye can see, the scene is the same: crumbling dust-covered buildings. Nearly all of the city's 300,000 original residents have been displaced.

A hollow victory, Oct. 17, 2017

The militants made their last stand in the area around the city's sprawling stadium, just blocks from the traffic circle.

When American-backed coalition members claimed control of the city, their victory celebrations seemed oddly familiar: Their route was a mirror image of the one Islamic State fighters took when they paraded through the city in the summer of 2014.

But little else seemed familiar, oddly or otherwise, at the Naem circle. The ice cream shop is gone. So are all the other stores that once surrounded the fountain. The buildings that housed them are crumbling from years of bombardment.

This time around, the tanks carried not the black flag of ISIS but the yellow banners of the Syrian Democratic Forces.

But they, too, were doing doughnuts.

The Naem traffic circle in Raqqa, Syria, left, in 2013 and on Tuesday. The fountain had a colorful light display and played music. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY YOUTUBE/RMC; ERIK DE CASTRO/REUTERS); The area became a site for public executions as the militants tightened control. Foreign fighters came to dominate the area. (PHOTOGRAPH BY YOUTUBE/RMCALRAQQA VIA STORYFUL); Drone footage showing destruction in and around the traffic circle on Oct. 10. As far as the eye can see, the scene is the same: the bombed-out buildings of a city of 300,000 people, now displaced. (PHOTOGRAPH BY YOUTUBE/FURAT FM, VIA STORYFUL) 

Document NYTF000020171019edaj0005q



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Struggle Over Kirkuk Puts the United States and Iran on the Same Side

By DAVID ZUCCHINO and ERIC SCHMITT; David Zucchino reported from Baghdad and Eric Schmitt from Washington. Falih Hassin contributed reporting from Baghdad, and Gardiner Harris from Washington. 
1,454 words
19 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
13
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- When the Iraqi military battled Kurdish forces this week to reclaim the contested city of Kirkuk, the spectacle of one American-backed ally fighting another with American-supplied weapons was not the only incongruous sight.

Another was the United States turning its back on a crucial ally in the fight against the Islamic State, the Kurds, as Washington's goals aligned with those of a regional nemesis, Iran.

While the military action in Kirkuk on Monday and Tuesday was carried out under the banner of the Iraqi military, the ground forces included Iranian-backed Shiite militias.

American officials, including President Trump, insisted that the United States was not taking sides in the dispute, but some analysts say that the United States approved the Iraqi plan to enter Kurdish-held areas and that Iran helped broker the agreement with a Kurdish faction to withdraw its fighters from Kirkuk, allowing the Iraqi forces to take over largely unopposed.

''Abadi would not have attacked without informing the U.S.,'' said David L. Phillips, a former State Department adviser who worked on Iraq for 30 years, referring to the Iraqi prime minister, Haider al-Abadi. ''At a minimum, the U.S. knew that the attack was coming.''

Maria Fantappie, senior analyst for Iraq at the International Crisis Group, said, ''The United States gave a green light, and that was essential.''

Iran's goal, she said, was to insert Shiite militias into contested areas, and to divide the Kurds while solidifying Iranian influence over the Iraqi government.

Intentionally or not, the United States seems to have abetted that goal as it pursued its own aim of restoring Iraqi government authority to the disputed Kirkuk region. The United States, officials said, also declined to defend the Kurds to show its displeasure with them for rejecting an American request to cancel a referendum on independence from Iraq.

Supporters of the Kurdish Regional Government, the Kurdish enclave in northern Iraq, said they expected better from the United States after 1,700 Kurdish fighters died helping the Americans fight the Islamic State.

''I don't want to use the word betrayal,'' Vahal Ali, the communications director for the region's president, said Wednesday, ''but we definitely feel the United States has been negligent.''

He said the Kurds were ''disappointed at how the United States looked at this.''

''Now they are giving Iraq to Iran as a present,'' he added. ''That's as diplomatic as I can be.''

Joshua A. Geltzer, the former senior director for counterterrorism at the National Security Council, noted the irony of helping Iran just as Mr. Trump was threatening to withdraw from the Iran nuclear agreement and assailing the country for sponsoring terrorism.

''It seems like we just got out of the way as Baghdad rolled the Kurds, and that doesn't feel right,'' he said. ''Plus, it makes little sense for an administration interested in getting tougher on Iran.''

The turn of events stems from the referendum the Kurds held three weeks ago, in which they voted overwhelmingly for independence from Iraq. Although the vote did not lead to a declaration of independence, it was vigorously opposed by nearly every power in the region.

Iran, which wields considerable influence in Baghdad, feared any move toward independence by the Kurds in Iraq would inflame separatist sentiments among its own Kurdish minority. The United States opposed the vote over, among other reasons, concern that it would rupture the coalition of Iraqi and Kurdish forces battling the Islamic State in Iraq.

The Kurdish Regional Government's determination to go ahead with the referendum, chasing the dream of an independent Kurdish homeland, has backfired spectacularly.

In just two days this week, Iraqi troops took Kirkuk and most other contested areas that Kurdish forces have held since 2014, including oil fields that have provided the bulk of revenues for the Kurdish region.

The assault crushed Kurdish dreams of independence and raised serious questions about the political judgment and future of the Kurdish leader, Massoud Barzani.

In retrospect, the depth of Mr. Barzani's miscalculations is clear if still surprising. He badly overestimated his bargaining position with Iraq and underestimated the animosity his referendum engendered among his neighbors and allies, including the United States. After the referendum, American officials told Mr. Barzani that he had forfeited the good will of the United States.

For the last three years, the Kurdish militia known as the pesh merga was a crucial ally for the United States and Baghdad in the battle against the Islamic State, often proving more effective than the Iraqi army.

But less than two weeks after the Sept. 25 referendum, Iraqi forces drove Islamic State militants out of Hawija, their last major urban stronghold in Iraq and the last battle in which the pesh merga played a role. The fight has shifted to the western desert of Anbar Province, far from pesh merga positions in northern Iraq.

''Barzani had very little leverage before and he has absolutely no leverage now,'' said Denise Natali, a Middle East specialist at the National Defense University in Washington.

As Iraqi forces massed on the Kurdish border and Kurdish officials warned of an impending invasion, Mr. Abadi, the Iraqi prime minister, insisted that Iraq did not plan to assault Kirkuk and dismissed reports to the contrary as ''fake news.'' American officials did not dispute his assertions.

Asked Wednesday whether the United States had approved Baghdad's military plans, Heather Nauert, a State Department spokeswoman, said, ''We have long called for a unified, democratic Iraq.''

The other surprise was that much of the pesh merga in Kirkuk, loyal to a Kurdish faction opposed to Mr. Barzani, had agreed to make way for the advancing Iraqi force.

Attention has since focused on a meeting on the weekend before the Iraqi assault between a prominent Iranian military commander, Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, and members of that faction, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan.

Gen. Khatab Omar, the police chief in Kirkuk, said General Suleimani held talks over the weekend with the P.U.K. in Kirkuk and in the Kurdish city of Sulaymaniyah.

Mr. Ali, the Kurdish government spokesman, said General Suleimani manipulated events to bring Shiite militias into areas vacated by the pesh merga.

When the first pesh merga withdrawals began on Friday from two districts south of Kirkuk in Shiite areas, Shiite militias accompanying Iraqi troops raised their flags over former Kurdish outposts.

There has been speculation that General Suleimani brokered the deal for the Kurdish forces to abandon Kirkuk, but Saadi Bira, a spokesman for the P.U.K., said local pesh merga commanders negotiated the agreement with the Iraqi government.

General Suleimani has been a pivotal, if shadowy, figure in Iraq for years. As the head of Iran's foreign military operations, he directed Shiite fighters who killed hundreds of American troops in Iraq. In 2014, he wrote a provision incorporating Shiite volunteer fighters into the Iraqi armed forces, the so-called Iraqi Hezbollah, a reference to the Iranian-backed Shiite militia in Lebanon.

Jennifer Cafarella, senior intelligence planner at the Institute for the Study of War in Washington, said that an agreement organized by General Suleimani was ''the most likely scenario in an event this strategically significant for Iran.''

''It does also seem likely that he was instrumental in forcing the Kurds to step down,'' she added.

A spokesman for the American Embassy in Baghdad said the operation had involved Iraqi troops, apparently with the cooperation of Kurdish forces, regaining government control of disputed territory.

The Iraqi operation also forced a military confrontation between two American-backed allies. Both the pesh merga and the Iraqi military have received American training, intelligence and supporting airstrikes and artillery in several joint operations against the militants.

Senator John McCain, the Republican chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, was incensed. ''The United States provided equipment and training to the government of Iraq to fight ISIS and secure itself from external threats -- not to attack elements of one of its own regional governments, which is a longstanding and valuable partner of the United States,'' he said in a statement.

Mr. McCain warned of ''severe consequences'' if American-supplied military equipment was destroyed in the operation. The Kurdish government said Monday that its fighters had destroyed five American-supplied Humvees used by the Iraqis.

Iraqi security forces in military vehicles in Kirkuk on Tuesday. The ground forces included Iranian-backed Shiite militias. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALAA AL-MARJANI/REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020171019edaj0005a



NEWS ANALYSIS
Foreign Desk; SECTA
As Caliphate Crumbles,  ISIS  May Revisit Insurgent Roots

By MARGARET COKER, ERIC SCHMITT and RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
1,447 words
19 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Its de facto capital is falling. Its territory has shriveled from the size of Portugal to a handful of outposts. Its surviving leaders are on the run.

But rather than declare the Islamic State and its virulent ideology conquered, many Western and Arab counterterrorism officials are bracing for a new, lethal incarnation of the jihadist group.

The organization has a proven track record as an insurgency able to withstand major military onslaughts, while still recruiting adherents around the world ready to kill in its name.

Islamic State leaders signaled more than a year ago that they had drawn up contingency plans to revert to their roots as a guerrilla force after the loss of their territory in Iraq and Syria. Nor does the group need to govern cities to inspire so-called lone wolf terrorist attacks abroad, a strategy it has already adopted to devastating effect in Manchester, England, and Orlando, Fla.

''Islamic State is not finished,'' said Aaron Y. Zelin, who studies jihadist movements at The Washington Institute for Near East Policy. ''I.S. has a plan, and that is to wait out their enemies locally in order to gain time to rebuild their networks while at the same time provide inspiration to followers outside to keep fighting their enemies farther away.'''

Even with the news on Tuesday that American-backed forces said they had captured Raqqa, the capital of the group's self-declared caliphate, European counterterrorism officials were worrying about sleeper cells that may have been sent out well before the battlefield losses mounted.

In Iraq, where the group that became the Islamic State took root, security officials are bracing for future waves of suicide attacks against civilians. And even if governments are able to head off organized plots like the Paris attacks of 2015, officials around the globe concede that they have almost no way of stopping lone wolf assaults inspired or enabled by Islamic State propaganda that lives online.

''It is clear that we are contending with an intense U.K. terrorist threat from Islamist extremists,'' Andrew Parker, the director of Britain's MI5 intelligence service, said in a speech on Tuesday. ''That threat is multidimensional, evolving rapidly, and operating at a scale and pace we've not seen before.''

American and European counterterrorism officials acknowledge that they do not know the exact capabilities the Islamic State retains, or how much the appeal of the group's ideology has been dented by its string of heavy military defeats.

Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, predicted last month that the loss of territory would precipitate a loss of credibility. ''We'll continue to see reduction in territory, reduction in freedom of movement, reduced resources and less credibility in the narrative,'' he told a Senate hearing.

Others are less sanguine. They point to a speech by the Islamic State spokesman Abu Muhammed al-Adnani, before his death in an American drone strike last year, urging the group's followers to fight on as a lean, agile insurgency instead of the bureaucratic juggernaut it had become.

''True defeat is the loss of willpower and desire to fight,'' he said. ''We would be defeated and you victorious only if you were able to remove the Quran from the Muslims' hearts.''

The group's ability to weld religious fervor to the political resentments of disenfranchised Sunni Muslims in Shiite-dominated Iraq already saved it once, when it appeared broken by the American military surge in Iraq in 2007 and 2008.

By the time American forces withdrew from Iraq in 2011, intelligence officials estimated that the Islamic State's predecessor, then called the Islamic State of Iraq, was down to its last 700 fighters. The group was considered such a minor threat that the reward offered by the United States for the capture of its leader plummeted from $5 million to $100,000.

It took less than three years for those beaten-down and diminished insurgents to regroup and roar across Iraq and Syria, declaring an Islamic caliphate from the Mediterranean coast of Syria nearly to the Iraqi capital, Baghdad. It became both the world's wealthiest terrorist group, and the most feared.

Even with the loss of most of that territory, the organization is far from defeated, and remains far stronger today than it did when American troops pulled out of Iraq.

The group currently has from 6,000 to 10,000 fighters in Iraq and Syria, the United States-led coalition said on Friday. That is eight to 14 times the number it had in 2011.

''That's the relevant comparison,'' said Daniel L. Byman, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution's Center for Middle East Policy, who tracks jihadist groups. ''This is a very strong group which has a lot of sympathizers, its ideas are embedded and it has networks. It has a lot to draw on even as it loses its physical territory.''

The group has also developed a powerful social media network that with no physical presence allows it to spew propaganda, claim responsibility for terrorist attacks, and not just inspire attacks but also help plot and execute them remotely.

A large share of its attacks in the West in recent years have been carried out by men who communicated online with ISIS, taking detailed instructions through encrypted messages, but never meeting their terrorist mentors.

The first major attack in the United States claimed by ISIS, a foiled shooting at a Texas community center in 2015, was directed this way, according to a recent assessment by the Defense Intelligence Agency.

The Islamic State may also have undercover operatives or sleeper cells outside the Middle East. Senior American officials said last year that the group had sent hundreds of operatives to Europe and hundreds more to Turkey.

And the group has continued to sow chaos even as it has lost territory. In 2017 alone, it has claimed responsibility for three terrorist attacks in Britain that killed 37 people, the Istanbul nightclub bombing on New Year's Eve that killed 39 people, and strikes in more than seven other countries.

As the group was losing Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, in August, it sent a van tearing through crowds in the heart of Barcelona, killing 13 people and loudly declaring its continued relevance.

It is also premature to assert that the Islamic State is running out of territory. While its footprint has shrunk in Iraq and Syria, it still controls close to 4,000 square miles along the Euphrates River Valley on both sides of the Iraq-Syria border. American and Iraqi military commanders believe the group's core leaders have gone to ground in the largely barren areas along the border.

At the same time, ISIS branches in North Africa and Asia are still launching operations, and its camps in eastern Afghanistan remain largely intact, despite recent American airstrikes.

Some areas that were previously declared liberated have seen a return of ISIS fighters. In Libya, where the group was routed from a 100-mile stretch of coastline in late 2016, the militants recently posted a video showing their fighters manning a new checkpoint. And far from its roots in the Middle East, the group continues to grow in other corners of the world, including in the Philippines, where a local affiliate held the town of Marawi for months, and in West Africa, where the militants continue to grow their ranks, encroaching on areas formerly under Al Qaeda's grasp.

If the Islamic State does decline, other jihadist organizations are poised to fill the vacuum.

Al Qaeda, whose appeal to young fighters had been largely eclipsed by the tech-savvy new caliphate of the Islamic State, is vying for a comeback.

''The reason that the I.S. gained a big following quickly was that it appealed to the hotheads, those looking for instant gratification,'' said Bill Roggio, a senior fellow at the Foundation for the Defense of Democracies who monitors terrorist groups. ''That caliphate model is all gone, but Al Qaeda remains.''

The older group has been urging followers to pivot from the Islamic State's focus on the battlefields of the Middle East and instead put an emphasis on attacks in the United States and other foreign lands.

It has also been promoting a younger, charismatic new leader: Hamza bin Laden, 27, the son of Osama.

Syrian Democratic Forces fighters in Raqqa this month. The Islamic State may be losing its capital but not its bite. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A12) 

Document NYTF000020171019edaj00056



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
The Trump Doctrine

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
1,078 words
18 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
27
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Well, it took almost a year, but we now have the ''Trump Doctrine.'' It's very simple. And, as you'd expect, it fits neatly into a tweet. On nearly every major issue, President Trump's position is: ''Obama built it. I broke it. You fix it.''

And that cuts right to the core of what is the most frightening thing about the Trump presidency. It's not the president's juvenile tweeting or all the aides who've been pushed out of his clown car at high speed or his industrial-strength lying.

It's Trump's willingness to unravel so many longstanding policies and institutions at once -- from Nafta to Obamacare to the global climate accord to the domestic clean power initiative to the Pacific trade deal to the Iran nuclear deal -- without any real preparation either on the day before or for the morning after.

Indeed, Trump has made most of his climate, health, energy and economic decisions without consulting any scientists, without inviting into the White House a broad range of experts, without putting forth his own clear-cut alternatives to the systems he's unraveling, without having at the ready a team of aides or a political coalition able to implement any alternatives and without a strategic framework that connects all of his dots.

In short, we're simply supposed to take the president's word that this or that deal ''is the worst deal ever'' -- backed up by no serious argument or plan about how he will produce a better one.

I'm open to improving any of these accords or institutions. I'm even open to the possibility that by just tipping over all these accords at once, and throwing away his steering wheel, Trump will get people to improve the Iran deal or Obamacare out of sheer panic at the chaos that might ensue if they don't.

But I am equally open to the possibility that unraveling all of these big systems at once -- health, energy, geopolitics -- without a clear plan or a capable team will set in motion chain reactions, some of them long term, that Trump has not thought through in the least. Moreover, when you break big systems, which, albeit imperfectly, have stabilized regions, environments or industries for decades, it can be very difficult to restore them.

Question: We're told by our secretary of state that he's been engaged in some secret contacts with North Korea, exploring the possibility of a diplomatic solution that might dramatically reduce North Korea's nuclear arsenal in return for U.S. promises of regime security. If, at the same time, Trump unilaterally pulls out of the deal we've already signed with Iran to prevent it from developing nukes -- and Trump moves to reimpose sanctions -- how does that not send only one message to the North Koreans: No deal with the U.S. is worth the paper it's written on, so you'd be wise to hold on to all your nukes?

Question: Iran controls tens of thousands of Shiite militiamen in Iraq and Syria who were our tacit allies in defeating ISIS. Tehran also has huge influence over Iraq's government and over certain regions of Afghanistan as well. Can we stabilize Iraq, Syria and Afghanistan -- post-ISIS -- and keep our troop presence low and safe, without Iran's help -- and will that help be coming after Trump rips up the nuclear deal? If you think so, please raise your hand.

And since our European allies as well as Russia and China have indicated that they will not follow us in backing out of the Iran deal or reimposing sanctions, Iran would have all the moral high ground and money it needs, and the U.S. would be isolated. Are we going to sanction E.U. banks if they deal with Iran?

Trump came into office vowing to end the trade imbalance with China -- a worthy goal. And what was his first move? To tear up the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the trade deal that would have put the U.S. at the helm of a 12-nation trading bloc built around U.S. interests and values, potentially eliminating some 18,000 tariffs on U.S. goods and controlling 40 percent of global G.D.P. And China was not in the group. That's called leverage.

Trump just ripped up the TPP to ''satisfy the base'' and is now left begging China for trade crumbs, with little leverage. And because he needs China's help in dealing with North Korea, he has even less leverage on trade.

Trump pulled the U.S. out of the Paris climate accord and, at the same time, restricted U.S. government funding for birth control both at home and abroad. Question: What is driving so many immigrants and refugees in Africa, the Middle East and Central America to try to get out of their world of disorder and into America and Europe and the world order?

Answer: It is a cocktail of climate change, environmental degradation, population explosions and misgovernance in these countries. So Trump's policy is to throw away every tool we have to mitigate climate change and population growth and try to build a wall instead, while also trying to bully Mexico's unpopular president into trade concessions, which could help elect a radical populist in next year's Mexican election -- a successor who would be anti-American -- and destabilize its economy as well.

At a time when China has decided to go full-bore into clean tech and electric cars, at a time when all of the tech giants are building data centers that they want powered by clean energy, at a time when solar and wind power are growing increasingly competitive with fossil fuels (and America still has a technological lead in many of these areas), at a time when climate change may be stimulating bigger hurricanes and forest fires that are costing us hundreds of billions of dollars, Trump's central energy initiative is to reverse Obama's and bring back coal-fired power.

None of these dots connect. And we will pay for that. ''Whiplash'' was a great movie. But it's a terrible organizing principle for our foreign or domestic policy.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020171018edai0004p



FACT CHECK
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Can Trump Claim Credit For Victories Over  ISIS ?

By LINDA QIU 
1,187 words
18 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- When President Trump took office in January, the Islamic State controlled about 23,300 square miles of territory across Iraq and Syria. Now, as an American-backed militia declared on Tuesday that it had liberated Raqqa, Syria, the capital of the extremists' self-proclaimed caliphate, the Islamic State's territory has dwindled to no more than 9,300 square miles.

For months, Mr. Trump has demanded credit for a stepped-up military campaign that has weakened the Islamic State, claiming repeatedly that he has done ''far more against ISIS in nine months'' than President Barack Obama did during his entire administration.

Yet experts said it was always anticipated that the three-year war against the Islamic State that was started by Mr. Obama in 2014 would reach this point, and military officials are quick to praise local troops and fighters for battleground victories.

''Just by looking at the map, the losses this year are off the scale compared to previous years,'' said Columb Strack, an analyst at the research firm IHS Markit, which has been tracking the territory that the Islamic State has surrendered.

But, he added, ''I haven't seen any major differences in the U.S. approach against the Islamic State.''

The ferocity of Operation Inherent Resolve, the American campaign against the Islamic State, has accelerated in nearly every way over the past year.

In the spring, Mr. Trump loosened the rules of battlefield engagement to give American commanders on the ground more authority in day-to-day decisions in fighting the Islamic State. Those rules were more restrictive under the Obama administration, and experts said easing them might have helped ramp up the assault against the Islamic State -- and, perhaps by extension, the death toll and civilian casualties.

''We weren't fighting to win,'' Mr. Trump said on Tuesday of military efforts before he became commander in chief. ''We were fighting to be politically correct.'' Victories were more elusive then, he said, ''because you didn't have Trump as your president.''

Early Tuesday, the Syrian Democratic Forces declared it had liberated Raqqa. Col. Ryan S. Dillon, the Pentagon's top spokesman in Baghdad, estimated that the American-backed militia of Kurds and Arabs now controlled more than 90 percent of the city in northern Syria, and about 350 Islamic State fighters had surrendered. Colonel Dillon cautioned, however, that ''clearance operations continue'' and Raqqa was not yet free of the Islamic State.

Raqqa has been an imminent target since last October, before Mr. Trump's election. The battle for Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, began that same month; the city's east fell two days before he took office. It was not until this summer, however, that Iraqi leaders announced they had freed Mosul from the Islamic State after its three-year occupation.

Military data show that actions taken under Mr. Trump's command have not eclipsed all efforts in the American-led coalition before he took office -- or, for that matter, do not represent a drastic change from the earlier mission. Rather, they reflect an incremental increase that shifted as the fighting moved from sparsely-populated areas to urban centers.

As of Oct. 16, the latest numbers available, the American-led military coalition that is fighting the Islamic State had carried out an estimated 28,051 airstrikes since 2014, according to the United States Central Command. As of Sept. 30, it had released 92,262 bombs. About two-thirds of the strikes, and 60 percent of the bombs dropped, occurred before Mr. Trump's inauguration.

The air campaign has steadily escalated over the years -- and not suddenly swelled in 2017, as Mr. Trump has claimed. So far this year, the coalition has conducted 9,300 strikes, as of Oct. 16, and dropped 36,531 bombs. While that is an increase from the airstrikes and bombs dropped at this point in 2016, the numbers from last year are themselves an increase from 2015.

The total number of Islamic State militants who have been killed also appears to have peaked this year -- but at only a slightly higher rate than in years past.

Peter Bergen, a national security analyst at the New America Foundation, cited estimates from military officials who have said 60,000 to 70,000 fighters for the Islamic State had been killed as of July -- compared with 45,000 as of August 2016.

A comparison of deaths of Islamic State militants -- from what Mr. Bergen estimated was about 1,500 fighters a month during the Obama years to more than 2,000 a month since Mr. Trump took office -- supports the growing increase. He credited intense military operations in Mosul and Raqqa for the rise.

The aggressive military campaign has also taken its toll on civilians.

Coalition strikes had killed at least 199 civilians from 2014 to Feb. 2 of this year, according to the United States Central Command. That number had increased to at least 735 as of Sept. 29. The monitoring group Airwars puts the civilian death toll much higher: at least 15,825 as of Sept. 30. Chris Woods, the director of Airwars, says the number of civilian deaths has more than tripled this year.

Given local troops' heightened battlefield roles in Iraq and Syria, American military officials and experts agree that the fight would probably have come to its current stage -- no matter who was in the White House.

That may also explain the vast amount of territory recaptured from the Islamic State -- about 14,000 square miles -- so far this year. The White House has cited the lost territory as proof of significant progress against the extremists under Mr. Trump's watch. Mr. Strack said those wins were reflective of ''conditions on the ground'' and largely driven by the Syrian regime's rapid advancements this year.

Syrian and Iraqi forces have ''dominated'' over the Islamic State in recent months, Colonel Dillon said. However, he estimated that 6,500 Islamic State militants remained in Iraq and Syria, and that fighting would continue in Raqqa and the Euphrates River Valley.

Military officials said the end of this era of the Islamic State, as a military or a caliphate, might be nearing. But Mr. Trump's promise that the group ''will soon be wiped out'' may yet be wishful thinking; the Pentagon years ago predicted the demise of Al Qaeda in Iraq, only to see it rebrand and return as the Islamic State.

Trying to defeat the ideology that fuels the extremists is a much tougher task, officials conceded -- one that is likely to vex Mr. Trump as it did the Obama administration.

''There's still going to be work to be done,'' Colonel Dillon told reporters. ''Yes, ISIS will be defeated militarily, but we know that there still is going to be the ideology and the continued insurgent activity as they devolve into that.''

The Syrian Civil Defense carrying a victim after an airstrike on a vegetable market in Idlib Province, Syria, this month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MOHAMED AL-BAKOUR/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020171018edai0004a



U.S.
Lawsuit Claims Three U.S. Companies Funded Terror in Iraq

By GARDINER HARRIS 
1,022 words
18 October 2017
02:37
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON — lawsuit filed in federal court on Tuesday contends that major American corporations doing business with the Iraqi government during the Iraq War also provided it with free drugs and medical devices that became an important source of funding for a Shiite militia that targeted United States troops.

The lawsuit was filed on behalf of members of the American military who were injured or killed by attacks between 2005 and 2009, at the height of the Iraq War. It accuses five companies —merican firms General Electric, Johnson & Johnson and Pfizer and European drugmakers AstraZeneca and Roche Holding A.G. —f winning contracts to sell their products to the Iraqi Ministry of Health with the understanding that they also provide additional medical supplies and medicines for free.

At the time, the health ministry was controlled by followers of Moktada al-Sadr, a firebrand cleric and the leader of the Mahdi Army, whose death squads against Iraqi Sunnis also brought the country to the brink of civil war. The lawsuit claims Mr. Sadr’ lieutenants sold the samples on Iraq’ black market to fund their attacks on American forces.

As evidence, the lawsuit cited contracts between the companies and the Iraqi government, leaked diplomatic cables, press accounts and the testimony of informants. It was filed in United States District Court in Washington by lawyers from of a start-up firm led by Ryan Sparacino, who has been investigating the allegations for more than a year, and the litigation firm of Kellogg Hansen.

“hile Americans worked to rebuild Iraq, many were attacked by a terrorist group that we allege has been funded in part by the defendants’orrupt sales practices,”aid Josh Branson, a Kellogg Hansen partner.

A spokeswoman for Pfizer, Allyanna Anglim, said the company “ategorically denies any wrongdoing. Our mission is to provide medicines to patients to help better their lives.”

Johnson & Johnson declined to comment.

Jennifer Friedman, a spokeswoman for General Electric, said the company “ecame aware of the complaint today and we are thoroughly reviewing the allegations.”

The central argument of the lawsuit is that the companies must have known that the Iraqi health ministry had become a de facto terrorist organization, and the American firms should have at least insisted that contracts be structured to guard against diversion and corruption. It is illegal under United States law to knowingly fund terror groups; the Mahdi Army and other Sadrist militias are not designated as terror organizations by the State Department, but they are linked to Hezbollah, which is.

The lawsuit says that the companies underwrote the Mahdi Army in two ways. Contracts mandated discounts, but instead of lowering the price, the companies provided “ree goods”ften equal to about 10 percent of the total order, allowing ministry officials to sell the extras on the black market or distribute them to fighters.

The companies were also required to hire intermediaries to register their companies, get approval for the use of their products in Iraq and negotiate contracts. The lawsuit says the payments to intermediaries were thinly-disguised bribes.

After the 2003 overthrow of Saddam Hussein, the procurement budget for Iraq’ health ministry soared to more than $1 billion in 2004 from about $16 million, in part because of an infusion of aid from the United States.

As the United States devolved power back to Iraqis n 2004, some government ministries were taken over by political factions. The health ministry was among the first to go, with Mr. Sadr’ movement taking charge. Very quickly, the ministry’ technocratic leaders and many secular doctors were purged.

Mr. Sadr’ militia was sometimes referred to as the “ill Army”ecause its fighters were often paid with prescription medicines and used hospitals as staging areas and ambulances to launch attacks. The Iraqi health ministry’ headquarters and hospitals were festooned at the time with pictures of Mr. Sadr alongside slogans declaring “eath to America.”

Some hospitals in Baghdad became staging areas for death squads, from where Mahdi Army forces launched mortars against American troops. Sunni patients were often summarily shot. A State Department cable from 2006 quoted a top Iraqi politician as describing the health ministry as “he Ministry of Weapons Transportation.”

That the companies knew their business practices were inappropriate and perhaps illegal, the lawsuit said, was suggested by settlements each reached on charges that they had used identical tactics and even some of the same intermediaries before the war as part of an oil-for-food program sponsored by the United Nations that was found to be riddled with fraud.

General Electric, Johnson & Johnson and Pfizer are likely to argue that they were simply selling to a government that the United States was spending billions of dollars to support, and that cutting off Iraq’ health ministry from lifesaving products would have been counterproductive to American goals.

About 100 former military personnel or their family members are plaintiffs in the lawsuit.

“t’ unconscionable to have U.S. companies give money to terrorists who then kill U.S. troops,”aid one of the plaintiffs, Ami Neiberger-Miller. Her brother, Specialist Chris Neiberger, a 22-year-old tank gunner, was killed in 2007 in Baghdad when his Humvee was blown up by a device that Ms. Neiberger-Miller later learned was linked to the Mahdi Army.

* Iraqi Forces Raid Mosque With Links to Sadrists

* Radical Shiite Cleric Calls on Iraqi Forces to Unite Against the U.S. Military

* Cleric Calls for Resistance to U.S. Presence in Iraq

* Pfizer Pays $2.3 Billion to Settle Marketing Case

* Narcotic Maker Guilty of Deceit Over Marketing

Ami Neiberger-Miller at home. Her brother, Chris Neiberger, was killed in Iraq in 2007. | Mary F. Calvert for The New York Times | U.S. Army Specialist Christopher Neiberger in Florida the day after Christmas 2006, in a photo taken by his mother, Mary Neiberger. | Mary Neiberger | A Mahdi Army rally in Baghdad burned an ISIS black banner, along with American and Israeli flags in 2014. | Tyler Hicks/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171018edai0008d



World; Asia Pacific
Philippine City Is Declared ‘iberated’rom Terrorists After Months of Fighting

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
728 words
17 October 2017
13:24
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA —lanked by soldiers and officers, President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines on Tuesday declared the southern city of Marawi “iberated from terrorist influence,”ive months after Islamic militants stormed the town, killing scores and sending thousands fleeing.

The president’ visit to Marawi came one day after the authorities declared government forces had killed the insurgency’ leaders in a gunfight. But gunfire could still be heard in pockets of the city, where about 30 militants, some of them foreigners, continued a last stand. At least 20 civilians remain hostages, the authorities said.

Those remaining fighters, officials said, were led by Mahmud bin Ahmad, a Malaysian terrorist who has helped fund the fighting in the Philippines’estive south. Mr. Ahmad was a close associate of Isnilon Hapilon, an F.B.I.-wanted terrorist who was killed in Monday’ fighting. Mr. Hapilon was the leader of Abu Sayyaf, a terrorist group linked to the Islamic State.

The area still controlled by Mr. Mahmud and his fighters is “ery much contained and controlled,”aid Maj. Gen. Restituto Padilla, a military spokesman.

General Padilla described Mr. Mahmud as an “cademic,”ho lacked the leadership skills of Mr. Hapilon and Omarkhayam Maute, another experienced guerrilla who was also killed on Monday.

“is ability to lead the fight is not there,”eneral Padilla said of Mr. Mahmud.

Mr. Mahmud, 39, trained at Al Qaeda camps in Afghanistan in the 1990s while studying at Islamabad Islamic University in Pakistan. He is a former lecturer of Islamic studies at the University of Malaya in Kuala Lumpur, one of Malaysia’ top universities.

Now that the bulk of the fighting has ended, the government must begin the difficult work of rebuilding the badly battered city.

More than 200,000 residents are crammed in filthy refugee camps, waiting for the military to declare the operation officially ended.

“lease be patient,”ol. Romeo Brawner, a regional army spokesman, told the displaced residents. “e will have to clear the area before you are allowed to return.”

Colonel Brawner said soldiers must “escue the remaining hostages and make sure there are no stragglers or I.E.D.s of unexploded ordnance left behind.”

Mr. Duterte declared martial law in Mindanao Province in May when fighting broke out. Two months later, he extended the provision through the end of this year.

General Padilla said on Tuesday that martial law would remain in place despite the cessation in fighting.

“here is a greater threat here that needs to be addressed,”e said. “he need for the maintenance of martial law in some parts is really important because of the network, the existence of the network of all these terrorist groups.”

Julkipli Wadi, a professor of Islamic studies at the University of the Philippines, said that although the fighting in Marawi may be close to ending, there has been a noticeable increase in violence elsewhere in the south.

The battle for Marawi showed Islamic State-affiliated fighters that a small group of militants can hold their own against the Philippine Army for months, Professor Wadi said.

“hey pinned down the army for five months,”e said. “his is a group that was not even recognized, let alone accorded respectability, some two years ago.”

“he picture down the stretch is not pretty,”rofessor Wadi warned. “s yesterday’ rain enlivens a dry brook, tomorrow’ rain will facilitate even more its turning into a gushing, dangerous river.”

* Philippines Says It Killed \b ISIS\b0 -Linked Leader in Push to Reclaim City

* Captive Priest Is Freed as Philippine Troops Close In on Militants

* He Aimed to Fight in Syria. \b ISIS\b0  Had a Broader Plan: Southeast Asia

* In City of Ruins, Philippines’attle Against \b ISIS\b0  Rages On

* Philippine Supreme Court Upholds Duterte’ Martial Law Edict

A Philippine soldier in Marawi last month. After months of fighting, President Rodrigo Duterte declared the city liberated on Tuesday. | Jes Aznar for The New York Times | Mr. Duterte, center, addressed Philippine troops on Tuesday. His visit came one day after officials said that government forces had killed the insurgency’ leaders in a gunfight. | Bullit Marquez/Associated Press | Soldiers listening to Mr. Duterte’ speech in front of posters showing images of two Islamist leaders killed on Monday. | Bullit Marquez/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020171017edah002gx



Briefing
Donald Trump, California, N.B.A.: Your Tuesday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,459 words
17 October 2017
11:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning. Before we begin, if you’e ever wondered how this briefing gets put together every day, your writer has the answer.

Here’ what you need to know:

How to make conservatives happy.

President Trump and Senator Mitch McConnell are trying a new approach: judges.

In a surprise display of togetherness on Monday, the two men emphasized a mutual desire to fill scores of federal court vacancies.

Our chief Washington correspondent, Carl Hulse, explains: “he courts are a longtime priority of conservative activists who have been grumbling about the failures of the Republican Congress, so a flurry of confirmations of nominees with known conservative views on cultural and government issues could quiet some complaints.”

After months of tensions, Mr. Trump and Mr. McConnell held a joint news conference in the Rose Garden. Here are some of the topics the president addressed.

While answering questions, Mr. Trump falsely asserted that his predecessors, particularly Barack Obama, hadn’ contacted the families of American troops killed in duty.

Milestone reached against ISIS.

The Syrian Democratic Forces, an American-backed militia group made up of Syrian Kurds and Arabs, said today that it had liberated the northern Syrian city of Raqqa from the Islamic State.

It’ a major blow to the militant group, which had long used the city as the de facto capital of its self-declared caliphate.

“he greatest fireworks show in the universe.”

Astronomers are excited.

It was announced on Monday that they had observed a pair of dead stars colliding, the first glimpse of the violent process by which most of the gold and silver in the universe was created.

“ can’ think of a similar situation in the field of science in my lifetime, where a single event provides so many staggering insights about our universe,”n astrophysicist at the University of Chicago said.

We have a video to explain it all , and answer some questions about the discovery.

After disasters, dangers remain.

One of our reporters, Caitlin Dickerson, visited a remote village in Puerto Rico devastated by Hurricane Maria.

Residents, she said, “ere quick to point out that other Puerto Ricans were living in worse circumstances, though it was hard to imagine whom they could have been talking about.”

And in California, the wildfires are far from over, but officials are confronting the next challenge: the huge amount of debris and ash that will be left behind.

“ust think of all the hazardous materials in your house,”he chief public health officer in Napa County said. “our chemicals, your pesticides, propane, gasoline, plastic and paint —t all burns down into the ash.”

#MeToo.

In the past two weeks, more than 30 women have accused the Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein of sexual misconduct.

There has been an outpouring on social media of stories of sexual harassment, punctuated by the hashtag #MeToo.

Nina Jacobson, a film producer, predicted a change in the entertainment industry: “ think the floodgates being opened is something that had to happen, and that finally brings a subject to the surface that has sort of gone unchecked for countless years.”

“he Daily,”our audio news report.

In today’ show, we discuss the guilty plea by Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•he health care industry is the job engine of many parts of the U.S., aided by funding as a result of the Affordable Care Act.

We visited a county in Arkansas where health care accounts for one in four jobs.

•ome airlines have begun offering free meals in coach on selected U.S. flights.

•.S. stocks were up on Monday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ristine environments for children can  contribute to allergies and asthma.

• ough workout? Try these five things to speed up recovery.

•ecipe of the day: This pumpkin Bundt cake with a maple brown-butter glaze is full of fall spices.

Noteworthy

•iking in New York City.

In today’ 360 video, ride through the busy streets of a city that has spent millions to improve safety for cyclists.

•artisan writing you shouldn’ miss.

Writers from across the political spectrum discuss the state of the Republican Party.

•hey’e cute now, but then they grow up…

No matter how you raise a wolf, you can’ turn it into a dog. Scientists are trying to determine why.

•asketball is back.

The N.B.A. tips off its 72nd season tonight. We have previews of the Eastern and Western conferences.

Our new basketball columnist, Marc Stein, has covered the league for more than 20 years and says he’ never seen a more overwhelming favorite to win the championship than the Golden State Warriors.

•est of late-night TV.

Kicking off a week of shows from Brooklyn, Jimmy Kimmel took a jab at its reputation for liberal pretension: “ll of the jokes you will hear tonight were written in small batches, by hand, on biodegradable hemp parchment, using natural ink that was made from sustainably harvested lingonberries.”

And  we spoke to Mr. Kimmel about his new visibility after he addressed the news in personal terms.

•uotation of the day.

“hey may have made a miscalculation of historic proportions by proceeding with the referendum over the objections of just about everyone who counts.”

—Joost Hiltermann, an analyst with the International Crisis Group, on the fallout from the Kurdish independence vote. On Monday, the Iraqi government carried out a military assault to wrest territory from separatists.

Back Story

The Man Booker Prize, which honors the best novel written in English and published in Britain, will be announced today.

On this year’ shortlist: “4 3 2 1,”y Paul Auster; “History of Wolves,”y Emily Fridlund; “Exit West,”y Mohsin Hamid; “Autumn,”y Ali Smith; “Lincoln in the Bardo,”y George Saunders; and “Elmet,”y Fiona Mozley.

First awarded in 1969, the Booker McConnell Prize was named for the multinational company that established it, as an effort to rival the Prix Goncourt in France. In 2002, sponsorship passed to the Man Group, an investment management firm, which added its name to the title.

The award was initially open only to writers from Britain, Ireland, Zimbabwe and the Commonwealth. Eligibility expanded in 2014 to include any English-language novelist, raising concerns that it would become dominated by Americans. (Since then, one U.S. novel —Paul Beatty’ “he Sellout”—as won. Half of the authors on this year’ shortlist are Americans.)

Winners receive 50,000 pounds, or about $66,000. Howard Jacobson, who won in 2010 for “The Finkler Question,”told The Guardian that he was going to spend the prize money on his wife: “ave you seen the price of handbags?”

Sara Aridi contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated all morning. Browse past briefings here.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can get the briefing delivered to your inbox Sunday through Friday. We have four global editions, timed for the Americas, Europe, Asia and Australia. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Using an improvised pulley system to transport supplies over the river at Charco Abajo, P.R. Three weeks after Hurricane Maria, damaged infrastructure is hampering the delivery of aid to remote communities in Puerto Rico. | Dennis M. Rivera Pichardo for The New York Times | President Trump and Senator Mitch McConnell at the White House on Monday. | Tom Brenner/The New York Times | A classic showstopper. | Jim Wilson/The New York Times | Wolf pups at play. Researchers are looking at DNA for the answer to the differences between wolves and dogs. | Renaud Philippe for The New York Times | One of these authors will win the Man Booker Prize today. Clockwise, from top left: Paul Auster, Emily Fridlund, Mohsin Hamid, Ali Smith, George Saunders, and Fiona Mozley. | Clockwise, from top left: Lotte Hansen; Weidenfeld & Nicolson; Hamish Hamilton; Sarah Wood; Bloomsbury Publishing and JM Originals | For the first time, astronomers have seen and heard a pair of neutron stars collide in a crucible of cosmic alchemy. | By DENNIS OVERBYE, JONATHAN CORUM and JASON DRAKEFORD | The city of New York has spent millions on improving bicycle safety, but a recent study that monitored cyclists’rainwaves while biking highlighted the dangers that still exist. | By TAYLOR NAKAGAWA, SAMANTHA QUICK and NATHAN GRIFFITHS 

Document NYTFEED020171017edah001up



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
OpEd; SECT
Democracy is possible in Syria. My friend knew how.

By DAVID GRAEBER 
1,253 words
17 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The International New York Times
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

''The Kurds have no friends but the mountains'' -- that's what Mehmet Aksoy used to say. But Mehmet, who was killed Sept. 26 during an attack by the Islamic State in northern Syria, was my friend, and a tireless advocate of the Kurdish freedom movement.

He was working on an essay that began with those words when he died. He often used that adage to explain the plight of his people, who have long been used or mistreated by the very powers that claim to spread democracy and freedom through the world.

I first met Mehmet at a Kurdish demonstration in London, where he lived. I had come because of my interest in direct democratic movements like the one the Syrian Kurds were building, but ended up feeling as if I was lurking, out of place at the fringe of the gathering, until he walked up and introduced himself. I came to know him as I've now heard many in the community did, as kind and unassuming but somehow larger than life, always juggling a dozen projects, films, essays, events and political actions.

Now I think it's important to tell people about his last project, his writing on the conflict in Kurdistan, so that more of us understand what's at stake there. He was writing in the shadow of a referendum taking place in neighboring Iraqi Kurdistan that everyone knew would end with a strong endorsement of an independent Kurdish state.

But the Syrian Kurdish freedom movement that Mehmet represents has pursued an entirely different vision from that of the Kurds in Iraq: It does not wish to change the borders of states but simply to ignore them and to build grass-roots democracy at the community level. It frustrated Mehmet that the endless sacrifices of Kurdish fighters against the Islamic State in cities across Syria are being mistakenly seen as justification of more borders and more divisions rather than for less.

Too often in the Western news media, the Kurds are grouped together as one homogeneous people, with Syrian Kurds often an afterthought of late because of the attention the Iraqi Kurds have received for their referendum. But the Kurds in these two countries have built very different political systems. The Syrian Kurds have built a coalition with Arabs, Syriacs, Christians and others in the northern slice of Syria that they call Rojava (or, more officially, the The Democratic Federation of Northern Syria.).

They want pluralistic, democratic self-determination for themselves and others in a newly federated Syria, discarding the nationalist project that led to the Iraqi referendum. As Mehmet put it, ''not to create a new state, but to create a revolutionary, educated, modern, self-conscious and genuinely democratic society. So stop calling us separatists!''

Why secede, trading the problems of one state for another as the Iraqi Kurdish authorities want? ''There have been many wars waged for independence,'' Mehmet wrote, ''but did having recognition as a state change the fate of the Arab children of Iraq, the African children of Libya or the Syrian children who have died in their thousands in the last few years? No.'' He felt the region's borders, largely a product of Western meddling after World War I, had stoked ethnic and religious conflict and rendered divided peoples ripe for economic exploitation.

Mehmet believed that the Syrian Kurdish model, called Democratic Confederalism, with its emphasis on an ''educated and ecologically self-conscious'' society employing direct democracy beginning at the neighborhood level, offered the Kurds and other ethnic groups the chance to have true autonomy across existing state borders that, even if they were redrawn, would never adequately represent all the peoples of the region.

He was convinced what Kurdistan was witnessing was a ''great crisis'' of the state system, a vast global proxy war that, he wrote, ''culminated in the rise of ISIS, an evil jihadist force that turned Syria and Iraq into a burning hell and threatened the lives of millions here and abroad.'' It was only the rise of that democratic movement, and its effective fighting forces, the People's and Women's Protection Units, that halted it, and today are on the verge of forcing the Islamic State from its de facto capital of Raqqa.

''But these victories came at a terrible cost,'' he reminds us. And it's true, thousands of young Kurds have died fighting a war against the Islamic State that, we shouldn't forget, benefits those in the West that fear the group's attacks. ''Why is it,'' he asked, ''that the sacrifice of such selfless souls is not receiving the attention it deserves in the media?''

And what will happen once the Islamic State is banished from Raqqa? Do Western leaders really care what happens to the Syrian people once the threat of the Islamic State is gone? ''Syria will remain a hotbed of war if a truly multiethnic and multireligious society is not established,'' Mehmet wrote. And what he and the movement he was part of offer is a vision of hope for the region: ''We believe we can only be human if we live under a humane system, humane social structures based on humane ideas.'' This is the system they are building.

Despite this, representatives from the Syrian Kurdish movement were not invited to peace talks in Geneva over the last few years largely because of Turkish and Iranian opposition. And the United States, though happy to support the Kurds militarily when it needs them, has kept them at arm's length diplomatically in deference to its Turkish allies, even as Turkey has labeled Syrian Kurds ''terrorists'' and unleashed unprovoked attacks on forces trying to focus on the Islamic State.

If this continues, Mehmet wrote, ''like the Kurdistan Regional Government's vote of independence, the negotiations will be over the form and borders of states, the creation of more divisions, more walls, more hatreds -- even as those who have fought the hardest against such forces, who have worked to propose a different model and vision of society, are frozen out.''

Now Mehmet Aksoy has joined the list of those who gave their lives to try to create a different vision for the Middle East and, ultimately, humanity. He had traveled from London to Syria to work toward this goal as a journalist and filmmaker embedded with the Y.P.G. -- the Syrian Kurdish forces fighting the jihadists -- and he was killed when the Islamic State attacked a base near the Raqqa front.

Those who knew him are keenly aware of what we all have lost. And those in Syria who share his vision are still excluded from future planned peace talks. Perhaps there will always be cynical politicians who speak of democracy and women's rights as a means of bringing more wars and suffering into the world. But those of us in the West who sincerely support these things need to pressure our governments to change that in honor of the sacrifices that Mehmet and so many thousands like him have given to create a new hope for a region that has drowned in tears and blood.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

David Graeber is an anthropologist, political activist and the author of ''Debt: The First 5,000 Years.''

Mehmet Aksoy in Raqqa, Syria, in August. Y.P.G. PRESS OFFICE 

Document NYTF000020171017edah0002x



World; Asia Pacific
Philippines Says It Killed  ISIS -Linked Leader in Push to Reclaim City

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
585 words
16 October 2017
09:04
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA —ne of Asia’ most-wanted terrorists was killed Monday in the southern city of Marawi, the Philippine authorities said, after thousands of government troops pushed over the weekend to reclaim the town from Islamist militants.

The terrorist who died, Isnilon Hapilon, was the leader of Abu Sayyaf, a militant group affiliated with the Islamic State that has held parts of Marawi since May. The police provided a photo of Mr. Hapilon’ body as proof of his death.

Mr. Hapilon and another militant leader, Omarkhayam Maute, led a final stand against government troops that ended with both men’ deaths in a predawn gunfight Monday.

More than 1,000 people, including 800 militants, have been killed since the terrorist groups overran the city five months ago. The government escalated its efforts to end the standoff this weekend. At least 20 soldiers, including a colonel, were wounded in the latest fighting.

Seventeen hostages, including children, were rescued by troops this weekend. Security analysts were cautiously optimistic that fighting could end this week, but they warned that other militant leaders could fill the void left by Mr. Hapilon’ death.

“ur units in the front line are continuing with their offensives to neutralize the remaining terrorists and rescue their hostages to end the crisis in Marawi,”aid Col. Edgard Arevalo, a military spokesman.

Mr. Hapilon’ group, Abu Sayyaf, earned a reputation for brutality, including kidnappings and beheadings. In 2001, he organized the abduction of 20 hostages, including three Americans, from a resort. Two of the Americans were murdered, an act that led the F.B.I. to put Mr. Hapilon on its most-wanted list and offer $5 million for his capture.

This year, the group beheaded a 70-year-old German yachtsman. Last year, it beheaded two Canadians kidnapped from a beach resort in the southern Philippines.

Mr. Hapilon became the leader of Abu Sayyaf in the 1990s after disavowing the Moro National Liberation Front, a Muslim separatist group that had signed a peace pact with the Philippine government.

Under Mr. Hapilon’ leadership, Abu Sayyaf earned a reputation for being the most violent of the Philippines’ armed Muslim factions.

Terrorism analysts said Mr. Hapilon’ death would not lead to the immediate end of hostilities in the south.

“his is a setback,”aid Rommel Banlaoi, the executive director of the Philippine Institute for Peace, Violence and Terrorism Research, “ut terrorist threats will take a new form and continue to challenge the government.”

“here are other leaders who are expected to take his place who still have the intention to wreak havoc,”r. Banlaoi said.

Mr. Banlaoi warned of “etaliatory attacks”rom Puruji Indama, an Abu Sayyaf lieutenant who remains at large on the island of Basilan, also in the south.

“t’ not over yet,”r. Banlaoi said. “iolence will take a new form after Hapilon.”

* In City of Ruins, Philippines’attle Against \b ISIS\b0  Rages On

* Destroying a Philippine City to Save It From \b ISIS\b0  Allies

* Philippine Military Says 17 Mutilated Civilian Bodies Found in Marawi

* He Aimed to Fight in Syria. \b ISIS\b0  Had a Broader Plan: Southeast Asia

Isnilon Hapilon, second from left, the leader of the Islamist militant group Abu Sayyaf, in an image taken from video and released by the Philippine Army in June. The government said he was killed on Monday. | Philippine Army, via Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171016edag001e1



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Jitters in Contested City of Kirkuk Over Movements by Iraqi Troops

By DAVID ZUCCHINO and FALIH HASSAN 
855 words
14 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- Kurdish and Iraqi officials rushed Friday to calm fears of impending military action around the contested city of Kirkuk.

Late Thursday, Iraqi media outlets began reporting Kurdish statements that Iraqi troops were massing for an attack on Kirkuk. Iraq's prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, said Friday on Twitter that the reports were ''fake news,'' writing, ''Our forces cannot and will not attack our citizens, whether Arab or Kurd.''

Kurdish officials continued to say on Friday that they were concerned about an Iraqi military buildup, but also said that they were withdrawing from certain areas to avoid conflict with Iraqi troops.

The flurry of statements reflected the tensions surrounding the political showdown between Iraq's central government and Iraqi Kurds since the autonomous Kurdish region in northern Iraq voted last month to seek independence.

The only troop movements that could be confirmed were the withdrawals of Kurdish forces from two small districts south of the city, a move that one Kurdish commander said was coordinated with the Iraqi military and allowed them to take over the vacated positions.

The commander, Brig. Gen. Rasool Kadir, said in a telephone interview from Kirkuk Province that the Kurdish withdrawal was made after discussions with Iraqi military commanders in the face of an Iraqi troop buildup.

''We don't want to fight the Iraqi Army because political problems must be solved by dialogue,'' General Kadir said.

Jafar Shakhe Mustafa, the commander of Kurdish forces in the city of Kirkuk, said in a separate interview that the withdrawals were intended to avoid conflict with Iraqi forces, ''who stood with us in fighting Daesh.'' The extremist group Islamic State is also known as Daesh, ISIS or ISIL.

But Mr. Mustafa added, ''We promise the people of Kirkuk that we will defend them until the last drop of our blood'' against any attack on the city.

Kurdish forces, known as pesh merga, and Iraqi government troops are part of the American-led coalition that has driven Islamic State militants from most of the territory they seized in 2014 in northern and western Iraq. The United States has supported both forces with military trainers, advisers, Special Operations forces, airstrikes and artillery.

But the coalition operation that evicted the militants from their last major urban stronghold in Iraq in the district of Hawija in Kirkuk Province on Oct. 5 narrowed the distance between pesh merga and Iraqi Army lines, raising tensions on both sides.

Defense Secretary Jim Mattis told reporters in Washington on Friday that with American troops ''integrated among these forces,'' he was concerned about an escalation to ''a shooting situation.'' But he said American forces were ''working too, to make certain we keep any potential for conflict off the table.''

Col. Ryan Dillon, the spokesman for the coalition in Baghdad, said American troops remained focused on advising and training Iraqi forces. He said the coalition sought to avoid distractions from the current operation to evict ISIS militants in Iraq from their remaining territory in western Anbar Province near the Syrian border.

An official at the American Embassy in Baghdad urged all sides to avoid remarks or actions that might escalate tensions or distract from the fight against the Islamic State.

The two districts abandoned by pesh merga troops are south of Kirkuk, Kurdish commanders said. Both districts, Taza and Beshir, are inhabited by Turkmens, a Shiite Muslim minority, who oppose control of the area by Kurds, who are Sunni.

The districts are among several disputed areas in northern Iraq, including Kirkuk, seized by the pesh merga after Iraqi troops fled the 2014 assault by the Islamic State. The central government has demanded that the Kurdish regional government return all the territory.

Baghdad seemed content on Friday to emphasize that the two sides managed to avoid armed conflict. The Iraqi military command said any movement by Iraqi forces on Friday was part of a clearing-and-stabilization operation after the successful battle for Hawija.

Iraq's interior minister, Kasim al-Araji, described ''a redeployment operation for federal forces after finishing the fight with Daesh in the sector.''

A video distributed on social media on Friday showed an Iraqi soldier climbing a tower, removing a Kurdish flag and tossing it to the ground as other soldiers fired their weapons. The video said the incident was filmed in the Taza district.

Hemin Hawrami, a spokesman for Massoud Barzani, the president of the Kurdish region, said pesh merga forces in Kirkuk city had been reinforced by several thousand volunteers as part of a ''rapid reaction plan'' in response to reports of a buildup of Iraqi forces outside the city. The presence of reinforcements could not be independently confirmed.

''Do not test our will,'' Mr. Hawrami said in a statement.

Omar Arif, the federal police commander in Kirkuk, described the situation there on Friday as ''stable, with no problems.''

Iraqi government forces taking up positions on Friday in Rashad, a town in the autonomous Kurdish region of northern Iraq. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MURTAJA LATEEF/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) 

Document NYTF000020171014edae0004s



Social Studies
The Learning Network; Lesson Plans
Then and Now: Exploring Modern Life Amid Relics of the Roman Empire

By TOM MARSHALL and AYAL GOURY 
1,424 words
11 October 2017
14:30
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Imagine living near the ruins of an ancient culture. Each day offers both delights and challenges, as you witness the ways in which time and modern problems have affected these precious artifacts. What are the costs of protecting these signs of history? And how has daily life changed for people living in such places in the 21st century, at the far end of a timeline reaching back generations?

In this lesson we invite students to learn about one ancient society, the Roman Empire, through stories about the communities that have developed in its wake. From modern Rome to the far reaches of the ancient empire in Syria, France, England and northern Africa, they will seek to understand the role that history can play in everyday lives. Then students can go further, conducting research on a specific site and learning how the goal of historical preservation comes into conflict with modern life.

_________

If You Have Only One Class Period …

Warm Up

Begin by using a map to orient students to the town of Lecce in southern Italy. Give them a quick visual tour using this travel video of the region. Then read the scenario below, detailed in the first lines of the article “Centuries of Italian History Are Unearthed in Quest to Fix Toilet.”

All Luciano Faggiano wanted when he purchased the seemingly unremarkable building at 56 Via Ascanio Grandi was to open a trattoria. The only problem was the toilet.

Sewage kept backing up. So Mr. Faggiano enlisted his two older sons to help him dig a trench and investigate. He predicted the job would take about a week.

If only.

“e found underground corridors and other rooms, so we kept digging,”aid Mr. Faggiano, 60.

Imagine if you were Mr. Faggiano, and you uncovered underground hidden rooms while trying to open a trattoria, a simple Italian restaurant, in Lecce. What would you do?

After students share their ideas with neighbors or the class, read and annotate the entire article.

Focus Questions for Discussion

After reading the story, ask students to work in pairs to answer the focus questions below. Then discuss.

1. Why did so many cultures settle in or pass through Lecce throughout history?

2. Why did local authorities initially close down Mr. Faggiano’ project, and what did they require to allow it to resume?

3. Why couldn’ Mr. Faggiano do whatever he wanted with his land and the treasures he found beneath it?

4. In what ways did history force Mr. Faggiano to change his plans for the property, and what was the impact of those changes for him and the broader community?

5. Do you think Mr. Faggiano handled his unexpected discovery well? Would you have made similar decisions? Why or why not?

_________

Student Inquiry Assignment

If you have more time, invite students to conduct their own research on a historical site from the Roman Empire, investigating the ways in which life has changed in that place.

As a warm up to generate ideas and enthusiasm, teachers may wish to share the slide show “Ancient Rome Today”rom The Guardian, or the New York Times travel video “36 Hours in Rome.”tudents may use stories from the list below as resources, along with this map from Vici.org’ Archaeological Atlas of Antiquity project which depicts specific archaeological sites from the empire.

As students read the stories below and gather additional resources from the internet, the class can use the following guiding questions to help focus their inquiry:

Q: How was this place used or developed in the ancient world?

Q: How has this place been used or developed in modern times?

Q: What are some of the most significant ways in which this place has changed?

Q: What have been some of the most significant challenges or conflicts in preserving these remnants of history?

Italy

Strays Amid Rome Ruins Set Off a Culture Clash Acqueducts’efenders Volunteer to Fill Breach in Upkeep of Park Illegal Dumping in Roman Catacombs Leaves Precious Ancient Site Polluted (The Guardian)

Rome Won’ Be Rebuilt in a Day: The Challenge of City Center Restoration (The Guardian)

Europe

Under English Garden, ‘nparalleled’emains of Roman Villa Roman France In Bulgaria, Roman Grandeur East of Italy

Middle East

When Cultural Heritage Is Caught in the Cross Hairs The Ancient City \b ISIS\b0  Is Destroying, Preserved Online

Northern Africa

Tourists Return to Tunisia, but Slowly Rome’ Glory Is Now Tunisia’ In Qaddafi’ Realm, Shadows of the Caesars

If students need additional background on the Roman Empire, teachers may wish to introduce the topic using resources such as The Roman Empire in the First Century from PBS, National Geographic’ Ancient Rome page, and ideas on teaching about ancient Rome from The Guardian’ Teacher Network.

Share student work on a class map using an online tool like National Geographic’ interactive MapMaker, which allows students to add text links and graphics to a pin on a map of the region.

_________

Going Further

What are the true costs of protecting history? It takes real money to keep ancient structures strong and safe. Nearly 300 people died in a 2016 earthquake in central Italy, and many priceless artifacts were destroyed —n part because property owners couldn’ afford necessary structural upgrades. Learn how this disaster revealed the costs of preserving Italy’ historical architecture. Then organize a class debate to decide what percentage of Italy’ budget should be devoted to structural upgrades, for the sake of safety and historical preservation, versus other priorities.

What have we learned in recent years about Ancient Rome? With all that digging, it’ no wonder that researchers periodically discover new insights into daily life in the Roman Empire, such as:

•rchaeologists have found that malaria may have contributed to the empire’ downfall;

•omans enjoyed eating a fish sauce called garum that may have given them tapeworms;

•hose impressive Roman buildings were constructed just like Legos;

•he city’ bakers once commissioned frescoes to show off their work.

Read one of these stories or find other examples. Then create a presentation that shows how researchers have helped to overturn conventional wisdom or lead us toward a better understanding of life in ancient times.

Can one historical event erase others? Learn how wars in Europe and Asia have destroyed historical sites in this story, “When Cultural Heritage Is Caught in the Cross Hairs.”hen use Unesco’ global list of endangered sites to find another threatened treasure, and design a social media campaign to spread the word.

How do modern Iraqis and Syrians feel about the historical sites that have been destroyed in recent wars? In “Life Among the Ruins,”he writer Kanishk Tharoor explores the personal stories of locals who live near historical relics. Using this and other stories, create a poster that highlights a few of the most powerful narratives from sites in these conflicts.

Does it really matter if historical sites get destroyed? In this travel essay, the writer Patrick Symmes suggests that nothing lasts forever. What’ important, he says, is helping the current inhabitants of ancient places to achieve their own vision of greatness. Do you agree? Write a personal essay in which you make an argument about the value of protecting historical sites, including examples that are close to your own home or heritage. As part of your analysis, consider: What —nd whose —istory should be preserved? For example, in the United States, are the plantation house and the slave market both deserving of preservation? What about the Native American burial ground and the colonial church? And, who should get to decide, especially if preservation funds are limited?

A Zumba party held in a first-century Roman amphitheater in Bulgaria. Related Article | Jodi Hilton for The New York Times | Luciano Faggiano and his sons were digging to fix a pipe in Lecce, Italy. They found a buried world tracing back before Jesus. Related Article | Davide Monteleone for The New York Times | The ancient Temple of Bel in Palmyra, Syria, was almost completely demolished by the Islamic State in August 2015. Related Article | Bryan Denton for The New York Times | Experts said the type of materials used in the buildings —ome more than 100 years old —ontributed to the high level of destruction caused by the 6.2-magnitude quake that struck early Wednesday. | By TURNER COWLES and GAIA PIANIGIANI 

Document NYTFEED020171011edab003s6



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Court Papers Reveal Snags in Detainment of Man Suspected in Foiled Terror Plot

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
769 words
10 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
21
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

When Abdulrahman El Bahnasawy, then an 18-year-old from Canada, was arrested in May 2016, he was secretly detained in New York by federal authorities who hoped to arrest others in a supposed plot to detonate bombs in Times Square and in the subways.

Although federal authorities did eventually arrest two other men, Mr. El Bahnasawy's time in custody did not go exactly to plan.

Shortly after his arrest, jail officials mistakenly moved him into the general population of a federal detention center in Manhattan, instead of holding him in isolation. That lasted one day -- long enough for him to have money stolen from his commissary account.

Several months later, after being allowed to move into the general population, Mr. El Bahnasawy was given drugs by another inmate, leading to more complications.

Those details were disclosed in newly unsealed court papers that showed how sensitive prosecutors were to keeping Mr. El Bahnasawy's arrest secret to not tip off a suspect who was believed to be preparing to enter the United States. But they also raised questions about how jail officials handled someone the government viewed as an important defendant.

On Friday, the authorities disclosed that the F.B.I. and New York Police Department had broken up the plot, which was to be carried out in support of the Islamic State and to have taken place during the Islamic holy month of Ramadan in 2016, which began that June.

The authorities said Mr. El Bahnasawy was arrested in New Jersey after he entered the United States from Canada. The government said it had also arrested two other plotters overseas, including Talha Haroon, a 19-year-old American citizen living in Pakistan, and Russell Salic, 37, of the Philippines.

The government said the men had also planned to open fire at concert venues in New York, and that their plot had been detailed in communications with an undercover F.B.I. agent, who had posed as an ISIS supporter and convinced them he would work with them.

''We need a really strong bomb,'' Mr. El Bahnasawy wrote in one message, referring to the Times Square plot, the authorities said.

Shortly after his arrest, Mr. El Bahnasawy became the victim of identity theft after he was inadvertently moved from an isolation unit at the Metropolitan Correctional Center and into the general population, Adam Johnson, a lawyer at the center, testified in June 2016, a transcript shows.

Another prisoner apparently used his personal access code to move money from his commissary account to an outside source, Mr. Johnson said.

''All signs are pointing toward this person essentially having robbed him electronically,'' Mr. Johnson testified. A spokesman for the detention center had no immediate comment on Monday.

It was in September 2016, after Mr. El Bahnasawy was allowed to move into the general population, that he obtained Suboxone, a prescription medication used to treat drug addiction, according to a letter from his federal public defenders to the judge. Mr. El Bahnasawy -- whose lawyers wrote that he had a long history of drug use, treatment and relapse -- took the drug and relapsed, according to the letter.

As punishment, jail authorities cut off his family visits for 18 months, leading to objections from his lawyers and a sharp response from a Manhattan judge, Richard M. Berman of Federal District Court, who said the disciplinary measure ''defies common sense.''

The judge's comments came during a closed hearing in May but were cited in the lawyers' letter, which was among the newly released filings.

The lawyers' letter said Mr. El Bahnasawy tried unsuccessfully to challenge the loss-of-visitation privileges within the jail system, before raising it with Judge Berman. According to the letter, the judge told Mr. Johnson to convey his view to the Bureau of Prisons that the sanction was inappropriate, saying, ''I've never done this in any case before.''

Mr. El Bahnasawy's visitation privileges were ultimately restored, the filings show.

After initially consenting to having the case remain secret for a short period, Mr. El Bahnasawy's lawyers argued that the continued secrecy violated his right to a public trial, the filings show. It was not until Friday, when the government announced the charges, that the case became public.

Mr. El Bahnasawy pleaded guilty in October 2016 to conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction and other charges. Sabrina Shroff, his lawyer, and James M. Margolin, a spokesman for the United States attorney's office, each declined to comment.

Document NYTF000020171010edaa0002x



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Grim War Aftermath: Finding Your Family In the Rubble of Mosul

By IVOR PRICKETT; Alaa Mohammed and Falih Hassan contributed reporting. 
1,214 words
10 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq -- ''This is the other arm. Was she wearing a black abaya?'' Daoud Salem Mahmoud shouted as he lifted the bone from the rubble and held it out to the small group looking on. A piece of cloth still clung to the sinews. ''This one is a black abaya.''

Mr. Mahmoud and a small band of men had picked carefully through the remains of a demolished city street of Mosul, digging through personal belongings and the crumbled walls of family homes.

The work was slow and laborious. They were searching for the dead.

Two months after the ferocious, nine-month battle to liberate Mosul from Islamic State militants, much of the city lay in ruins. Government forces supported by coalition planes had carried out repeated strikes, and the militants had fiercely defended their positions. Thousands may have died in the fighting, many lying uncounted beneath the rubble.

Now that the fight has moved on, the city has turned its attention to recovering those bodies to return them to their families. That task has fallen to the city's Civil Defense workers, mostly trained as firefighters and rescue workers.

The are focused on the devastated Old City district, where Islamic State fighters made their last stand. The workers move cautiously to avoid leftover bombs and unexploded suicide belts. In August, one of their officers was killed and three crew members were wounded when they disturbed explosives.

This day, the crew worked slowly and methodically as Sondus Mazaal, her husband and her elderly aunt Nadhira Aziz waited anxiously for any signs of their relatives or their personal belongings.

Mrs. Aziz, the homeowner, sat in a plastic chair 15 feet from the excavator. At times she was engulfed in dust whipped up as the driver dumped mounds of stone and parts of her house beside her, but she refused to move.

She directed the driver and shouted at the men on the ground to retrieve books and bags that she saw poking out of the debris. By the end of the day she was surrounded by a pile of tattered belongings that she wanted to bring with her. When the men said they were unable to bring all of the belongings with them she almost refused to leave.

There are still dangers.

A week earlier, the men said, someone shot at them and immediately fled. It was hard to fathom how an ISIS fighter might still be alive months after the battle had ended, and in an area that was largely razed, but the men were on high alert.

The sprawling ancient quarter is now largely sealed off from residents who used to live there, but soon after the crew arrived on this recent morning, some people in the group began shouting.

They had come across a young man hiding in a partly collapsed building. He had managed to survive in an area cut off from the rest of the city months after the fight had ended. He denied being an ISIS fighter. But he was found with a mobile phone, some money and four automatic rifle magazines. The men handed him over to the federal police unit stationed nearby and continued their work.

They haven't been paid in months, but see this as their duty to the community, said Rabia Ibrahim Hassan, who is leading the recovery efforts. ''We will continue until we have finished our work here,'' Mr. Hassan said.

Earlier in the day, Mrs. Mazaal had confirmed that the arm bone belonged to her sister. Now, after hours of digging, the crew found her mother in what was once a basement.

Much of the room was not badly damaged, a shelving unit standing along one wall. Her body was almost fully intact, but heavily decomposed after months under debris. Three men worked delicately, digging by hand to remove the mortar and twisted metal. They wanted to remove her body as carefully as possible.

It took most of the day for a rotating crew of more than 10 men using an excavator to retrieve just these two bodies. The men have months of work ahead of them.

They are also being asked to retrieve those who were hastily buried during the months of fighting before their families fled. Five members of Fouad Mohammed Sadi's family died during one week in June. As the push to retake the Old City was in full swing, his wife, his 10-year-old daughter and his brother's wife were killed when their house was hit by what he believed was a heavy artillery strike aimed at targeting ISIS militants in the area.

''They told us to stay at home and then they bombed us,'' Mr. Sadi said.

Mr. Sadi and his brother survived and early the next morning, under continued shelling, buried the bodies before they fled. Mr. Sadi has one remaining daughter and they now live with relatives on the east side of Mosul.

He returned with the Civil Defense workers to the spot where he had buried his family to exhume their bodies from the shallow grave on the outskirts of the Old City and give them a proper burial.

Under Mr. Sadi's direction, the team of 10 men dug into the rocky ground. It didn't take them long to hit the wooden panels Mr. Sadi had used to crudely cover the bodies. The men removed the remains and placed them in white body bags, as Mr. Sadi leaned in to try and identify his family. There was no time to grieve as the men carried the three bodies through the destroyed streets over piles of masonry, past uncleared improvised explosives.

Mr. Sadi's two brothers were killed that same week in June, when their home was brought down by an airstrike aimed at ISIS militants in the area. On the same day he dug up the bodies of his wife and daughter, he watched as the Civil Defense workers recovered the remains of his two brothers from what was left of their house.

Before the sunset, Mr. Sadi buried them in four graves, side by side in a cemetery in western Mosul.

He never broke down, but he wept quietly throughout the day as he kept himself busy directing the workers.

As he placed the bodies of his wife and daughter into the ground, he dropped his head and stood inside the grave for a moment. It seemed like he might never come out of the hole.

But he still had to bury his brothers.

Iraqi Civil Defense workers searched for the bodies of a family believed to have been killed in an artillery strike directed against ISIS militants in June.; A young man suspected of being an Islamic State militant was found hiding in the ruins and handed over to security forces in the area.; Nadhira Aziz leaned forward to direct a recovery crew to the location where bodies of her relatives were buried.; Mr. Sadi wept quietly as he stood inside the grave of his wife and daughter after lowering their bodies into the ground. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171010edaa0002j



The Conversation
Opinion
Our Stupid Gun Debate

By GAIL COLLINS and BRET STEPHENS 
2,018 words
10 October 2017
09:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Bret Stephens: I know we’l have to bring this conversation around to the Twitter feud between President Trump and Senator Bob Corker. But I don’ think we can begin with any subject other than Las Vegas. Everyone seems to want to understand the murderer’ state of mind. That strikes me as largely beside the point. What do you think?

Gail Collins: Bret, you wrote an amazing column last week about repealing the Second Amendment, which would certainly do a lot more to stop mass shootings than psychoanalyzing the gunman. However, since that’ not going to happen, I do find it useful to at least try to figure out what creates this kind of person.

Bret: No doubt we’l find out more about Stephen Paddock’ state of mind as time goes by, but perhaps the most noteworthy point about him was his utter normality. Even his reported use of prostitutes and supposed remarks about being “orn bad”re just, well, relatively ordinary bad male behavior. He was the “anality of evil”ncarnate.

Conservatives often say that the way to stop mass shootings isn’ by limiting access to weapons, but by doing more to make sure mentally ill people don’ get their hands on them. It’ a weak argument. For starters, even the most competent government agency would be hard-pressed to spot and stop deranged people —hose dark fantasies occur in the proverbial dark —efore their rampages. And then you have these same conservatives block efforts to stop crazy people from purchasing guns on the grounds that they mustn’ have their Second Amendment rights removed without due process.

Gail: Yeah, and these are the same people trying to squeeze mental health coverage out of the Affordable Care Act.

I have an all-purpose theory for understanding American cultural polarization. We’e really two different countries —he crowded one and the empty one. It’ easy to understand why if you live in, say, rural Wyoming you are going to want to have some rifles. Also it’ obvious why in New York City we have thrived by making it stupendously difficult for anybody but the police to legally have weapons. But our current laws make it impossible for us crowdeds to keep guns completely out. That’ because the laws on gun sales reflect the financial needs of gun dealers and gun manufacturers.

Bret: I’ no expert on gun manufacturers, though I can guess their financial motives. But the deeper problem is ideological. The N.R.A. is powerful not because it’ rich, but because it has successfully peddled the idea that our civil liberties rely principally on the possession of guns. What fantasy. Does anyone really think that when the agents of Leviathan show up at your doorstep to deport you to the gulag, your trusty Smith & Wesson will see you through?

Gail: Don’ discount the economic end. The N.R.A. is totally about the gun industry, which has a problem in that everybody who wants to have a gun for anything except criminal activity already has one. Or more likely several — percent of the population owns half the guns, and they’e the best sales target.

So the only way for the makers and dealers to grow is by selling the idea that you need every new wrinkle. Like silencers or, God help us, bump stocks.

Bret: Look, I would never want the government to stand in the way of any responsible adult with a legitimate reason to own a gun. I don’ just mean the hunter in Wyoming but also the protective father raising a family in a high-crime area or the woman who has to walk through a deserted area late at night.

Gail: Those household guns are less likely to end up shooting an intruder than another member of the family. But go on.

Bret: That’ a reason to own one gun, maybe even two, but not several dozen rifles kitted out to resemble fully automatic weapons. And I don’ think we can establish that kind of limiting principle while we have a Second Amendment.

Don’ resign yourself to the idea that this will never change, Gail. A good argument is always worth making.

Gail: The problem with your argument is that we’e agreeing too much.

Let’ switch to a subject we can fight about. I know I can always drive you crazy by insulting Lindsey Graham. Last week he introduced a Senate bill to ban abortions at 20 weeks. We haven’ really discussed abortion much —o you think Senator Graham’ fighting the good fight or trying to impose his religious principles on the rest of the nation?

Bret: I hate to break this to you, Gail, but I’ basically pro-choice. Always have been. I’ opposed to late-term abortions and think they should be severely restricted. I believe in religious liberty and don’ think, say, Catholic hospitals should be required to provide abortions.

Otherwise, I subscribe to Bill Clinton’ line that abortion ought to be safe, legal and rare. It’ great that the abortion rate has this year dropped to its lowest rate since abortion became legal nationally in 1973. That’ thanks in large part to the vastly greater availability of contraception —nother reminder that cultural conservatives often advocate positions that are at cross-purposes with their stated intentions.

Gail: Everybody can rally around the idea that late-pregnancy abortions should be avoided whenever possible. Which means to me that people who try to ban them while also trying to defund Planned Parenthood and other programs that work to prevent unwanted pregnancies are hypocrites.

Also people like Graham are interfering with painful decisions that are often made by couples who are eager to have a baby but discover late in the pregnancy that the fetus is terribly compromised and won’ survive if carried to term.

Bret: That’ an awful situation for any parent. I guess my rejoinder is that a late-term abortion means certain death for the fetus; bringing the child to term means at least the hope of survival, however faint. Regarding Planned Parenthood, though, we agree again.

Let’ switch the subject to the Corker-Trump feud. The president’ relationship with Senate Republicans reminds me a bit of Prince Charles’ marriage to Diana Spencer. We knew it was bad, but it took a while to figure out how bad. Corker’ disdain for the president isn’ revealing for what it says just about him, but probably about the Republican caucus as well.

Gail: Well, Corker has made it pretty darn clear that almost everybody in the caucus is huddled under the stairs talking about what a nut case the president is. Which we sort of suspected. And that everyone’ afraid Trump will fire Secretary of State Rex Tillerson. Given the fact that Tillerson seems incapable of appointing people to his department’ key jobs, if he goes I guess our allies will have to discuss North Korea with the janitorial staff.

Corker’ a very important figure on foreign policy matters. I wonder how his rebellion will affect Trump’ attempt to get out of the Iran compact. What, by the way, do you think about the withdrawal idea? I think it’ crazy —e made the Iran deal along with our partners in the developed world, and none of them is going to resume the sanctions.

Bret: Disagreement at last! I’e been thinking about this topic a lot lately. I fought the Iran deal when it was being negotiated, and I think the Obama administration came away with a lousy agreement. Iran’ behavior is worse now, because it has been enriched and emboldened. Declarations that Iran is fulfilling its end of the bargain ignore serious concerns that it is cheating incrementally. At the end of the day Iran will emerge from the deal with an internationally recognized right to enrich unlimited quantities of uranium. We are setting ourselves up for another North Korean fiasco, which also began (under Clinton) with a supposedly negotiated solution.

Gail: We have our argument!

Bret: My problem is that I don’ trust the Trump team to execute a competent exit strategy from the agreement. For all the anti-Iranian rhetoric, Trump has done more than Obama to facilitate Iran’ grip over Syria, first by withdrawing support for U.S.-backed anti-Assad insurgents, then with a foolish cease-fire arrangement with the Russians. Decertification alone is a symbolic step that doesn’ break the agreement but merely hands responsibility to Congress to decide what to do next.

As with anything and everything Trump, we’e being asked to take a ride with a drunken driver: we may need desperately to get to a destination, but there are no guarantees of getting there alive.

Gail: Hey, that isn’ fair. We’e got a disagreement going and then you finish up with a fresh attack on Donald Trump.

Back to Iran. I think everyone agrees the Iranian deal is imperfect. Three arguments against ditching it.

One is that Iran’ enemies overstate Iran’ unique …vildoerness. It’ true that they finance terrorism in their neighborhood. So do many of the richest and most powerful people in Saudi Arabia. ISIS isn’ an Iranian production.

Second, the only way for us to survive over the long run in this incredibly dangerous world is by working together with other nations that hold the same basic values we do. If we drop out of this international agreement, we turn our backs on our allies and we undermine the spirit of cooperation that all of our recent presidents have worked so hard to cultivate.

Third, it won’ do any good. Allies will continue to do business with Iran, whatever power the bargain has over Iranian nuclear development is weakened.

Three strikes and you’e out.

Bret: Now we’e talking! Disagreement down the line.

Iran is in a class by itself in the awfulness department. It openly vows to annihilate another U.N. member state. It provides financial and military support to terrorist groups both Shiite (Hezbollah) and Sunni (Hamas). It campaigns against ISIS but gave shelter to Al Qaeda. It continues to arm Shiite killing squads in Iraq. It is Bashar al-Assad’ best friend in his genocidal campaign against his own people. It has the death of hundreds of American soldiers in Lebanon and Iraq on its hands. It has conducted terror attacks as far away as Argentina and tried to blow up a restaurant in Washington in order to assassinate the Saudi ambassador. It denies the existence of gay people within its borders and then hangs them when it finds them. It holds Holocaust denial conferences and cartoon competitions.

I don’ think it is out of the question that we can get our allies to be tougher on the enforcement front, even if we don’ renegotiate the deal itself (which would require Iranian consent). We still have the whip hand, since we can make companies like the French energy giant Total or the German engineering firm Siemens choose between doing business in the United States or in Iran.

I agree that we need to be mindful of our alliances, but this agreement was never ratified by the Senate and doesn’ have the status of a treaty. And, ultimately, we are better off in a world in which Iran doesn’ have a bomb and the European diplomatic corps hates us than one in which the reverse is true.

Told you I was conservative!

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

The marquees on the Las Vegas Strip went dark on Sunday to honor the victims of the mass shooting there. | Drew Angerer/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171010edaa001jr



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Surrender Is New Martyrdom for  ISIS  Fighters

By ROD NORDLAND 
1,644 words
9 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

DIBIS, Iraq -- The prisoners were taken to a waiting room in groups of four, and were told to stand facing the concrete wall, their noses almost touching it, their hands bound behind their backs.

More than a thousand prisoners determined to be Islamic State fighters passed through that room last week after they fled their crumbling Iraqi stronghold of Hawija. Instead of the martyrdom they had boasted was their only acceptable fate, they had voluntarily ended up here in the interrogation center of the Kurdish authorities in northern Iraq.

For an extremist group that has made its reputation on its ferociousness, with fighters who would always choose suicide over surrender, the fall of Hawija has been a notable turning point. The group has suffered a string of humiliating defeats in Iraq and Syria, but the number of its shock troops who turned themselves in at the center in Dibis was unusually large, more than 1,000 since last Sunday, according to Kurdish intelligence officials.

The fight for Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, took nine months, and by comparison, relatively few Islamic State fighters surrendered. Tal Afar fell next, and more quickly, in only 11 days. Some 500 fighters surrendered there.

The Iraqi military ousted the Islamic State, also known as ISIS and ISIL, from Hawija in 15 days, saying it had taken its forces only three days of actual heavy fighting before most of the extremists grabbed their families and ran. According to Kurdish officials, they put up no fight at all, other than planting bombs and booby traps.

Seen up close, the fighters' pretense of bravado soon disappears.

Their shoes were taken from them, their pockets emptied and their belts discarded, and, as they stood facing the wall, the backs of their dishdashas were stained with the evidence that some of them had not been to a toilet in days.

One of the men smelled so bad that when he was taken into the small interrogation room, those inside were startled. He filled the doorway, appearing even larger than his actual size. The interrogator unbuckled his hip holster, resting his right hand on his pistol. Everyone in the room seemed scared of the man, even though his hands were tied behind his back. His thick black hair was Medusa-wild and shoulder-length, though his handsome face had only a wisp of black stubble on the chin.

''Hello,'' a visitor said. ''Where's your beard?'' The Islamic State requires all men to grow full beards.

''I'm only 21, I can't grow it yet,'' he said, clearly embarrassed.

Kurdish interrogators allowed a dozen of the surrendered fighters to be interviewed by a reporter as they arrived at the local headquarters of the Asayish, the Kurdish intelligence service, in the town of Dibis, near the Kurds' front lines opposite Hawija. Officers monitored all interviews.

Many of the fighters claimed to have been just cooks or clerks. So many said they had been members of the Islamic State for only a month or two that interrogators suspected they had been coached to say that. Gone was the contempt for the world's opinion, spewed out in one violent video after another -- many of them made in Hawija, where grisly killings, especially of Kurdish prisoners, were the norm during their three-year reign over that Sunni Arab city in northern Iraq.

Most of the prisoners, though, claimed to have never seen a beheading, or even heard of such a thing.

At first, the beardless fighter seemed an exception, admitting defiantly that he had been fighting for the group for two years, alongside family members. He readily gave his name: ''Maytham Muhammed Mohemin,'' he said, practically spitting it out. His hands were bound behind his back and he was effectively sitting on them, forced back into a red plastic lawn chair, yet the three Kurdish officers in the room kept more than an arm's length away in case he lunged for their weapons.

During the interview, he grew nervous. He said he was from Hawija and had joined the Islamic State because he believed in its cause, because his elder brother had, and because the $100 a month pay was better than anything else around.

He had arrived in Dibis on Thursday afternoon with eight companions, seven Iraqis and an Egyptian, after they dropped their weapons in Hawija that morning. Since the beginning of the Iraqi offensive two weeks earlier, they had spent most of the time burrowed in foxholes to escape the relentless American bombing and shelling by advancing Iraqi forces, and had passed days without sanitary facilities or food.

Finally, the Islamic State wali, or governor of Hawija, told the men to turn themselves in to the Kurdish forces, known as the pesh merga, and to flee the advancing Iraqi Army and its Shiite militia allies, the Iranian-trained Hashed al-Shaabi, notorious for killing not only Islamic State prisoners but also their entire families.

''The governor told us each to 'solve your own problem and find your own solution for yourself,' '' Mr. Mohemin said. ''He said, 'Go to the pesh merga, not to the Hashed.' ''

Mr. Mohemin denied ever attending a beheading but later, prompted by an Asayish intelligence officer, he admitted going to one, he said, because he had been ordered to.

''I was scared,'' he said. ''I never saw anything like that in my life.''

His prospects are grim. His pregnant wife had fled to Dibis a week before him, but it was unlikely he would see her or their expected child, their first, anytime soon. His elder brother was killed in combat. His father and little brother, one too old to pledge to the Islamic State and the other too young, had disappeared.

The interrogator, Lt. Pisthiwan Salahi, said Mr. Mohemin was not only an Islamic State soldier but also a member of an elite suicide squad known as the Seekers of Martyrdom, according to informers. If convicted of that affiliation by an Asayish court, his sentence would be long; if he was connected to any killings, possibly lifelong.

Mr. Mohemin's narrative differed. ''I was just a common soldier,'' he said. ''I never killed a civilian. I wasn't even on the front line.'' The lieutenant scoffed at him. ''Well, twice I was on the front line, just for a day, but not against the Kurds,'' Mr. Mohemin said. More scoffing. ''Well once against the Kurds, but only shooting from a distance. I couldn't see anyone.''

Kurdish officials have been perplexed by the number of fighters who have surrendered. Many of the militants said they were ordered by their leaders to turn themselves in to the Kurds, who were known to take prisoners instead of killing them. But Capt. Ali Muhammed Syan, chief of the Asayish interrogators in Dibis, said even the fighters did not seem to know why their leaders were telling them to quit. ''Maybe it's some deal,'' he said. ''Maybe it's just bad morale, I don't know.''

To identify the militants, Kurdish intelligence officers pored over videos from Hawija, such as ones showing pesh merga prisoners in orange jump suits in individual cages on the backs of pickup trucks, being paraded through town to be stoned, then set afire or beheaded in public. Crowds of thousands participated.

[Video: Captured Kurdish fighters were displayed in cages before they were executed in Hawija. Watch on YouTube.]

One by one the Islamic State prisoners were taken out of the waiting room line to be interviewed, each telling pretty much the same story. ''I pledged to ISIS in January 2015 and left in March,'' said Raad Abdullah Ahmad, 31. ''My family disowned me after that. Imagine having no family. I left because I didn't like what they did to people.''

Another, Hussein Jamal, 21, said he had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State in 2014 but had remained only 45 days.

''Ask him why he didn't come out sooner then,'' one of the interrogators suggested.

''I was afraid,'' Mr. Jamal said.

''Ask them why they fled this way,'' another of the interrogators suggested.

Both men said that they were certain that the Hashed al-Shaabi militias would kill them, but that the Kurds would not.

''Why not?''

''They are more civilized than we are,'' Mr. Ahmad said. ''They know who is good and who is bad.''

Mr. Mohemin had shrunk back into his red chair after an hour of talking and looked much smaller than before. When asked if he thought he would see his wife again, or his new child, he said, ''I don't know,'' and looked at the floor.

The lieutenant did not take his eyes off him for a second. ''They're just planning to go underground and make sleeper cells,'' he said.

Mr. Mohemin shook his head. ''This is the end of this state,'' he said. He had wet his trousers, adding to the smell, but did not ask to use a toilet. ''I believe if the governors are telling us to surrender, it really means that this is the end.'' He swore to God that he was telling the truth.

Follow Rod Nordland on Twitter @rodnordland.

Men suspected of being ISIS members waiting to be questioned in Kurdish-controlled Iraq. (A1); A security screening center near Kirkuk, in Kurdish-controlled Iraq. Many of the Islamic State fighters who surrendered claimed to have been just cooks or clerks.; Displaced children played at a security screening center near Kirkuk in Kurdish-controlled Iraq, after the Islamic State's last urban stronghold fell in Hawija. Below, the screening center in Dibis, where suspects are searched, their shoes taken, their pockets emptied and their belts discarded. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A8) 

Document NYTF000020171009eda90004d



Asia and Australia Edition
Briefing
North Korea, Catalonia, Hurricane Nate: Your Monday Briefing

By CHARLES McDERMID 
1,323 words
8 October 2017
20:53
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•orth Korea celebrates a major holiday tomorrow, raising concerns of another possible major nuclear or missile test. The leader, Kim Jong-un, vowed over the weekend to build up his nuclear arsenal as a “owerful deterrent”o the U.S.

At a major meeting, above, Mr. Kim also promoted his sister, Kim Yo-jong, 30, to the nation’ top decision making body, along with Foreign Minister Ri Yong-ho, who warned last month of a possible hydrogen bomb test over the Pacific.

The moves came after days of vague, threatening comments from President Trump: that a dinner with military leaders was “he calm before the storm,” and that 25 years of talks and deals with North Korea had made “ools of U.S. negotiators.”“orry, but only one thing will work!”e tweeted.

_____

•.S. investigators, still unable to identify the gunman’ motive for massacring 58 people on Oct. 1, are putting up billboards around Las Vegas begging, “f you know something, say something.”

Our reporters were able to reconstruct the contours of his life. Stephen Paddock, 64, was a savvy businessman and an utterly unremarkable “umbers guy”ith a special skill at video poker.

His girlfriend, Marilou Danley, told investigators that he seemed to be deteriorating mentally and physically.

_____

•resident Trump and his vice president, Mike Pence, above, reignited the fight with the N.F.L. over kneeling protests.

In Washington, President Trump laced into Bob Corker, an influential Republican senator, in a deeply personal back-and-forth on Twitter over Mr. Corker’ decision to not run for re-election.

In an interview, Mr. Corker warned that the president’ behavior could set the nation “n the path to World War III.”

_____

•atalans rallied in large numbers in support of a united Spanish state, just ahead of an expected declaration of independence.

Carles Puigdemont, the regional president who has led the independence movement, is expected to address the regional Parliament tomorrow.

The pro-independence movement has gained an unlikely symbol: tractors.

_____

•“erminated, effective immediately.”

Harvey Weinstein was fired by the directors of his film company, which include his brother, Robert, days after a Times investigation revealed accusations of sexual harassment that stretch back decades.

But there’ been an eerie silence in Hollywood.

Why did it take so long for the tales to emerge? “oo many people in the intertwined news and entertainment industries had too much to gain from Mr. Weinstein for too long,”our media columnist writes.

_____

•s a young Japanese newscaster fluent in Arabic, she interviewed the Libyan dictator Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. As Japan’ environment minister, she pushed businesses to let workers wear casual clothes in summer to reduce the need for air-conditioning.

Now the country is watching to see if Yuriko Koike, 65, the first female governor of Tokyo, will run for Parliament this month, which could position her to challenge Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.

She has insisted that she won’ run, but has until tomorrow to make a final declaration. Above, she holds a sign reading “njecting hope into Japan”t a debate Sunday with Mr. Abe.

_____

Business

•n many major countries, including the U.S., Britain and Japan, labor markets are exceedingly tight. But workers are still waiting for fatter paychecks.

•eadlines to watch for: The European Central Bank is expected to publish the results of its latest stress test today, and the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank begin Tuesday in Washington.

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•urricane Nate weakened to a tropical storm as it moved inland over Mississippi and Alabama, but storm-surge flooding continued in the southeastern U.S. [The New York Times]

•ISIS fighters have been surrendering en masse after losing their last major urban stronghold in Iraq. [The New York Times]

•hina denied responsibility for reported cyberattacks in the U.S. appearing to target Guo Wengui, the exiled tycoon who accused Communist Party officials of corruption. [Reuters]

•he Australia-originated group that won the Nobel Peace Prize for its nuclear-disarmament efforts is getting over its shock and preparing calls for Australia to become the 123rd country to sign the U.N.’ Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. The Nobel Prize in Economics is announced today. [AAP via The New Daily]

•n tough, seasonal industries, U.S. employers trying to “ire American”ften can’ find workers who’l stay on the job. [The Washington Post]

•n Hong Kong, pathologists discovered more than 1,200 adulterants in supposedly natural Chinese medicinal supplements, including drugs and animal tissue. [The New York Times]

•he 30th World Solar Challenge: More than 40 international teams are racing mostly sun-powered vehicles across Australia, traversing the 3,000 kilometers (1,864 miles) from Darwin to Adelaide. [Electrek]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

• trip to the sauna may be good for high blood pressure.

• itting the bar tonight? Here are some dos and don’s from bartenders.

•ecipe of the day: The beauty of linguine with lemon sauce is its simplicity.

Noteworthy

•he tree lobster, an extraordinarily rare insect, was declared extinct in 1960. Well, it’ back. Genetic analysis showed that a stick insect found on another island was the same species as the one wiped out by rats on Australia’ Lord Howe Island.

•n memoriam: Tom Alter, 67, an Indian-born character actor of American descent who played Westerners in more than 300 Bollywood films.

•i Weiwei, the dissident Chinese artist now based in Berlin, has been in New York preparing “ood Fences Make Good Neighbors,” project that debuts Thursday with more than 300 public artworks meant to draw attention to the global refugee crisis.

Back Story

This was a big weekend for Kesen, one of the many communities in Japan that were devastated after an earthquake and tsunami struck in March 2011.

Kesen reopened its Buddhist temple on Sunday. A Times photo editor who often chooses the images for our briefings, Hiroko Masuike, was there to capture the moment.

Ms. Masuike has been making twice-yearly visits to document residents’truggles to rebuild their lives since the disaster, which killed almost 16,000 people and caused nuclear plant meltdowns.

In one of the community’ villages, the tsunami killed more than 200 people and reduced most buildings to rubble.

The disaster’ scars are still visible, Ms. Masuike said. Most residents have moved away, and only about 10 buildings have been rebuilt.

But Kesen’ story is also one of resilience, she said. A monk named Nobuo Kobayashi stayed and, by selling land and with the help of donations, rebuilt the 1,100 year-old Buddhist Kongoji Temple on higher ground. Its statues have also been painstakingly restored.

On Sunday, about 300 people gathered for the reopening. Monks from all over Japan chanted sutras for those who perished, Ms. Masuike said. “hey prayed for the temple to stay here forever.”

Patrick Boehler contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. Browse past briefings here.

We have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian, European and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.

KCNA,via Associated Press | Drew Angerer/Getty Images | Michael Conroy/Associated Press | Felipe Trueba/European Pressphoto Agency | Yana Paskova for The New York Times | Pool photo by Ma Ping | Ko Sasaki for The New York Times | Mark Wallheiser/Getty Images | Ilvy Njiokiktjien for The New York Times | Rohan Cleave/Melbourne Zoo, Australia | Hiroko Masuike/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171008eda8003ml



FIRST WORDS
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
Apocalypse Now

By NITSUH ABEBE 
1,524 words
8 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Last month, after Hurricane Irma rolled over Florida, the state's commissioner of agriculture took in the damage to citrus crops and deemed it ''a unique and existential threat to the industry.'' This was an alarming thing to say: Taken literally, it suggests that one of his state's signature industries might cease to exist. And if it doesn't sound alarming, perhaps that's only because we're surrounded on all sides with existential alarm, to the point where it feels almost like a tic to identify it. In the same month, a corporate lawyer, marveling at Equifax's handling of an enormous data breach, called it ''a botched response to an existential threat.'' Climate change is considered an existential threat to all life on earth; a source in one news report deemed Brexit an existential threat to Irish beef exports.

Through the whole late 20th century, ''existential'' floated through American conversation mostly as a kind of mush -- a loose gesture in the general direction of a loosely grasped idea, something perhaps half-remembered from a film review or philosophy course, something about cigarette smoke and French intellectuals and the grim absurdity of constructing meaning in a universe totally indifferent to our presence. At the start of the '60s, the Times critic John Leonard once wrote, ''whenever something interesting happened in this country it was called 'existential' '' -- there were ''existential presidents, existential prize fights, existential murders, even existential architecture.'' At the word's baggiest, it becomes little more than an upscale synonym for ''deep'' -- as when the protagonist of ''Clueless'' described the animated duo Ren and Stimpy as ''way existential.''

But citrus farmers and beef exporters are not, pretty obviously, reading Camus and struggling to create authentic modes of existence in an absurd vacuum of meaning; they are not pondering what it means to be, even in the Ren-and-Stimpyest sense. What we are talking about when we use the word today is something much more straightforward than continental philosophy. We are talking, for the most part, about whether a thing will continue to exist, or whether it might be at risk of going away.

There are other ways to say this, but none seem as enjoyable. Calling something ''a matter of life and death'' sounds hysterical and alarmist; ''existential threat'' feels more solemn, gravely analytical, as if you've been poring over classified reports with world-weary experts. It is the verbal equivalent of a B-movie scientist somberly removing his glasses.

We say it with abandon now, in every context, about the continued existence of big things and the continued existence of small ones. Artificial intelligence, says Elon Musk, may pose an existential threat to humanity -- but also, say some medical professionals, to the significantly more limited field of human radiologists, who fear being replaced by software. Donald Trump's control of the American nuclear arsenal, according to a psychiatrist named John Zinner, poses an existential threat to the world; to others, Facebook's recent string of bad press presents an existential threat to a large company. (Tech businesses are rife with existential threats: Uber presents an existential threat to taxi services, but it also faces existential threats from potential regulation.) Brain injuries are an existential threat to the sport of football. Tax cuts are an existential issue for the Republican Party. Anything that has the potential to end can be matched with some factor that promises to hasten that end -- and what is there in the universe that cannot, in theory, cease to exist?

Our current use of ''existential'' is about as far removed from artsy-philosophical realms as you can imagine: It's originally the province of defense analysts and foreign-policy think tanks, national-security types and people who write editorials about the Middle East peace process. In 1982, Chancellor Helmut Kohl described Soviet-American talks as having existential importance to West Germany. Through the 1990s, this was how pundits talked about Israel, a nation facing fairly unusual existential threats and conundrums. Debates about Israel seem to be the precise place where ''existential anxiety'' stopped referring to philosophical angst and started referring to the fear your nation could be destroyed.

It was Sept. 11, 2001, that sent existential concerns slamming into American speech. But there was something new, something dissonant, in the way we began to use the word -- a change meant to accommodate the idea that just 19 men might strike at a nation's being. We'd been exposed to an event people found truly unimaginable, one that shifted their sense of the world and what seemed possible in it. And yet, disorientingly, day-to-day American life continued. No armies massed on the country's borders. The nation felt itself plunged into momentous conflict, and yet so much of that conflict existed somewhere else -- not just in remote places but in abstractions and arguments over what developments, far from any battlefield, would indicate that ''the terrorists have won.''

''There is no longer any doubt,'' said Condoleezza Rice in 2002, ''that today America faces an existential threat to our security.'' The fight against terrorism, Vice President Dick Cheney said, was an ''existential conflict.'' It wasn't that terrorists had any capacity to annihilate us, the way South Korea or Israel have feared the prospect of hostile, nuclear-armed neighbors; even our grimmest fears about dirty bombs and biological weapons did not remotely add up to the end of Western civilization. But some terrorists claimed to want to destroy us whole, and many Americans were happy to take up the fight on their terms. Existential conflict took a step back toward the abstract: Now it could be a fight not for our very being but about it.

These two meanings have chased each other in circles for 15 years. Barack Obama, in an interview before his final State of the Union address last year, doggedly stuck to the more straightforward interpretation, professing that ''there are no existential threats'' to the United States -- meaning, as he said in the address itself, that ISIS fighters, much as they might like to pretend so, ''do not threaten our national existence.'' A spokesman for Paul Ryan issued a rebuttal: ''It's absolutely clear that radical Islamic terrorists are determined to destroy the Western way of life.'' They didn't have to be capable of it; they just had to want it.

In 2009, Michael B. Oren, soon to become Israel's ambassador to the United States, wrote an essay for Commentary examining seven ''existential'' threats the nation faced -- noting first how infrequently ''modern states were threatened with their survival'' or wars were fought ''to eliminate another state and its people.'' Foremost among them was the theoretical loss of Jerusalem, without which Israel would be ''rendered soulless,'' becoming ''merely another Mediterranean enclave not worth living in.''

This was an interesting shift in definition. It's not that Israel would be -- as is so often actively threatened -- wiped from the map. But it would lose a thing many consider central to its essence, a thing without which it could no longer be considered itself. But what makes a thing itself? We're brought right back to philosophical questions. What is a nation, really? Precisely what would have to change for America to no longer qualify, in your estimation, as America at all?

It's here that existential threats become subjective, that they lose their gravity and turn back into a vapor. For white nationalists, an America in which minorities mingle and miscegenate and share power with whites is an annihilating, nation-ending danger; for others, America cannot be itself until that happens. For the conservative columnist and radio host Dennis Prager, writing for TownHall in July, ''left-wing-dominated media and universities pose an existential threat'' to Western civilization -- not because they seek to raze cities and scorch the earth, but because they envision it in ways Prager declines to recognize as the thing itself. For people of all stripes, the fear of seeing things destroyed has merged with the fear of seeing them made unrecognizable.

Not 20 years ago, we seemed less apt to think this way. Totalizing, annihilating threats were for cranks, alarmists, extremists and speculating academics. Follow the path of existential danger, though, and you can track a slow shift in the tenor of our conversations. A few decades ago, we were still swaddled in a consensus that made us feel as if things were unlikely to change or end, even if we dearly wanted them to; the order of the world was too firm for that. Now we are more practiced than ever in spotting potential ends. We have made sport of it. We find wrenching, apocalyptic change lurking inside everything -- enough to invoke just the kind of despair European intellectuals used to write plays about.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Nitsuh Abebe is a story editor for The Times Magazine.

(PHOTOGRAPH BY DEREK BRAHNEY; WISIEL/SHUTTERSTOCK) (MM12) DRAWING (DRAWING BY DEREK BRAHNEY) (MM12) 

Document NYTF000020171008eda80006l



Today’ Paper
Quotation of the Day: As Hawija Falls, Iraqi Forces See the Beginning of the End for  ISIS 

66 words
8 October 2017
01:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

“heir leaders failed them. A lot of fighters ran away. The rest, we killed.”

KAREEM GITA, a Shiite militiaman who commanded a checkpoint in Hawija, the last major urban stronghold of ISIS to fall in Iraq, on how many militants had lost the will to fight.

Document NYTFEED020171007eda7004h5



National Desk; SECT
Las Vegas Shooting: At a Loss on Motive, F.B.I. Turns to Billboards for Leads

By THE NEW YORK TIMES; Reporting was contributed by John Branch; Jennifer Medina and Mitch Smith from Las Vegas; Richard C. Paddock from Manila; Sheryl Gay Stolberg from Washington; and Richard Péez-Peñ, Christopher Mele and Jonah Engel Bromwich from New York. 
1,708 words
7 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

LAS VEGAS -- Still unable to identify a motive five days after the massacre of 58 concertgoers, local and federal officials sounded increasingly desperate for leads on Friday, announcing plans to erect billboards with the message, ''If you know something, say something.''

''There are still a number of people out there that know that something looked out of place,'' said Undersheriff Kevin McMahill of the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department. ''Someone may have been acting suspiciously that night, or in the years prior, the months prior. Someone that may have seen something or knows something.''

Aaron Rouse, the special agent in charge of the F.B.I. office in Las Vegas, said billboards would be set up around Las Vegas area, to ''reach as many people as we possibly can,'' seeking tips about the gunman. ''We have not stopped, we will not stop, until we have the truth.''

Though the gunman, Stephen Paddock, had explosives and chemicals that can be used in bomb-making in his car, ''it did not resemble an I.E.D.,'' or improved explosive device, Undersheriff McMahill said. Later, speaking on CNN, he clarified, ''I believe he certainly had nefarious intent with that material,'' but he did not know what that intent was.

The possibility that Mr. Paddock, 64, who had no evidence prior criminal history, was suffering from mental illness ''is another aspect of the investigation we're keenly interested in, and we continue to investigate that,'' Undersheriff McMahill said.

The F.B.I. is searching electronic devices and financial statements belonging to the gunman. Investigators have not found a manifesto or signs that he held extremist views.

The coroner's office in Las Vegas completed the task of identifying the 36 women and 22 men, ranging in age from 20 to 67, who were fatally shot at a country music festival, and made their names public on Thursday night. They were teachers, police officers, secretaries, retirees, from across the United States; these are their stories.

A note the gunman left on a table inside his suite at the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino had numbers written on it, Sheriff Joseph Lombardo of the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department said in an interview. He said the authorities were trying to determine what the numbers meant, but the sheriff said the document was not a suicide note.

Mr. Paddock may have scouted other locations before targeting Las Vegas, including Fenway Park in Boston, the Lollapalooza show in Chicago and the Life Is Beautiful music festival in Las Vegas.

The search continues for motives and possible accomplices.

Undersheriff McMahill said on Friday, ''we have no credible information to report to you, as to motivation.''

''We have looked at everything, literally, to include the suspect's personal life, any political affiliation, his social behaviors, the economic situation, and any potential radicalization that so many have claimed,'' he said. ''We're also aware, of course, that ISIS has repeatedly claimed responsibility, which today I can tell you that we have no known nexus to.''

As for whether Mr. Paddock had any help, the undersheriff said investigators were ''very confident'' there was not another gunman in the room but that they still could not rule out that someone else knew of the attack.

''There's voluminous amounts of video from many different locations'' in the hotel, he said. ''We have reviewed it, and we have not located any other person that we believe to be a suspect at this point.''

The F.B.I. took Mr. Paddock's computers and cellphones to its laboratory in Quantico, Va., for review, law enforcement officials said. Agents interviewed his girlfriend, Marilou Danley, in an attempt to determine his mental state at the time of the shooting, but Sheriff Lombardo said he was ''not at liberty to say'' what information had been learned.

Of course, investigators could at any time come across evidence that reveals Mr. Paddock's thinking, Sheriff Lombardo said on Thursday. ''I'm pretty confident we'll get there,'' he said.

The signs of chaos are cleared from the concert site.

The cleanup of the concert area that became the scene of the deadliest mass shooting in modern American history was nearly complete on Friday.

The back half of the football-field-size viewing area had been littered all week with lawn chairs and other debris left behind in the pandemonium of the attack that killed 58 people. Workers on Friday morning stacked the chairs in neat rows and picked up the garbage scattered across the artificial turf.

Through most of the week, the crime scene had been left untouched. Investigators strolled through it in small groups occasionally, but not continuously. They worked during daylight, and the area has been left dark at night.

Most of the cars that filled an adjacent parking lot on Monday morning have been claimed, and only a few remained on Friday morning. Among them, though, were two large truck trailers, side by side. The one closest to the stage still serves as a billboard for Jason Aldean, the country star who was performing at the time of the shootings. It has his picture and name, the full size of a truck.

The N.R.A. calls for greater regulation of rapid-fire devices.

The National Rifle Association on Thursday endorsed tighter restrictions on bump stocks, devices that can turn a gun into a rapid-fire weapon, but did not say they should be outlawed.

In a statement on Thursday, the N.R.A. said the federal authorities should ''immediately review whether these devices comply with federal law.''

''The N.R.A. believes that devices designed to allow semiautomatic rifles to function like fully automatic rifles should be subject to additional regulations,'' the group said.

Last year, the N.R.A.'s online magazine, America's First Freedom, called one of the rapid-fire devices ''sublime,'' and it advised users to keep copies of the firearms bureau's ruling that such items are legal.

On Capitol Hill, support appeared to grow for a ban on the bump-stock devices, either through regulation or legislation, as Republicans -- who for decades have rejected any form of gun restrictions -- began increasingly to speak out. Several leading Republicans, including Senator John Cornyn, the No. 2 Republican in the Senate, have raised questions about the devices.

And in Las Vegas, a gun show scheduled for this weekend at the Eastside Cannery Casino Hotel has been canceled.

''This was a mutual decision with the show's organizers,'' said David Strow, a spokesman for the Boyd Gaming Corporation, which owns the casino. ''Given recent events, this seemed the prudent thing to do.''

A murdered officer who was a joker and a father.

Hundreds of people took part in a candlelight memorial on Thursday night for Charleston Hartfield, the Las Vegas police officer who was one of the 58 people killed in the massacre on Sunday, remembering him as a big-hearted colleague, husband and father, always quick with a joke.

An Army veteran who spent 11 years on the police force, Officer Hartfield, 34, also worked as a youth counselor and football coach. In speeches at Police Memorial park in northwest Las Vegas, friends and fellow officers recalled calling him Charlie, Coach Chucky or even, occasionally, ''Captain America.''

''I know that none of us here really planned on saying goodbye to Charlie so soon, but I'm glad we get to send him off in our way, not somebody else's way,'' said Steve Grammas, the president of the Las Vegas Police Protective Association.

Many of the people who paid tribute to Officer Hartfield recalled his sharp sense of humor, how he was always ready with a comeback. One officer recalled wearing a kilt to a recent game of Risk, the world-domination board game.

''Charlie looked at me and he says, 'No way I'm going to let a ginger wearing a skirt take over the world,''' the officer said.

A formal procession took Officer Hartfield's coffin, draped in an American flag, to the Palm Downtown Mortuary and Cemetery, followed by the candlelight vigil, accompanied by bagpipers. His wife, Veronica; their daughter, Savannah; and their son, Ayzayah, wearing a black T-shirt printed with the words ''Family first,'' joined by officers and friends.

The money the gunman sent to the Philippines would not have raised flags, officials say.

Investigators are looking into a large sum of money Mr. Paddock transferred to Ms. Danley in the Philippines shortly before the attack.

Ms. Danley, who was born in the Philippines, said in a statement Wednesday that Mr. Paddock wired her the money so that she could buy a house for herself and her family. She said she feared it meant he was breaking up with her. Some media reports have put the amount of the transfer at $100,000.

Officials at the Philippines Anti-Money Laundering Council and the National Bureau of Investigation declined to comment on whether they were looking into the transaction.

Other Philippine officials, who requested anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the subject, said that any overseas transfer of more than $10,000 was supposed to be flagged for review but that few were actually examined.

The volume of money transfers is so great, they said, that only questionable transactions or those involved in a crime are investigated. Even a transfer of $100,000 would not raise have raised any eyebrows, said a former United States law enforcement official who has worked in the Philippines. About 10 million Philippines citizens live overseas and send home more than $2 billion a month, according to government figures.

Mr. Paddock, took two trips to Manila in April of 2013 and 2014, said Antonette Mangrobang, a spokeswoman for the Philippine Bureau of Immigration. Both trips coincided with his birthday on April 9 and each lasted less than a week.

Document NYTF000020171007eda70005w



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Three Charged In a Bomb Plot Halted in 2016

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
751 words
7 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
21
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A plot to detonate bombs in Times Square and the New York City subway system and to open fire at concert venues last year was quietly thwarted, federal authorities disclosed on Friday.

The bombings and shootings, which were planned in support of the Islamic State, would have taken place during the Islamic holy month of Ramadan in 2016, which began in June, United States officials said in a statement.

Three men involved in the plot were arrested; one of the men, Abdulrahman El Bahnasawy, a 19-year-old Canadian citizen, has been in custody since his arrest in May of last year, and has pleaded guilty to terrorism offenses, the authorities said.

The two others -- Russell Salic, a 37-year-old Filipino, and Talha Haroon, 19-year-old American living in Pakistan, have been arrested overseas, and they are expected to be extradited to the United States.

Mr. El Bahnasawy bought bomb-making materials in Canada for use in the attacks, including 40 pounds of hydrogen peroxide, a primary ingredient commonly used in improved explosive devices, the authorities said.

He also bought batteries, Christmas lights, thermometers and aluminum foil for use in constructing the explosive devices, the authorities said. He also helped to secure a cabin within driving distance of New York City, where the devices would be built and for staging the attacks, the government said.

The officials said that the men, communicating through internet messaging applications, intended to carry out bombings and shootings in heavily populated areas of New York last year.

The authorities say the plot was broken up by the F.B.I. and the New York Police Department. Criminal complaints unsealed in Federal District Court in Manhattan on Friday indicated that an undercover F.B.I. agent, who posed as an ISIS supporter, had convinced the men that he was prepared to carry out the attacks with them.

In a communication in April 2016, Mr. El Bahnasawy introduced himself to the undercover agent, saying, ''I'm one of the guys from the U.S. project,'' according to one complaint. It says he ''conveyed his desire to carry out a terrorist attack in New York City,'' and said ''we will show them what they hadn't seen in 2001.''

In May of last year, Mr. El Bahnasawy wrote about plans to detonate a car bomb in Times Square. ''We need a really strong bomb,'' he said.

He also identified as potential targets specific concerts scheduled to take place in the next month in and around New York City, the complaint says. ''We should pick a concert in a closed area,'' he said, adding that he was looking ''for a concert hall that's far away from cops.''

Mr. El Bahnasawy, in writing about attacking a concert, referred to terrorist attacks in 2015 at various locations in Paris, including at a concert hall.

''We just walk in with the guns in our hands,'' he wrote. ''That's how the Paris guys did it.''

Mr. Haroon expressed his enthusiasm for a plan to attack the subway system, calling it a perfect target in a communication with the undercover agent in May 2016.

Mr. Haroon told the agent that they could get on a subway and, on the way to the next station, ''kill all in the train.''

''Remember, do not stop shooting even if u see women or kids,'' he wrote, according to the complaint. ''No mercy is rule one.''

The government said that Mr. El Bahnasawy, of Mississauga, Canada, was arrested in New Jersey, after traveling to the United States from Canada and that Mr. Haroon was arrested in Pakistan in September 2016, and Mr. Salic in the Philippines in April of this year.

Mr. El Bahnasawy pleaded guilty in Federal District Court a year ago to charges including conspiracies to use weapons of mass destruction and to commit acts of terrorism transcending national boundaries. The case is being prosecuted by the United States attorney's office in Manhattan.

Mr. El Bahnasawy is scheduled to be sentenced in December; some of the charges against him carry potential life sentences. His lawyer, Sabrina Shroff, declined to comment.

The announcement of the charges comes as the trial of another man accused in a terrorism case, Ahmad Khan Rahimi, has ended its first week in the federal courthouse in Manhattan.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020171007eda70005a



Foreign Desk; SECTA
As Hawija Falls, Iraqi Forces See the Beginning of the End for  ISIS 

By DAVID ZUCCHINO; Falih Hassan contributed reporting from Hawija, and Rod Nordland from Dibis, Iraq. 
1,311 words
7 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

HAWIJA, Iraq -- The jubilant outpouring that erupted in the heart of Hawija on Friday, the day after Iraqi forces claimed victory there, celebrated more than the fact that the Islamic State militants had finally been routed from the city, their last major urban stronghold in Iraq.

For many of the Shiite Muslim militiamen, who sped through the streets in pickups, flying militia colors and blaring religious music on loudspeakers, and the federal paramilitary police, who feasted on mutton and rice, their swift two-week victory represented the beginning of the end for militants who just three years ago ruled a third of Iraq.

''Game over,'' said Gen. Sabah al-Aboda of the Iraqi police, as he chewed a date in the shade of a collapsed storefront. ''When they lost Mosul, they were broken.''

General Aboda and other officers said the militants had been badly led and poorly supplied since they were driven from Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, after a punishing nine-month battle that ended in July. They lost some of their best commanders and cadres, the commanders said, and their supply lines to Syria were cut by Iraqi forces.

Beyond that, officers and soldiers said, hundreds of militants never fired a shot in the Hawija operation. Following their commanders' orders, they fled north with their families to surrender to Kurdish forces, they said.

But others stayed and fought, the troops said. Most were killed, though some escaped and a few were taken prisoner, according to General Aboda.

On Friday, corpses of several militants lay where they had fallen, some with weapons still at their sides. Downtown Hawija, the site of the heaviest fighting, was a jumble of collapsed walls and crushed storefronts.

Kareem Gita, a Shiite militiaman who commanded a checkpoint in the shattered city center Friday, said many militants had lost the will to fight.

''Their leaders failed them,'' he said. ''A lot of fighters ran away. The rest, we killed.''

A handful of militants remained holed up in the city on Friday, General Aboda said. He said Iraqi forces were searching for them as engineering teams worked to clear streets and buildings of roadside bombs and booby traps.

Fighting continued just outside the city. Gunfire rattled in the distance and pillars of black smoke spun skyward as Iraqi troops pursued fleeing militants north of Hawija. Col. Ryan Dillon, the spokesman for the American-led coalition forces in Baghdad, said the militants were operating from a shrinking slice of territory.

Assuming Hawija's outlying districts are finally cleared, the Islamic State in Iraq would be left with a string of desert outposts in the Euphrates River valley and the city of Qaim on the Syrian border. The group still controls significant territory in Syria.

But the militants never made much of a stand in Hawija. For the first week or so, commanders said, some fought back as government troops squeezed them from three directions in outlying areas. Trapped, they made a final stand in the city center. After three days of urban fighting, commanders said, the battle ended on Thursday.

Burned-out civilian vehicles, some upturned and others riddled with bullet holes, lay among rubble in the city center. Soldiers said many had carried Islamic State fighters.

But virtually no destroyed military vehicles were visible, suggesting that militants in and around Hawija can no longer obtain the gun-mounted Humvees and armored troop carriers they used in Mosul.

''They don't know how to fight anymore,'' said Rohaid Talal, 22, a Shiite militiaman.

Before the operation, Iraqi forces dropped leaflets instructing residents to flee. About 75,000 to 80,000 took refuge in outlying districts, according to Naji Ibrahim Hawas, head of the Hawija provincial council. Those residential areas seemed mostly untouched.

For civilians, who began to emerge at the city's edge on Friday, the defeat of the Islamic State offered salvation after three years under the militants' harsh rule. Like residents of other Sunni cities controlled by ISIS, they described public beheadings in the city square, people shot in the foot if caught with a cellphone, and beatings for such offenses as wearing dishdasha hems too low or beards too short.

''They beat me with a belt in front of my children -- it shamed me,'' said Raad Mohammed Jasim, 38, who said he was jailed for three weeks by militants who stole his sheep and car.

Abdul Basit, 21, who like Mr. Jasim remained in the Hawija district under ISIS rule, said he was shocked that so many militants had fled without a fight because they had seemed so terrifying and ruthless.

''Just seeing their faces and their beards made me tremble,'' Mr. Basit said.

The sight of Shiite militiamen parading through a Sunni city did not seem to alarm many residents.

''They helped liberate us,'' said Mr. Hawas, the provincial council leader. ''We prefer anyone to Daesh,'' he added, using an Arabic acronym for the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

He was preparing to slaughter 30 sheep to thank government forces, including the militiamen. He said Shiite militia units will soon hand control of Hawija to local police and to Sunni tribal leaders.

From 2005 to 2007, Sunnis and Shiites fought a brutal civil war. In 2013, Hawija was at the forefront of a brief uprising that pitted Sunni gunmen against the Shiite-dominated government of Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, then the prime minister.

Human rights groups have accused Shiite militiamen in liberated Sunni cities such as Falluja of executing Islamic State prisoners and civilians accused of supporting them. Several militants who surrendered to Kurdish forces last week said they feared execution if captured by Shiite militiamen.

General Aboda said all militants captured in Hawija were turned over to Iraqi military intelligence officers.

The military coalition in Hawija included Iranian-trained militiamen, federal police officers and local Sunni tribal fighters. They were backed by American airstrikes and artillery.

Mr. Hawas and other Sunni residents complained about the Kurdish fighters known as pesh merga, who maintained defensive lines a few miles north of the city. They said the overwhelming vote last month for independence from Iraq for the Kurdish autonomous region had undercut the fight against the Islamic State. The Kurds should annul the vote, many said.

There are fears that Iraqi forces will clash with pesh merga fighters now that the two sides' front lines are closer after the fall of Hawija. Kurdish leaders and the government in Baghdad are locked in a tense confrontation over the vote, with Iraq threatening military and economic reprisals if the Kurds don't annul the results.

''If they insist on their independence, then of course we may have to fight them,'' General Aboda said. But he added that the police had been ordered by Baghdad to avoid any confrontation with Kurdish fighters.

''They told us not to provoke anything,'' said another police commander in Hawija, Gen. Maitham al-Abbodi.

Despite the military triumph, not everyone was so sanguine about the end of Islamic State. Col. Kareem Aboud of a federal police SWAT unit, who was providing security for food deliveries to displaced Hawija district residents, said he was not convinced that the Islamic State was on the verge of complete defeat in Iraq.

''They're like a cancer,'' he said. ''You can never declare them dead.''

Above, a Shiite militia fighter praying on a road outside Hawija on Friday, a day after Iraqi forces retook the city from Islamic State militants. Left, Shiite fighters celebrated their victory. Many ISIS fighters fled north to surrender to Kurdish forces. (PHOTGRAPHS BY AHMAD AL-RUBAYE/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES; DAVID ZUCCHINO/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171007eda70004q



WHITE HOUSE MEMO
National Desk; SECTA
A Message Sent, to Whom or About What Is Not Exactly Clear

By MARK LANDLER; Maggie Haberman and Eileen Sullivan contributed reporting. 
1,178 words
7 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
14
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Trump was clearly looking to make some kind of news, but about what, exactly, was not clear. And the mystery, as it often does with a president whose statements baffle even his staff, only deepened the next day.

On Thursday evening, the White House told the presidential press corps that Mr. Trump was done with his public schedule for the day. But around 7 p.m., Mr. Trump summoned reporters who were still at work to the State Dining Room, where he was throwing a dinner for military commanders and their spouses.

Gesturing to his guests, he said, ''You guys know what this represents? Maybe it's the calm before the storm.''

''What's the storm?'' asked one reporter.

''Could be the calm before the storm,'' Mr. Trump repeated, stretching out the phrase, a sly smile playing across his face.

''From Iran?'' ventured another reporter. ''On ISIS? On what?''

''What storm, Mr. President?'' asked a third journalist, a hint of impatience creeping into her voice.

As the generals shifted from foot to foot, Mr. Trump brought the game of 20 Questions to an end. He praised his beribboned guests as the ''world's great military people'' and excused the stymied reporters, who returned to their workstations to start another round of: What was the president talking about?

By Friday, the White House was still unable to shed light on the matter; several of Mr. Trump's aides said they had no idea what the president meant. But the press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, wanted to make one thing clear: Mr. Trump wasn't just teasing his favorite antagonists. He was sending a message.

''I wouldn't say that he's messing with the press,'' Ms. Sanders told reporters. ''I think we have some serious world issues here. I think that North Korea, Iran both continue to be bad actors, and the president is somebody who's going to always look for ways to protect Americans, and he's not going to dictate what those actions may look like.''

Suddenly, Mr. Trump's preprandial banter took on an ominous tone. Maybe he was foreshadowing war with North Korea, which he has already threatened with ''fire and fury'' if the reclusive country aimed its missiles at the United States. Or perhaps he was predicting a clash with Iran, a week before he is expected to disavow the nuclear deal negotiated by his predecessor, Barack Obama.

''He certainly doesn't want to lay out his game plan for our enemies,'' Ms. Sanders declared.

Sometimes, though, Mr. Trump's statements leave his own staff in the dark, forcing them to impute a meaning to his words that might not actually exist. Privately, a few aides said they did not believe the president was preparing the country for war with either North Korea or Iran.

But they also noted Ms. Sanders has had a more successful debut as press secretary than her predecessor, Sean Spicer, in part because she has not attempted to clean up Mr. Trump's statements -- something that would rankle the president.

The president's penchant for provocative statements is well established. In March, Mr. Trump tweeted, ''Terrible! Just found out that Obama had my 'wires tapped' in Trump Tower just before the victory. Nothing found. This is McCarthyism!'' The Justice Department later said there was no evidence that Mr. Obama tapped his apartment during the 2016 campaign.

Pressed by reporters at the time, Mr. Spicer tried to walk back the claim, saying ''the president used the word wiretaps in quotes to mean, broadly, surveillance and other activities.''

Mr. Trump also shows an obvious delight in keeping people guessing. At the United Nations last month, he announced he had made up his mind about how to handle the Iran nuclear deal, but was not going to tell the public. When he met Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain, perhaps America's closest ally, she asked him what he had decided. He refused to tell her, either.

''I didn't know he was going to say today he's made a decision,'' a bemused Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson said at the time. ''I knew he had, but I didn't know he was going to say he had.''

Henry A. Kissinger, the former secretary of state, is credited with coining the principle of constructive ambiguity in diplomacy: the use of deliberately fuzzy language to overcome sensitive issues in negotiations between countries. Mr. Trump may have tried a variation of that on Thursday evening, except that he was applying it to military deterrence.

In his prepared remarks to the military leaders, Mr. Trump outlined a series of specific challenges.

''We have had challenges that we really should have taken care of a long time ago, like North Korea, Iran, Afghanistan, ISIS and the revisionist powers that threaten our interests all around the world,'' the president said, using the an acronym for the Islamic State.

What made Mr. Trump's reference to the ''calm before the storm'' particularly tantalizing was the timing.

For weeks, he has promised to retaliate against any North Korean aggression toward the United States. When Mr. Tillerson spoke in Beijing last week about seeking diplomatic channels to the North, Mr. Trump followed up with a tweet that his chief diplomat was ''wasting his time trying to negotiate with Little Rocket Man,'' the president's nickname for the North Korean dictator, Kim Jong-un.

Mr. Trump also faces an Oct. 15 deadline to recertify the nuclear deal with Iran that was negotiated among world powers during the Obama administration. He is expected to decline to recertify the agreement, which would essentially kick it to Congress to decide whether to reimpose economic sanctions against Tehran.

But it is equally plausible that Mr. Trump was merely being theatrical, using the backdrop of military officers to stir up some drama. As the president spoke, the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Paul J. Selva, stood next to him stoically.

Perhaps it is not Mr. Kissinger, but his former boss, Richard M. Nixon, who is the president's model. Nixon devised the ''madman theory'' of statecraft, under which he hoped to keep the nation's foes off balance by persuading them that he was impulsive and unpredictable.

Asked whether Mr. Trump had adopted Nixon's keep-'em-guessing approach, Ms. Sanders said, ''If you're asking, is the president trying to do that? Absolutely. I mean, I don't think that's a secret.''

As for Mr. Trump, he seemed to savor the speculation. When a reporter asked him during a signing ceremony in the Oval Office what he meant by the ''calm before the storm,'' he winked, paused, and said, ''You'll find out.''

President Trump and his dinner guests Thursday at the White House. Comments from Mr. Trump raised questions about whether military action was imminent. (POOL  BY ANDREW HARRER) 

Document NYTF000020171007eda70004c



Foreign Desk; SECTA
American Held as  ISIS  Suspect, Creating Quandary for Trump Administration

By ERIC SCHMITT and CHARLIE SAVAGE 
1,462 words
7 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Trump administration officials are divided over how to handle a United States citizen that the military has held in Iraq for more than three weeks as a suspected Islamic State fighter, according to an official familiar with internal deliberations, raising a dilemma that could resurrect some of the biggest wartime policy questions of the post-9/11 era.

Providing the first details about a predicament that the Trump administration has kept draped in near-total secrecy, the official said the problem facing Pentagon and Justice Department officials is how to ensure that the man -- who surrendered on Sept. 12 to a Syrian rebel militia, which turned him over to the American military -- will stay imprisoned.

It may not be possible to prosecute the man because most of the evidence against him is probably inadmissible, the official said. But holding a citizen in long-term wartime detention as an enemy combatant -- something the military has not done since the George W. Bush administration -- would rekindle major legal problems left dormant since Mr. Bush left office and could put at risk the legal underpinnings for the fight against the Islamic State.

Admissible evidence is sparse, said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss sensitive information without authorization, adding that the F.B.I. and Justice Department were working to build the case. Spokesmen for the National Security Council, the Justice Department and the Pentagon declined to comment on the specifics of this account but did not contest its details.

But the pressure to make a decision is mounting. On Thursday, the American Civil Liberties Union filed a habeas corpus petition asking a judge to order the Pentagon to let its lawyers visit the prisoner and to rule that the government's holding of him in detention without due process and unable to communicate is unconstitutional.

''The U.S. government cannot imprison American citizens without charge or access to a judge,'' said Jonathan Hafetz, an A.C.L.U. lawyer. ''It also cannot keep secret the most basic facts about their detention, including who they are, where they are being held and on what authority they are being detained. The Trump administration should not resurrect the failed and unlawful policy of 'enemy combatant' detentions.''

But it is unclear whether the group has standing to bring that complaint without the man agreeing to let it represent him. Because Trump administration officials have refused to disclose his name, rights groups have been unable to track down any close relative to grant that assent on his behalf.

The Trump administration has said almost nothing about the detainee beyond acknowledging that he exists and was recently visited by the International Committee of the Red Cross. Spokesmen at the White House, the Pentagon and the Justice Department have repeatedly demurred when asked for even basic facts about what is happening.

When asked about the case at a security conference at Georgetown University on Sept. 14, two days after the suspect surrendered, John J. Mulligan, the deputy director of the National Counterterrorism Center, said he presumed that the individual would probably be charged with material support to terrorism.

The senior administration official partly opened a window onto the matter. The prisoner, the official said, was born on American soil, making him a citizen, but his parents were visiting foreigners and he grew up in the Middle East. The near total lack of contact with the United States slowed efforts to verify his identity, the official said.

The prisoner was interrogated first for intelligence purposes -- such as to determine whether he knew of any imminent terrorist attacks -- without being read the Miranda warning that he had a right to remain silent and have a defense lawyer present. The government then started a new interrogation for law-enforcement purposes, but after the captive was warned of his Miranda rights, he refused to say any more and remains in military custody in Iraq, the official said.

Investigators have also identified a personnel file in a cache of seized Islamic State documents that appears to be about the captive, the official said. But prosecutors could have difficulty getting that record, which was gathered under battlefield conditions, admitted as evidence against him under more rigorous courtroom standards.

As a result, while the Pentagon wants the Justice Department to take the prisoner off its hands, law enforcement officials have been reluctant to take custody of him unless and until more evidence is found to make it more likely that a prosecution would succeed, the official said.

There is a limit to how long the military can hold a citizen without at least letting him talk to lawyers, said Stephen Vladeck, a law professor at the University of Texas, Austin, who specializes in national security matters, acknowledging the government's predicament.

''It would be one thing if this were a cooperating witness who was being kept in incommunicado detention to protect his safety and his intelligence value,'' Mr. Vladeck said. ''But keeping someone in these circumstances simply because they don't know what to do with him is not going to help them in court, if and when it gets there.''

The Pentagon spokesman, Maj. Ben Sakrisson, said that ''captured enemy fighters may be detained'' as part of the armed conflict against the Islamic State.

''A U.S. citizen may lawfully be subject to military detention in armed conflict under appropriate circumstances,'' he added, pointing to a 2004 decision in which the Supreme Court upheld the indefinite wartime detention of an American citizen captured in the Afghanistan war, Yasser Hamdi.

Still, there are questions that were not answered by that 2004 ruling and would be raised again by trying to hold the new detainee indefinitely.

Mr. Hamdi, like the new captive, was born in the United States but raised abroad -- in his case, Saudi Arabia. After he was captured in Afghanistan, the Bush administration moved him, along with hundreds of other wartime detainees, to the prison at Guantáamo Bay, Cuba. Only there did officials discover his citizenship.

They transferred him to a brig in South Carolina and continued to hold him as an enemy combatant under the laws of war. In 2004, the Supreme Court ruled that his detention as a wartime prisoner was lawful -- but also that he had a right to challenge the evidence that he was an enemy fighter in a hearing before a neutral decision maker.

Instead of granting him such a hearing, the Bush administration sent him to Saudi Arabia. The Supreme Court has never ruled on what kind of hearing -- or how much or what type of evidence -- is sufficient to hold an American in indefinite wartime detention. Attempting to hold the new detainee in that fashion would raise those questions anew.

The Trump administration would also face political risks in holding an American as a long-term enemy combatant. The Bush administration's decision to detain Mr. Hamdi without trial, along with an American and a Saudi on a student visa who were arrested in Illinois and transferred to military custody, was controversial across the ideological spectrum.

It is not clear whether the administration is also weighing transferring the captive to Iraqi or Kurdish custody. The Obama administration sent a previous high-profile Islamic State prisoner, Umm Sayyaf, to Iraq -- but she was not an American.

The new case also raises the prospect of a fight over the law authorizing the battle against the Islamic State.

In Mr. Hamdi's case, the Supreme Court ruled that the military's legal power to detain a citizen captured fighting on the Afghan battlefield flowed from Congress's authorization to use military force against the perpetrators of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. But it is in dispute whether that aging law encompasses the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, as the executive branch has argued since the Obama administration.

The Justice Department has fought in court to prevent a judge from ruling on that notion, and legal experts have warned the Trump administration not to bring Islamic State detainees to Guantáamo to avoid the issue. But litigation over whether an American member of the Islamic State is subject to wartime detention would squarely raise that question, potentially jeopardizing the basis for the broader war effort.

''They don't want this habeas case,'' Mr. Vladeck said. ''This is not the hill the government wants to fight the ISIS or the U.S. citizen questions on.''

On Twitter, follow Eric Schmitt @EricSchmittNYT and Charlie Savage @charlie_savage.

A wall in Hawija, Iraq, painted with the black flag commonly used to represent the Islamic State. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020171007eda70004a



Editorial
Opinion
Why Decertifying the Iran Nuclear Deal Would Be a Bad Idea

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
599 words
6 October 2017
01:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

President Trump is expected to announce next week whether he will withdraw certification of the nuclear deal with Iran that was negotiated by the Obama administration. The Washington Post reported Thursday that he is planning to decertify the deal. The Times editorial board has long argued that is wrong-headed, and will ultimately prove to be a step that antagonizes Iran, a major regional power, and leads to the proliferation of nuclear weapons around the world.

Here’ why:

It ignores that the deal is working. The deal was intended to keep Iran from producing a nuclear weapon, a crucial and necessary goal. Critics ignore the fact that the deal is doing that, as the International Atomic Energy Agency, which rigorously monitors Iran’ activities, and even Mr. Trump’ own State Department have certified.

It would alienate our allies and make a bad situation with North Korea even worse. If America withdraws from the agreement, it will outrage the other major powers that are party to the deal —rance, Britain, Germany, Russia and China —nd give Iran an excuse to resume a full-blown nuclear program. Why Mr. Trump would risk that when North Korea’ program is a full-time concern is a mystery.

It sends the wrong message to Iran, and that’ dangerous. As it has been with other foreign policy issues, the Trump administration’ approach to Iran has been full of mixed messages. Yet amid the confusion, there has been an ominous tendency to demonize Iran and misrepresent the threat it presents. This could lead to an unnecessary and risky confrontation.

It doesn’ help in the fight against the Islamic State. The fear is that Mr. Trump’ demonizing of Iran, and his unwillingness to engage its government, could result in a broadening of the American military mission from defeating \b ISIS\b0  to preventing Iranian influence from expanding. This would be dangerous. Iran is a vexing state to be smartly managed, not assumed to be an implacable enemy.

It ignores the complexity of the region. In some ways Iran is an easy political target. Sunni Arabs feel threatened by Iran and are competing with Iran for regional influence. Israel detests Iran and so do many members of Congress. Yet to see Iran as implacably hostile is much too simple. Even as Mr. Trump reaffirmed America’ partnership with the conservative Saudi royals, Iranians were re-electing a moderate, Hassan Rouhani, as president and reaffirming their interest in engagement with the West. The Saudi human rights record is no better than Iran’.

It undermines trust in America and the country’ ability to negotiate in the future. At a crucial moment, Donald Trump is forcing the world to confront core questions it really shouldn’ have to ask: Can he be trusted? And, more saliently, can America be trusted? His threats to jettison the Iran nuclear deal are undermining America’ credibility as a negotiating partner and weakening America’ ability to lead the free world as it has for 70 years.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

* Trump Approves Iran Strategy; No Word Yet on Nuclear Deal

* Mr. Trump Squanders the World’ Trust

* Before You Rip Up That Iran Deal ...

* Warmongers and Peacemakers at the U.N.

* Asking for Trouble on Iran

Iranian President Hassan Rouhani speaking at the United Nations in September. | Chang W. Lee/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171005eda50093t



JAKARTA JOURNAL
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Where Christians and Muslims Share a Street

By JOE COCHRANE 
1,211 words
5 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

JAKARTA, Indonesia -- On a tree-lined side street in the Indonesian capital sits a colonial-era Protestant church with rustic wooden pews and stained-glass windows, and an antique pipe organ built into a large wall behind the altar.

Across the street is a modern, 100,000-square-foot mosque with towering arches at its entrances and a cavernous prayer area laid wall-to-wall with red carpet.

Despite their different faiths, the two houses of worship are friendly, helpful neighbors -- and an example of pluralism in the world's most populous Muslim-majority nation at a time of heightened fears over religious intolerance.

''We respect each other,'' said Nur Alam, an imam at the Sunda Kelapa Grand Mosque, which opened in 1971. ''If we never offend other people, then we will be respected.''

Across the street, Adriaan Pitoy is a pastor at St. Paul's Church, which was built in 1936 under the Dutch colonial administration. ''Our relationship is just one of many steps we take,'' he said of the neighbors at the mosque. ''We also go to other mosques to promote dialogue. Our relationship with our friends next door is normal.''

For the two houses of worship, normal means sharing parking spaces during busier services: Friday Prayer for the mosque, Sunday service for the church. They also host interfaith dialogue sessions, and even volleyball tournaments. During Ramadan, the Muslim holy fasting month, the staff at St. Paul's, some of whom are Muslim, carry boxes of food to the mosque for worshipers there to break their fast.

This type of religious harmony among neighboring houses of worship is evident not just in Jakarta, but across the Indonesian archipelago. About 90 percent of Indonesia's 260 million people are identified as Muslim, but the country also has small but influential Christian, Hindu, Buddhist and Confucian populations.

Yet these friendly relations are regularly overshadowed by international news reports and social media posts about racial intolerance and fears of the ''Islamization'' of Indonesia.

In recent years, there have been hundreds of cases of hard-line Islamic groups harassing, attacking and in some cases even killing religious minorities including Christians, Shiite Muslims and members of the Ahmadiyah Islamic sect, and forcibly closing hundreds of churches and other houses of worship across the country.

Then there is Indonesia's domestic terrorism, dating back to 2000, including multiple bombings and attacks in Jakarta and the resort island of Bali by terrorist cells that pledged loyalty to Al Qaeda or the Islamic State.

''If you see the actions of these hard-line groups, and threats from ISIS, or Indonesian militants coming back from Syria, they are a threat to interfaith cooperation in Indonesia,'' said Theophilus Bela, former president of the Jakarta Christian Communication Forum, who has for years documented attacks on, and discriminatory actions against, churches in Indonesia.

A recent local challenge to religious harmony can be found cater-cornered from St. Paul's Church and the Sunda Kelapa Grand Mosque, where, across a boulevard and public park, lies the official residence of the governor of Jakarta.

Basuki Tjahaja Purnama was supposed to be living there. Instead, he is in prison, serving a two-year sentence for blaspheming Islam in a case that ignited violent street marches through Jakarta by hard-line Islamist groups. They demanded he be prosecuted or lynched outright for citing a verse of the Quran that warns Muslims against taking Christians and Jews as allies.

Mr. Basuki, a Christian, subsequently suffered a landslide loss in a runoff election in April. A few weeks later, he was convicted by a Jakarta court and immediately transferred to a high-security prison, to the cheers and celebrations of hard-line Islamic groups gathered outside the courthouse.

Mr. Basuki's prosecution and imprisonment shocked much of the country, in particular its religious minority communities.

Despite the case and its stoking of Muslim-Christian tensions, both Mr. Nur and Mr. Pitoy contend that the episode of Mr. Basuki was more political than religious, and they say they are not worried about the long-term durability of Indonesia's pluralistic tradition.

''The people of Indonesia know that there have been conflicts among religious groups, but actually it's not really just because of religious faith, but maybe it's political, economic and things like that,'' Mr. Pitoy said. ''Sometimes it's difficult to differentiate between politics and religion -- especially in Indonesia.''

In August, Christian Solidarity Worldwide, a human rights organization founded in Britain, released a report saying that Indonesia's centuries-old tradition of religious pluralism was ''under severe threat,'' and that its reputation as a moderate, democratic Muslim-majority nation that protects freedom of religion was being undermined.

The report said some Christian communities particularly feared for their safety.

''There's almost a sense that they are second-class citizens in their own country,'' said Benedict Rogers, the organization's East Asia team leader.

In response to the fall of Mr. Basuki, who used to attend St. Paul's, Indonesia's president, Joko Widodo, one of his key political allies, established a special task force to reinforce the country's state ideology, known as Pancasila, which enshrines pluralism.

Despite Mr. Basuki's case, violent attacks on religious minorities have decreased substantially in the past five years. The Setara Institute for Democracy and Peace, a nongovernmental organization in Jakarta, had recorded only 93 such attacks this year through August, compared with 264 in all of 2012.

''But the number of blasphemy cases because of social media, because people have comments on Facebook and groups report them to the police, that is growing now,'' said Bonar Tigor Naipospos, vice chairman of the Setara Institute's executive board.

Mr. Nur and Mr. Pitoy both said Indonesia's core problem with religion is not intolerance, but a lack of education and understanding among its people. Less than half of all Indonesians have completed primary school, according to the government's statistical bureau.

''Indonesia is Muslim-majority -- you have to accept it -- but the lower class has a very simple knowledge'' of Islam, Mr. Nur said. ''That is why, if you want to know about the essence of Islam, which is peace and tolerance, study the Quran.''

When asked if he thought that religious intolerance was growing in Indonesia, Mr. Pitoy, the pastor at St. Paul's, said, ''I don't think so.''

''The problems are about poverty and making social justice a reality,'' he said of the challenges facing the church. ''Also, with globalization, there are failures internally, and it has created many sudden changes. It's very important to have a common foundation, and we have it with our Constitution and Pancasila.''

The main gate of Sunda Kelapa Grand Mosque. Religious harmony in Indonesia is often overshadowed by reports on racial intolerance and fears of ''Islamization.''; Outside the Sunda Kelapa Grand Mosque in Jakarta, top. A Muslim woman, above, selling tissues outside the entrance of St. Paul's. Some of the church's staff members are also Muslim.; St. Paul's Church in Jakarta. Most Indonesians identify as Muslim, but the nation has a small, influential Christian population. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KEMAL JUFRI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171005eda50005i



Washington; SECT
Transcript of Rex Tillerson's Remarks Supporting President Trump

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
1,365 words
5 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDSecretary of State Rex W. Tillerson on Wednesday made a statement from the Treaty Room of the State Department reiterating his support of President Trump. The following is a transcript of that statement, as prepared by The New York Times.

For more coverage of his statement, read here »

TILLERSON: Good morning.

There are some news reports this morning that I want to address. First, my commitment to the success of our president and our country is as strong as it was the day I accepted his offer to serve as secretary of state.

President Trump's America-first agenda has given voice to millions who felt completely abandoned by the political status quo and who felt their interests came second to those of other countries.

President Trump's foreign policy goals break the mold of what people traditionally think is achievable on behalf of our country. We're finding new ways to govern that deliver new victories. Our job is now to achieve results on behalf of America. We are doing that.

We've created international unity around our peaceful pressure campaign around North Korea, including influencing China to exert unprecedented economic influence on North Korea.

At the Riyadh summit, the president rallied Muslim-majority nations to assume new responsibilities for stopping terrorism. NATO members are now contributing more to shared security. And our approach to South Asia and specifically Afghanistan means building upon our relationships with India and Pakistan to stamp out terrorism and support the Afghan government in providing security for their own people. And ISIS's fraudulent caliphate in Iraq and Syria is on the brink of being completely extinguished, thanks to an aggressive new strategy led by the president.

What we have accomplished, we have done as a team. Similarly, Secretary Mnuchin has levied economic sanctions on North Korea and related entities. Countries must increasingly decide whether they will do business with North Korea or with the community of peace-loving nations.

Ambassador Haley has spearheaded and achieved enormous success, passing the toughest U.N. sanctions to date on North Korea.

General Mattis and I communicate virtually every day and we agree there must be the highest level of coordination between our diplomatic efforts and our military efforts. You can't have a stronger partner than a secretary of defense who embraces diplomacy. And I hope he feels he has the partner he needs at the State Department.

And this is just the beginning of the list of partners and friends across the government who are all working for the American people. There's much to be done, and we're just getting started.

To address a few specifics that have been erroneously reported this morning, the vice president has never had to persuade me to remain as secretary of state, because I have never considered leaving this post. I value the friendship and the counsel of the vice president and I admire his leadership within President Trump's administration to address the many important agendas of President Trump, both from a foreign policy perspective and a diplomatic -- I'm sorry, a domestic objective.

Let me tell you what I've learned about this president, whom I did not know before taking this office.

He loves his country. He puts Americans and America first. He's smart, he demands results wherever he goes, and he holds those around him accountable for whether they've done the job he's asked them to do.

Accountability is one of the bedrock values the president and I share. While I'm new to Washington, I have learned that there are some who try to sow dissension to advance their own agenda by tearing others apart, in an effort to undermine President Trump's own agenda. I do not and I will not operate that way. And the same applies to everyone on my team here at the State Department.

When I wake up in the morning, my first thoughts are about the safety of our citizens at home and abroad. There's no more important responsibility I carry with me than ensuring that Americans are safe. Providing for the security of the United States must be the number one goal of our American foreign policy.

President Trump and his administration will keep moving forward as one team, with one mission. Doing great things for the United States of America, to make America great again. Thank you.

REPORTER: Is that the only thing that you consider to be erroneous in that article?

TILLERSON: I think it's the most important out of the article is to reaffirm my commitment to this role that President Trump's asked me to serve and to dispel with this notion that I have ever considered leaving. I have answered that question repeatedly. For some reason, it continues to be misreported. There's never been a consideration in my mind to leave. I serve at the appointment of the president and I am here for as long as the president feels I can be useful to achieving his objectives.

REPORTER: Mr. Secretary, do you agree with Secretary Mattis that the United States should stay in the J.C.P.O.A.?

TILLERSON: We'll have a recommendation for the president. We're going to give him a couple of options of how to move forward to advance the important policy towards Iran. As you've heard us say many times, the J.C.P.O.A. represents only a small part of the many issues that we need to deal with when it comes to the Iranian relationship. So it is an important part of that, but it is not the only part. And I've said many times, we cannot let the Iranian relationship be defined solely by that nuclear agreement.

REPORTER: Can you address the main headline of this story that you called the president a moron, and if not, where do you think these reports --

TILLERSON: I'm not going to deal with petty stuff like that. This is what I don't understand about Washington. Again, I'm not from this place. But the places I come from, we don't deal with that kind of petty nonsense. And it is intended to do nothing but divide people. And I'm just not going to be part of this effort to divide this administration.

REPORTER: Secretary, did you speak with the president about the report and did he ask you to make a statement or --

TILLERSON: I have not spoken to the president this morning. I think he's on his way to Las Vegas, is my understanding.

REPORTER: Secretary, [inaudible] Foreign minister [inaudible] Do you have a reliable partner in Pakistan now? [inaudible]

TILLERSON: Yes, I believe we do. I think the Pakistan relationship -- the Pakistan relationship and the U.S. relationship is extraordinarily important regionally. And as we rolled out the South Asia strategy, we spoke about it in a regional context. It is not just about Afghanistan.

This is about the importance of Pakistan and Pakistan's long-term stability as well. We have concerns about the future of Pakistan's government, too, in terms of them -- we want their government to be stable and we want it to be peaceful. And many of the same issues they're struggle with inside of Pakistan are our issues.

We think there is an opportunity to strengthen that relationship. We're going to be working very hard at all levels, from the State Department to the Defense Department to our intelligence communities, as well as economic, commerce opportunities as well. So it really is a regional approach and Pakistan is critical, I think, to the long-term stability of the region.

Thank you very much.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Online Correction: October 4, 2017, Wednesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this transcript misspelled the surname of the United States ambassador to the United Nations. She is Nikki R. Haley, not Hailey.

Document NYTF000020171005eda50004z



Briefing
Las Vegas, Puerto Rico, Rex Tillerson: Your Wednesday Evening Briefing

By KAREN ZRAICK and DAVID SCULL 
1,039 words
4 October 2017
23:53
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good evening. Here’ the latest.

1. Baffled investigators hope that Marilou Danley, who was in the Philippines when her boyfriend, Stephen Paddock, killed 58 people and injured hundreds in Las Vegas, can help explain what drove him to become a mass murderer.

F.B.I. agents met Ms. Danley when she returned to the U.S. late Tuesday. President Trump visited Las Vegas, lauding the efforts of emergency workers and doctors. And leaked photos showed the arms cache inside the hotel room. Here’ the latest.

Today on our podcast “he Daily,” we look at how the N.R.A. became a powerful lobbying group, and a gun store owner talks about selling military-style weapons to civilians.

_____

2. In Puerto Rico, the official death toll from Hurricane Maria rose to 34 from 16, as piecemeal reports were added up. And federal officials tried to dial back President Trump’ apparent vow to clear some of the island’ $73 billion debt, made during his trip yesterday.

How did the island amass a debt big enough to crush it? This in-depth article from July, “he Bonds That Broke Puerto Rico,” tries to explain. The late-night hosts also had a lot to say about President Trump’ trip.

_____

3. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson insisted that he had never considered resigning, despite an NBC News report to the contrary and what aides say is his deep frustration.

But he did not outright deny another element in the report: that he once referred to President Trump as a “oron.”e limited his response to: “’ not going to deal with petty stuff like that.”

Three days ago, Mr. Trump publicly undercut Mr. Tillerson by dismissing efforts to reach out to North Korea.

_____

4. Just when Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain most needed to deliver a strong speech —t a Conservative Party conference dominated by talk of her fragile leadership —he had a nightmare.

First Mrs. May was targeted by a prankster. Then her voice gave out. And finally, the letters spelling out a slogan began disappearing from the display behind her.

Among the potential successors hunting for an opening is Boris Johnson, the country’ top diplomat, who is however known for undiplomatic remarks. At the same conference, he came under fire for saying that the former ISIS stronghold of Surt, Libya, could become “he next Dubai”f the authorities could just “lear the dead bodies away.”

_____

5. The European Union is taking aim at Silicon Valley over taxes.

The European Commission said it would take Ireland to court for not clawing back billions from Apple, and ordered Luxembourg to recover around $293 million from Amazon.

“ don’ think that we’e done,”arned the competition commissioner, Margrethe Vestager. Above, Amazon’ Luxembourg outpost.

_____

6. The Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to three scientists who developed a method for generating 3-D images of the molecules of life.

The discovery has already helped scientists better understand diseases like the Zika virus and could lead to treatments in the future. Coming tomorrow: the prize for literature.

_____

7. A celebrated 1981 drama that won the Pulitzer Prize for its portrayal of the struggles of black G.I.s is being revived Off Broadway. The actors and producers say it’ more relevant than ever.

“ Soldier’ Play”s set during World War II on a Louisiana military base and works backward from the mysterious murder of a sergeant.

Actors from the debut production —ncluding Denzel Washington, above center —nd the current revival said they hoped audiences sense the echoes between past and present.

_____

8. Some good news: The Burmese star tortoise, which was declared functionally extinct in the early 2000s, is making a comeback.

The animals have yellow polygon patterns across their shells that camouflage them in dry grasses —ut also make them attractive as exotic pets, smuggled for thousands of dollars to the U.S., Europe and other parts of Asia.

Captive breeding colonies set up by conservationists have bolstered the population, and now some are even being released back into the wild.

_____

9. The Yankees are headed to the American League division series after beating the Minnesota Twins, 8-4, in the wild-card game last night. It was the first playoff win for the Yankees since 2012. Next stop: Cleveland.

Above, Joe Mauer, the former American League M.V.P. and six-time All-Star who was drafted by the Twins in 2001 and joined the team in 2004. He’ watched Minnesota get smacked around by the Yankees ever since.

“his one stings right now,”e said last night. “ut they all sting.”

_____

10. Finally, we visited the world’ first Lego restaurant, in Billund, Denmark. That’ where the company has its headquarters; its flagship theme park, Legoland; and now, a new destination called Lego House.

At the restaurant in Lego House, called Mini Chef, orders are taken and food is “repared”y Lego minifigure chefs “iving”n iPad boxes at each table. The chefs speak only in brick: to get your meal, you must request it by snapping together Legos whose colors match the menu items.

Both our reporter and the kids in her party enjoyed the visit.

Have a great night.

_____

Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.

Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

Gregory Bull/Associated Press | Doug Mills/The New York Times | Yuri Gripas/Reuters | Phil Noble/Reuters | Emmanuel Dunand/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Jonathan Nackstrand/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Bert Andrews | Wildlife Conservation Society/Turtle Survival Alliance | Chang W. Lee/The New York Times | Lego 

Document NYTFEED020171004eda40080x



Fact Check
U.S.; Politics
Spurious Chart, Data on N.R.A. Spending Mislead in Gun Debate

By LINDA QIU 
914 words
4 October 2017
02:17
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

At least 23 weapons were found in the Las Vegas hotel suite of the gunman who targeted an outdoor concert on Sunday night, killing 59 people, including himself, and injuring more than 500 others. Authorities found 19 more firearms, and hundreds of rounds of ammunition, in the home of the gunman, Stephen Paddock.

The cache has ignited yet another round of debate over guns and gun control in the United States. Here are some common claims, fact-checked.

A widely shared chart showing that more guns mean fewer gun murders gives a misleading impression.

In response to calls for more gun control and fewer guns, some have pointed to a chart published by the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative-leaning think tank in Washington, to argue that more guns don’ necessarily translate to more gun homicides.

The point that more permissive gun laws did not lead to a huge spike in gun violence has merits, said Adam Winkler, a Second Amendment expert at the University of California, Los Angeles. But the chart itself, he said, “s a bunch of hokey.”

The chart’ data on the spike in the number of firearms and the decline in the homicides by firearms are accurate. But there is no proof that these two trends are connected. Crime, whether or not committed with guns, has generally declined over the past two decades. Experts aren’ entirely sure why but do say the drop was influenced by a host of economic, racial and demographic factors.

“ot a single criminal justice researcher out there looks at the gun homicide rate solely as a function of the number of private firearms,”aid Mr. Winkler.

A few other statistics quickly puncture the chart’ suggested conclusion.

The number of firearms in the United States has steadily increased over the past two decades. It rose to 310 million in 2009, up from 259 million in 2000 and 192 million in 1994.

Gun homicides, meanwhile, fell dramatically from a 1993 peak of a rate of 7.02 per 100,000 people; by 1999, it was at 3.82 per 100,000 people. But the homicide rate has remained steady since then, suggesting the correlation between the number of guns and number of gun killings does not hold past the turn of the millennium.

At the same time, the number of mass shootings has also spikeddramatically.

Planned Parenthood did not outspend the National Rifle Association.

A flurry of Twitter posts compared spending by the N.R.A. to Planned Parenthood, two groups that are consistently among the nation’ top political contributors.

Both groups give vastly less to candidates directly than they invest in outside spending, or expenditures made independent of a candidate often in the form of political advertisements.

For example, the N.R.A. —hrough affiliated groups and individuals —onated $839,215 to candidates in the 2016 campaign cycle, while Planned Parenthood contributed $904,420. 

But the gun group poured $54 million in outside spending in 2016, more than triplePlanned Parenthood’ amount. The N.R.A.’ cumulative spending across three election cycles tops $104 million, more than double than the $41 million spent by Planned Parenthood during the same time, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, the campaign finance watchdog.

The impact of gun silencers can be overstated.

Among the calls for tougher gun restrictions, Hillary Clinton tweeted on Monday to criticize a House bill that would make it easier to purchase gun silencers. “magine the deaths if the shooter had a silencer, which the N.R.A. wants to make easier to get,”rs. Clinton wrote the day after the massacre in Las Vegas.

Addressing other claims that were far more dramatic, The Washington Post Fact Checker awarded three Pinocchios out of four to statements that the gunshot suppressor makes the weapon “uiet.”rs. Clinton did not go quite that far.

It is not known yet exactly what weapons Mr. Paddock used in the shootings, but a federal law enforcement official said they included AR-15-style rifles.

A typical AR-15 produces a decibel level of around 167, “ive or take depending on environmental conditions,”according to the Loadout Room, a gear review website. With an average gun suppressor or silencer attached, the rifle’ decibel levels lower to about 136 decibels. Unsilenced, the gun would be louder than a jet engine or fireworks at a very close distance. With a suppressor, it would be as about as loud as jackhammer.

Mrs. Clinton has a point that suppressors also make it harder to tell where gunshots are coming from, especially as was the case during the concert in Las Vegas, with its blaring music.

Given the many variables involved, it’ extremely difficult —f not impossible —o determine what impact a silencer would have had. But it would not have “ilenced”he weapons.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* A Burst of Gunfire, a Pause, Then Carnage in Las Vegas That Would Not Stop

* In Las Vegas, Concert Security Met a New Threat: Aerial Assault

* False \b ISIS\b0  Connections, Nonexistent Victims and Other Misinformation in the Wake of Las Vegas Shooting

A federal law enforcement official said the guns Stephen Paddock used to carry out the shooting in Las Vegas included AR-15-style rifles. | John Moore/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171004eda40002t



NEWS ANALYSIS
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Kurdistan And Iraq Dial Down The Anger

By ROD NORDLAND and DAVID ZUCCHINO; Rod Nordland reported from Erbil, Iraq, and David Zucchino from Baghdad. Reporting was contributed by Margaret Coker in London, Carlotta Gall in Istanbul, Thomas Erdbrink in Tehran, and Falih Hassan and Omar al-Jawoshy in Baghdad. 
1,525 words
4 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq -- The world could be excused for thinking that another war was about to break out in Iraq.

After Iraq's Kurds voted in favor of independence, they took to the streets, waving flags and honking horns, and loudly scoffing at Baghdad's threats of military action. Iraq shut down international flights into the region and sent its gendarmes to the Kurdish borders, while its neighbors threatened economic and military intervention.

More than a week later, however, the Kurds have taken no steps to actually declare independence, and Baghdad and its allies have done nothing to make good on their threats of intervention. The referendum on independence was a seminal moment in the Kurds' long struggle for a homeland, but neither Baghdad nor the Kurds seem determined to force that moment to a crisis.

Kurdish oil is still flowing, despite threats by the Turks to shut down a vital pipeline; the Kurds' pesh merga forces are still fighting alongside the American-led military coalition in Iraq, their borders are open, and the military maneuvers by Turkey and Iran have been viewed by all sides as little more than posturing. On Monday, Iran made a showy display of moving battle tanks to its vital Parvaz Khan border crossing into Kurdistan, but the border stayed open to civilian traffic all the same.

[Video: Iran Army Heydar-Karar drill Phase-3 in Prviz-Khan border Ø§ÛŒØ±Ø§Ù†Ø§Ø±ØªØ´Ø±Ø²Ù…Ø§ÛŒØ´Ø­ÛŒØ¯Ø±Ú©Ø±Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ø±Ù…Ø±Ø²Ù¾Ø±ÙˆÛŒØ²Ø®Ø§Ù†tch on YouTube.]

Baghdad's most concrete action, the ban last Friday on international flights to and from Kurdistan's international airports, was softened this week when Iraqi authorities announced they would allow air travel from Kurdistan to transit through Baghdad.

Though there are existential issues at stake -- potentially an independent Kurdish state and the breakup of Iraq -- both sides may have been acting provocatively at least in part out of domestic political considerations.

For the Kurds, the timing of the referendum was seen by critics as an attempt by the Kurdish regional government's leader, Masoud Barzani, to bolster his popularity domestically and deflect attention from the region's economic problems.

For Baghdad, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi's harsh reaction was seen as an attempt to placate Shiite hard-liners demanding a severe response to the Kurdish provocation.

Both leaders face elections in the coming months. Now, having made their points, both seem willing to back away from the precipice.

Mr. Abadi's spokesman, Saad al-Hadithi, said in an interview Tuesday the Iraqi government had not carried out most of its threats yet to give the Kurds ''every opportunity to step back from their position.''

''The government does not want to inflame the situation,'' he said. ''We believe they will back down.''

He insisted, however, that the government had a timetable for forcing the Kurds to surrender control of its borders and its oil income but he declined to provide details.

Hard-line Shiite factions aligned with Iran are a powerful voting bloc in Iraq, and many of them are supporters of Mr. Abadi's leading political opponent, Vice President Nuri Kamal al-Maliki. Threatening tough action against the Kurds helps Mr. Abadi buttress his Shiite base.

''This is a long-term strategy,'' said Ali al-Alaq, a leading Iraqi lawmaker and a confidant of Mr. Abadi's. Gradually Iraq will cut off Kurdistan's exports and revenues until it gives in. ''In the end,'' he said, ''the revenues will come and Mr. Barzani will be left with nothing and his dreams will collapse.''

For their part, the Kurds say they never intended to follow the vote with an immediate declaration of independence.

''We held this vote because we lost faith, we were fighting a rear-guard position for a lost country,'' said Hoshyar Zebari, the former Iraqi foreign minister who was the architect of the Kurds' referendum vote. ''But it doesn't follow automatically that we will declare a state the day after. The conditions and requirements of state-building are much harder than having a vote on the 25th of September. It will not happen overnight.''

The Kurds hoped the referendum would provide leverage to begin divorce negotiations with Baghdad. Although Mr. Abadi has refused, the Kurds have not given up hope that Baghdad will negotiate.

They are also dismissive of Baghdad's threat to subjugate the Kurdish region by force.

''Military intervention, it's not going to happen,'' said Vahal Ali, director of communications in Mr. Barzani's office. ''Because first and foremost they don't have the military strength.''

In addition, the Iraqis are preoccupied with the battle against the Islamic State, which still controls territory in Iraq, and for which they depend on cooperation from Kurdish military forces.

The reality is that neither side wants a military confrontation, said Joost Hiltermann, a Middle East specialist at the International Crisis Group.

''If things escalate, it will be because of a particular dynamic that evolves,'' and not necessarily because Mr. Abadi wants it, Mr. Hiltermann wrote in an email. ''I don't think we're even close to that point.''

Behind the scenes, Western diplomats have been working to tamp down anger on both sides, and maintain the alliance against the Islamic State. Diplomats have expressed optimism that the independence crisis won't boil over into outright conflict -- at least not yet.

One break in the standoff came from an unexpected source, a sermon last Friday by the influential Iranian Shiite leader, Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani. Ayatollah Sistani firmly criticized the idea of an independent Kurdish state but at the same time called for dialogue and for Baghdad to respect the rights of Kurds.

''While Sistani has made it politically safe for Abadi to engage in a dialogue with Erbil, he has also set the secession of Iraqi Kurdistan as a red line that Baghdad cannot cross,'' wrote Randa Slim, director of conflict resolution at the Middle East Institute in Washington. That statement gave hope to both sides, and defused some of the tension between them.

Turkey and Iran, who opposed moves toward Kurdish independence out of fear of arousing such moves among their own Kurdish minorities, have also failed to follow through on bellicose threats, including military exercises on the Kurdish border and economic isolation.

Turkey in particular wields the greatest threat to the deeply troubled Kurdish economy, the ability to shut off the Kurdish oil pipeline, which runs through Turkey and provides the single biggest source of revenue to the Kurdish Regional Government.

Economy Minister Nihat Zeybekci told journalists over the weekend that it would be ''business as usual.'' In comments last week he described talk of an economic embargo as ''dangerous rhetoric'' and said any trade sanctions would hurt Turkey as much as the Iraqi Kurdish region.

''We're talking about a $8-9 billion trade and the interests of Turkey,'' he said.

The Kurds have long had a great deal of autonomy in their northern region, in what many viewed as de facto independence, running their own defense and foreign affairs, and exporting their own oil.

So far the independence crisis has not noticeably deepened the Kurdish economic crisis, except in industries catering to international visitors, such as hotels. Roza Mustafa, sales coordinator at the luxury Rotana Hotel in Erbil, said one of the company's hotels, the Arjan Rotana, had only ''one or two guests'' in its 165 rooms, as a result of the travel ban.

Fears the referendum would lead to panic buying in a country heavily dependent on imports, and might even prompt runs on the banks, since Kurdistan has no central bank of its own and is part of the Iraqi financial and currency system, have not materialized.

At the Byblos Bank in Erbil, branch manager Lara Azamat said that only a few relatively small account holders were making withdrawals out of nervousness. ''In 2013 during the ISIS advance many people were scared and they took their money out,'' she said. ''Now a few small accounts have, but the big ones are staying in.''

For now, at least, Kurdish leaders believe they can weather the storm.

''So far it's within the limits of what we predicted,'' Mr. Zebari said. ''It is not risk-free but we are prepared for the consequences.''

The main square in Erbil, Iraq, on Monday. Kurds there voted in favor of their independence last week, which drew threats of retaliation from Baghdad.; Gas flares at an oil field in Kurdish-controlled territory near Kirkuk. Turkey has threatened to shut down a Kurdish pipeline. Money changers, below, haggling in Erbil. Runs on the banks have not materialized, as some had feared. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020171004eda40005h



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
If Only Stephen Paddock Had Been a Muslim

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
989 words
4 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
25
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

If only Stephen Paddock had been a Muslim ... If only he had shouted ''Allahu akbar'' before he opened fire on all those concertgoers in Las Vegas ... If only he had been a member of ISIS ... If only we had a picture of him posing with a Quran in one hand and his semiautomatic rifle in another ...

If all of that had happened, no one would be telling us not to dishonor the victims and ''politicize'' Paddock's mass murder by talking about preventive remedies.

No, no, no. Then we know what we'd be doing. We'd be scheduling immediate hearings in Congress about the worst domestic terrorism event since 9/11. Then Donald Trump would be tweeting every hour ''I told you so,'' as he does minutes after every terror attack in Europe, precisely to immediately politicize them. Then there would be immediate calls for a commission of inquiry to see what new laws we need to put in place to make sure this doesn't happen again. Then we'd be ''weighing all options'' against the country of origin.

But what happens when the country of origin is us?

What happens when the killer was only a disturbed American armed to the teeth with military-style weapons that he bought legally or acquired easily because of us and our crazy lax gun laws?

Then we know what happens: The president and the Republican Party go into overdrive to ensure that nothing happens. Then they insist -- unlike with every ISIS-related terror attack -- that the event must not be ''politicized'' by asking anyone, particularly themselves, to look in the mirror and rethink their opposition to common-sense gun laws.

So let's review: We will turn the world upside down to track down the last Islamic State fighter in Syria -- deploying B-52s, cruise missiles, F-15s, F-22s, F-35s and U-2s. We will ask our best young men and women to make the ultimate sacrifice to kill or capture every last terrorist. And how many Americans has the Islamic State killed in the Middle East? I forget. Is it 15 or 20? And our president never stops telling us that when it comes to ISIS, defeat is not an option, mercy is not on the menu, and he is so tough he even has a defense secretary nicknamed ''Mad Dog.''

But when fighting the N.R.A. -- the National Rifle Association, which more than any other group has prevented the imposition of common-sense gun-control laws -- victory is not an option, moderation is not on the menu and the president and the G.O.P. have no mad dogs, only pussycats.

And they will not ask themselves to make even the smallest sacrifice -- one that might risk their seats in Congress -- to stand up for legislation that might make it just a little harder for an American to stockpile an arsenal like Paddock did, including 42 guns, some of them assault rifles -- 23 in his hotel room and 19 at his home -- as well as thousands of rounds of ammunition and some ''electronic devices.'' Just another deer hunter, I guess.

On crushing ISIS, our president and his party are all in. On asking the N.R.A. for even the tiniest moderation, they are AWOL. No matter how many innocents are fatally shot -- no matter even that one of their own congressional leaders was critically wounded playing baseball -- it's never time to discuss any serious policy measures to mitigate gun violence.

And in the wake of last month's unprecedented hurricanes in the Atlantic -- that wrought over $200 billion of damage on Houston and Puerto Rico, not to mention smaller cities -- Scott Pruitt, Trump's head of the Environmental Protection Agency, also told us that it was not the time to discuss ''the cause and effect'' of these superstorms and how to mitigate their damage. We need to focus on helping the victims, he said. But for Pruitt, we know, it's never time to take climate change seriously.

To take ISIS seriously abroad, but then to do nothing to mitigate these other real threats to our backyards, concert venues and coastal cities, is utter madness.

It's also corrupt. Because it's driven by money and greed -- by gunmakers and gun sellers and oil and coal companies, and all the legislators and regulators they've bought and paid to keep silent. They know full well most Americans don't want to take away people's rights to hunt or defend themselves. All we want to take away is the right of someone to amass a military arsenal at home and in a hotel room and use it on innocent Americans when some crazy rage wells up inside him. But the N.R.A. has these cowardly legislators in a choke hold.

What to do?

Forget about persuading these legislators. They are not confused or underinformed. They are either bought or intimidated. Because no honest and decent American lawmaker would look at Las Vegas and Puerto Rico today and say, ''I think the smartest and most prudent thing to do for our kids is to just do nothing.''

So there is only one remedy: Get power. If you are as fed up as I am, then register someone to vote or run for office yourself or donate money to someone running to replace these cowardly legislators with a majority for common-sense gun laws. This is about raw power, not persuasion. And the first chance we have to change the balance of power is the 2018 midterm elections. Forget about trying to get anything done before then. Don't waste your breath.

Just get power. Start now.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020171004eda40004u



National Desk; SECT
Right and Left React to the Las Vegas Shooting and the Gun Control Debate

By JUSTIN BANK 
998 words
4 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The political news cycle is fast, and keeping up can be overwhelming. Trying to find differing perspectives worth your time is even harder. That's why we have scoured the internet for political writing from the right and left that you might not have seen.

Has this series exposed you to new ideas? Tell us how. Email us at ourpicks@nytimes.com.

For an archive of all the Partisan Writing Roundups, check out Our Picks.

From the Right

David Harsanyi in The Federalist :

''Maybe Paddock evaded or abused some gun law. Maybe it can be tightened. But those who reflexively call for more restrictive gun laws without even knowing how or why Paddock got his hands on guns -- or what kind of firearms he used -- give themselves away.''

Mr. Harsanyi argues that those calling for tighter gun control laws do themselves a disservice by reflexively demanding changes after a mass shooting. The rhetoric is heated and may mix anger toward the incidents with prescriptive solutions, he says. Mr. Harsanyi argues that ''ideological stridency and partisanship'' will never appeal to gun owners, for whom each ''law feels a lot like incremental steps to undermine access.'' Read more »

_____

Noah Rothman in Commentary :

''The American left honestly wants to see gun violence in America reduced. But appealing to the same failed tactics over and over suggests that they're only preening for the advantage of their like-minded audience. The people they need to convince tuned out years ago.''

The problems Mr. Rothman sees in the liberal approach to increasing gun control include ''displays of cultural hostility that masquerade as exhibitions of policy-oriented seriousness.'' He holds particular contempt for ''attacks on the prayerful'' because, he sarcastically posits, ''prayer for victims of violence is another waste of a few private minutes that could be spent crafting and passing new gun legislation.'' And Mr. Rothman says that the ''same failed tactics'' of persuasion will not work. Read more »

_____

Ben Shapiro in The Daily Wire :

''Good policy is good regardless of timing; bad policy is bad regardless of timing. But when something horrific occurs, it's in the interest of those pushing a related policy to suggest that those who oppose the policy somehow don't care enough about victims.''

Among the reasons that Mr. Shapiro thinks the immediate aftermath of the shooting is a poor time to talk about gun control policy: The ''motive of the shooter is still unknown,'' and ''how the shooter acquired his weapons is still unknown.'' Absent that knowledge, Mr. Shapiro suggests now is a good time to ''gather information'' and ''stay silent'' for fear of ending up ''with more heavy-handed government policy that doesn't actually achieve the end for which it supposedly aims.'' Read more »

_____

From the Left

German Lopez in Vox:

''The only way to get significant legislation passed is by staying on an issue, particularly when it's on the news, usually due to a crisis. And since mass shootings help highlight the need for gun control, they are often the only major opportunity for lawmakers to act on momentum.''

Mr. Lopez thinks that ''lawmakers can't do anything about mass shootings without politicizing them.'' The political dimensions are what allow the debate to take place. Alternately, ''the best way to keep the status quo is by making sure debates about it never get off the ground.'' Read more »

_____

Charles P. Pierce in Esquire :

''Only with the Second Amendment do we hear that the price of freedom is the occasional Stephen Paddock, locked away in his own madness on the 32nd floor of a luxury hotel and casino, deciding coolly whose brains he will blow out next a few blocks away in the 273rd such unfortunate exercise of Second Amendment rights this year.''

There are ''serious arguments about all the other parts of the Bill of Rights,'' according to Mr. Pierce. From practical limits on the free speech promised in the First Amendment to the limits of the Sixth Amendment ''that allows the states to poison convicts to death.'' Why the discrepancy? Mr. Pierce puts it plainly: ''Our leaders are afraid to tolerate limits on Second Amendment 'freedoms.' '' Read more »

_____

Richard Wolffe in The Guardian:

''This happens to be a national sickness, requiring a national series of cures. We can't pray it away. It's a public health crisis that kills more Americans than HIV, Parkinson's disease and hypertension.''

Mr. Wolffe vigorously argues for gun violence to be approached with the urgency of a public health issue. He says that ''gun violence is not an act of nature: it's not an unpredictable earthquake or unexpectedly severe hurricane.'' And that ''we don't stop talking about air safety after a passenger jet goes down. We don't stop talking about terrorism after another ISIS attack.'' But ultimately he fears that the usually fervent interest in gun rights ''trumps sanity.'' Read more »

_____

And Finally, From the Center:

Esmé. Deprez in Bloomberg:

''The well-funded NRA and its allies argue that gun regulations only hurt law-abiding gun owners because criminals simply ignore them. They note that since Congress let a ban on assault weapons expire in 2004, violent crime in America has fallen significantly, while fatal and nonfatal shootings also declined. Meanwhile, gun-control advocates (some backed by Michael Bloomberg, founder and majority owner of the Bloomberg News parent Bloomberg LP) say limiting weapons will drive down gun-related crimes.''

Ms. Deprez gives some historical and international context to the N.R.A.'s ''decades-long winning streak, convincing courts and lawmakers to loosen gun restrictions and to prevent the passage of new ones.'' Read more »

_____

Want the Partisan Writing Roundup in your inbox? Sign up for the Morning Briefing Newsletter or the What We're Reading Newsletter.

Have thoughts about this collection? Email feedback to ourpicks@nytimes.com.

Document NYTF000020171004eda40004b



U.S.
Heroes of the Las Vegas Shooting: ‘’e Got to Go to Work’

By DANIEL VICTOR 
857 words
3 October 2017
21:04
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Dean McAuley had found a path to safety, but he didn’ leave. As his two friends followed the police away from the Las Vegas gunman’ view, one called back to him: “ou’e got to come with us.”

He replied, “’e got to go to work,”e said at a news conference on Wednesday.

Mr. McAuley, a firefighter from the Seattle area who went to the country music festival each year with friends, ignored warnings that bullets were still flying. He got gloves from a medical tent and helped bring two women back to the tent. He then helped Natalia Baca, 17, by operating a tourniquet and helping to put an IV in her arm.

She had a hard time breathing, but was calm. He told her to trust him, and said he wouldn’ let anything happen to her.

He let her use his phone to call her father, telling him that she would be O.K. After a man offered his car to take them to the hospital, he kept her calm by showing her pictures of his wife, son and dog.

A day later, after he spent several more hours triaging patients at the hospital, he made it home to Washington and “queezed the heck out of my wife.”e was avoiding his phone, but was relieved to get a text message from Ms. Baca’ father: “ou saved my daughter’ life.”s. Baca and her twin sister were both O.K.

“e all became one that night,”r. McAuley said Wednesday, praising the many others who worked together to help anyone they could. “ got to see one person at their worst, but I got to see and witness humanity at its best.”

His story was among the many that emerged of heroic acts, big and small, that saved lives.

Carly Krygier lay on top of her daughter to shield the girl from bullets, she told CNN. They both made it out safely.

Todd Blyleven got out, then went right back in.

“ had two arms, I had two legs, I hadn’ been shot, I was healthy and I knew people were in danger,”e told MSNBC. “nd I just needed to go back and help wherever I could.”

Sonny Melton died while protecting his wife, Heather Melton, she told WSMV-TV.

“e grabbed me and started running when I felt him get shot in the back,”he said.

Tom McIntosh said he wouldn’ be alive if not for the help of a stranger who used a belt to create a makeshift tourniquet for his wounded leg. The “oday”how found that stranger, James Lawson, and reconnected the two for an on-camera reunion. “hanks, buddy,”r. McIntosh said as they hugged.

Lindsay Lee was in the passenger seat of a truck, watching victims being carried on makeshift stretchers, when a man approached her window. “ight now, we need your truck,”e said. “e just need to get people over to the hospital, O.K.?”

“.K., go ahead, put them all in the back,”she responded.

Steve Keys, a firefighter, was performing CPR on a woman when he was grazed by a bullet. He stayed to help people instead of getting medical attention.

“lease, please, please say prayers,”he wrote on Facebook.

Jonathan Smith estimated that he led about 30 people to safety, grabbing them and guiding them away from the scene, before he was shot in the neck. He was able to walk out of the hospital, but doctors left the bullet in. “ might have to live with this bullet for the rest of my life,”he told The Washington Post.

Taylor Winston found a truck with keys inside, stole it, loaded as many victims as he could into the back seat and drove them to a hospital. After going back for another round, helping a total of 20 to 30 victims, Mr. Winston, a Marine veteran, returned the keys to the truck’ owner on Monday. [WBTW-TV]

Krystal Goddard and Amy McAslin don’ know the man who saved them. He had already been shot, but he shielded the women and held tight to them as they chanted, “verything is going to be O.K.”CNN]

Addison Short had been shot in the leg and couldn’ run. A man she didn’ know threw her over his shoulder and carried her to a taxi, which took her to the hospital. [CNN]

Meanwhile, the lines to give blood in the Las Vegas area circled blocks.

Niraj Chokshi contributed reporting.

* What We Know About the Las Vegas Shooting Victims

* False \b ISIS\b0  Connections, Nonexistent Victims and Other Misinformation in the Wake of Las Vegas Shooting

* A Burst of Gunfire, a Pause, Then Carnage in Las Vegas That Would Not Stop

* Country Stars React to Las Vegas Shooting: ‘ Cannot Express How Wrong I Was’

A person injured in the shooting was tended to at Tropicana Avenue and Las Vegas Boulevard on Monday. | Ethan Miller/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171003eda3005xx



LIVE BRIEFING
Foreign Desk; SECT
Las Vegas Shooting Live Updates: Multiple Weapons Found in Gunman's Hotel Room

By THE NEW YORK TIMES; Reporting was contributed by Ken Belson, Jennifer Medina and John Eligon from Las Vegas; Julie Turkewitz from Mesquite, Nev.; Vivian Yee, Jonah Engel Bromwich, Stephanie Saul, Matthew Haag, Rukmini Callimachi, Sheri Fink and Richard Péez-Peñ from New York; Gerry Mullany, Russell Goldman, Austin Ramzy, Alexandra Stevenson and Tiffany May from Hong Kong; Adam Goldman and Eric Schmitt from Washington; Liam Stack from London; and Lizette Alvarez from Miami. 
1,961 words
3 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

LAS VEGAS -- A gunman on a high floor of a Las Vegas hotel rained a rapid-fire barrage on an outdoor concert festival on Sunday night, leaving at least 59 people dead, injuring 527 others, and sending thousands of terrified survivors fleeing for cover, in one of the deadliest mass shootings in American history.

Online video of the attack near the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino showed the singer Jason Aldean's performance at the Route 91 Harvest Festival, a three-day country music event, being interrupted by the sound of gunfire. The music stopped, and as victims fell bleeding, concertgoers screamed, ducked for cover, or ran. ''Get down,'' one shouted. ''Stay down,'' screamed another.

The police found the gunman, whom they identified as Stephen Paddock, 64, dead in his room at the hotel. Investigators were still combing through Mr. Paddock's background and searching his home on Monday.

The Islamic State claimed that Mr. Paddock was one of its soldiers, but did not provide any evidence of its claim. The F.B.I. said there was no evidence so far that Mr. Paddock had ties to any international terrorist organization, and relatives said he had not displayed strong political or ideological beliefs in their interactions with him.

Speaking at the White House, President Trump condemned the shooting as an ''act of pure evil'' and called for the country to come together, saying, ''Our unity cannot be shattered by evil, our bonds cannot be broken by violence.''

The police found an arsenal in the gunman's hotel room.

At least 23 firearms, including a handgun, were found in Mr. Paddock's hotel suite, according to the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department. Some were rifles equipped with scopes, said Sheriff Joseph Lombardo of the Police Department, adding that Mr. Paddock used multiple rifles during the attack.

A federal law enforcement official earlier said there were at least 20 rifles in the suite, along with hundreds of rounds of ammunition, including two rifles outfitted with scopes and set up on tripods in front of two big windows. Another official said that among the weapons were AR-15-style assault rifles. Both officials spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to divulge details of the investigation.

Sheriff Lombardo said that Mr. Poddack brought in at least 10 suitcases into his hotel room over a period of time.

Sheriff Lombardo said that Mr. Paddock fired through his hotel room door at security guards, striking one in the leg. The guard is still alive, he said. SWAT officers went in after the guard was shot.

In addition to the weapons at the hotel, the sheriff said the police retrieved 19 firearms, as well as explosives, several thousand rounds of ammunition and ''electronic devices'' from Mr. Paddock's home in Mesquite, Nev.

Who was the gunman?

Mr. Paddock, 64, was described as a high-flying gambler who lived in a quiet retirement community and played golf. Officials said he had no significant criminal history and drew little attention to himself.

Investigators are trying to piece together his financial history to search for clues that could help determine what set him off.

Details about Mr. Paddock's career and livelihood were sparse, aside from observations by neighbors and family members that he routinely gambled large amounts of money. ''He was a wealthy guy, playing video poker, who went cruising all the time and lived in a hotel room,'' a brother, Eric Paddock, said.

Mr. Paddock and his three brothers were raised by their mother, who told the children their father had died when in fact he was in prison, Eric Paddock said. Mr. Paddock's father was convicted in 1961 of committing a series of bank robberies, and was sentenced to 20 years in prison, but escaped from La Tuna federal prison in Texas in 1968 and then became a used-car dealer and bingo parlor operator in Oregon.

The family moved around the country, from Iowa to Tucson to Southern California, another brother, Patrick Paddock II, said.

In an interview with CBS, Eric Paddock said that his brother Stephen was ''not an avid gun guy at all.''

''The fact that he had those kind of weapons is just -- where the hell did he get automatic weapons?'' he asked.

Guests at the Mandalay Bay are in shock.

The hotel was on partial lockdown Monday. While guests were allowed in the hotel through the parking structure in the back of the complex, the exits to the Strip were closed.

The casino floor was largely empty, though a few gamblers played slots. Several guests napped on couches, some covered in towels and bathrobes they had been given overnight.

A bellman at the hotel said the gunman's car was still in the valet, which had been shut down.

Melissa Ayala, 41, came to the country music festival with four friends from Orange, Calif. They were drinking and laughing when they heard what they thought was fireworks. She did not realize it was gunfire until a man near them was grazed by a bullet and fell to the ground, blood coming from his neck.

''It seemed like rapid fire,'' she said. ''There was blood pouring everywhere.''

What about the ISIS claim?

The Islamic State claimed on Monday that the gunman was ''a Soldier of the Islamic State,'' but the group did not provide any evidence for its claim. The group has generally claimed violence carried out only by those directed by the terrorist group, or else by assailants who were inspired by their ideology. However, in recent months, the group has made at least two false claims, including for an attack on a casino in Manila and a bomb plot at Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris.

Aaron Rouse, the F.B.I. special agent in charge in Las Vegas, said that so far there was no proof that Mr. Paddock had links to any international terrorist organization.

Citing a ''source,'' the terror group's Amaq news agency said the assailant had ''responded to calls for targeting Coalition countries.''

That phrase is a reference to a famous 2014 speech by Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, a former Islamic State spokesman, who called for sympathizers around the world to carry out violence in the group's name on the soil of countries involved in the fight against ISIS.

In a second bulletin about the Las Vegas shooting, Amaq said the attacker had converted to Islam months earlier.

The gunman recently bought several weapons.

Christopher Sullivan, general manager of Guns & Guitars, a gun shop in Mesquite, Nev., said confirmed that Mr. Paddock had bought three guns at his shop -- a handgun and two rifles -- within the last year. All the purchases were legal and cleared routine federal screening, Mr. Sullivan said.

''The man does not have a criminal history,'' Mr. Sullivan said of Mr. Paddock.

Mr. Sullivan, who said he had also been contacted by the F.B.I. and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, would not provide detailed descriptions of the guns. ''We have cooperated with local and federal authorities,'' he said.

He described Mr. Paddock as seeming like ''a normal fellow, a normal guy -- nothing out of the ordinary.''

''As for what goes on in a person's mind, I couldn't tell you,'' Mr. Sullivan said. ''I know nothing about him personally.''

How did the shooting unfold?

The first reports of the shooting came at 10:08 p.m. local time. Officers were overheard on police radio channels reporting that they were pinned down by gunfire. Shortly before midnight, the Las Vegas police reported that ''one suspect is down,'' and soon after, the police said they did not believe there were any more active gunmen.

The Route 91 Harvest Festival bills itself as ''three days of country music on the Vegas Strip,'' and Sunday night's performance was the last of the festival. The site of the concert, the Las Vegas Village and Festival Grounds, operated by MGM Resorts, sprawls over 15 acres and has a capacity of 40,000 people. The festival's website said this year's three-day concert was sold out.

Tenaja Floyd of Boise, Idaho, said many of the people around her in the concert crowd thought at first that the sounds came from fireworks, but ''I knew immediately, that wasn't fireworks.'' She said her mother, Jennifer, threw her to the ground and lay on top of her to protect her. As people started running out of the venue, she said, they thought they might be trampled, so they decided to join the rush to leave.

Video of the shooting captured nine seconds of continuous rapid fire, followed by 37 seconds of silence from the weapon and panicked screaming from the crowd. Gunfire then erupted again in at least two more bursts, both shorter than the first.

The police reported clearing out the Mandalay Bay's 29th floor and then working their way up to the 32nd floor. A police Twitter post described reports of an ''active shooter'' near or around the Mandalay Bay casino.

SWAT units swarmed the upper floors of the Mandalay Bay, closing in on the source of the shooting, a room on the 32nd floor where they found the gunman, the sheriff said. ''We believe the individual killed himself prior to our entry.''

Video from the shooting showed Mr. Aldean, the final performer of the night, running off the stage as the gunfire erupted.

Jake Owen, a country singer who was on stage with Mr. Aldean when the shooting began, told CNN on Monday that it was like ''shooting fish in a barrel from where he was.''

''This is not an exaggeration: This shooting was going on for at least 10 minutes,'' he added. ''It was nonstop.''

Concertgoers described hearing round after round of gunfire. ''Everyone was running, you could see people getting shot,'' Gail Davis, one of the witnesses, said. ''I've never been that scared in my life,'' she added. ''To have this happen, I can't wrap my mind around it.''

A Hospital Deals With the Victims

The surge of patients at Sunrise Hospital and Medical Center, within walking distance of the concert, was almost unthinkable. In the first hours, 90 patients arrived at the Level Two trauma center, and by noon on Monday, the total was 180.

Of those, 124 ''met the criteria for trauma activation,'' said Dr. Jeff Murawsky, the hospital's chief medical officer. They included patients with single and multiple gunshot wounds to the head, face, chest, body, arms and, in one case, a finger.

The less severely injured included those who fell or were pushed as they ran. By Monday afternoon, 16 patients had died, some on arrival and others after being treated.

Patients were sorted on arrival in the lobby of the emergency room using a scale of one -- most critical -- to five, a system used daily that Dr. Murawsky said helped in the emergency. A separate area at Sunrise was created for those whom the doctors deemed ''unsalvageable.'' Still, Dr. Murawsky said, ''our trauma surgeons don't feel like we were ever in a situation where we weren't able to do our best.''

Document NYTF000020171003eda30006c



FACT CHECK
Washington; SECT
False  ISIS  Connections, Nonexistent Victims and Other Misinformation in the Wake of Las Vegas Shooting

By LINDA QIU 
871 words
3 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Rumors and conspiracies have proliferated in the aftermath of the Sunday night shooting at a Las Vegas music festival that left at least 59 dead. Viral falsehoods include: false allegations about the gunman, a person of interest and Nevada's gun control laws. More below.

Social media users falsely identify the gunman

Before the police named Stephen Paddock as the gunman, some bloggers and social media users incorrectly pointed to a man named Geary Danley as the ''murderer.'' In a now deleted post, the right-wing blog The Gateway Pundit called Mr. Danley ''a far left loon'' and noted that he had followed several pages dedicated to liberal politics on Facebook.

All of these claims are untrue.

The unfounded rumors appear to have originated on the anonymous messaging board 4chan.

Unfounded connection to ISIS

ISIS claimed responsibility for the attack and said the gunman had recently converted to Islam. But an FBI spokesman has said there is no proof so far that Mr. Paddock had any ties to international terrorist groups.

Still, some social media accounts spread the unfounded claims that Mr. Paddock has been radicalized.

The New York Times reporter Rukmini Callimachi, who has covered ISIS for several years, noted on Twitter that the organization has incorrectly claimed responsibility for two recent attacks, casting further down on any assertion of an ISIS connection.

Additionally, Graeme Wood, who has reported on ISIS for The Atlantic, noted that Mr. Paddock was a gambler and had committed suicide, actions that are at odds with ISIS' ideology.

Incorrect information about an alleged accomplice

Facebook and Twitter users have connected Marilou Danley, a woman whom law enforcement officials initially described as a ''companion'' of the gunman, with a viral video to suggest that she knew in advance the shooting would happen and was perhaps complicit in it. In the video, an unnamed concertgoer recounted her experience with two people who she said had told a group, ''You're all going to die,'' before being escorted out of the concert.

There is no evidence in the video that Ms. Danley had been identified by the witness. The police have since said that Ms. Danley was out of the country at the time of the shooting and is no longer a person of interest.

Social media users falsely identify victims

As has become common in the aftermath of an event with unidentified victims, social media has been a tangled web of users expressing legitimate concern for missing loved ones and pranksters polluting social streams with fakery.

Several news outlets have done a fine job flagging fakes that include pranksters repurposing the photos of a German soccer player, a murder suspect in Mexico, a porn star and random social media stars. In a telling exchange, Gianluca Mezzofiere of Mashable reached out to the operator of one Twitter account sharing misinformation and reported the following:

Mashable reached out to the troll to ask why he's spreading misinformation during such a critical time.

''I think you know why,'' he replied. ''For the retweets :)''

When Mashable pointed out that it's unethical to spread misinformation when people are desperately looking for their missing family and friends, he just said: ''You are right I'm sorry.''

''Jack Sins'' said he chose TheReportOfTheWeek (aka Reviewbrah) just because he's a meme and tweeted Johnny Sins because he ''is a living legend.''

Asked whether he's done it before and whether he'd do it again, he replied:

''Yes and maybe.''

Las Vegas' gun control laws cause confusion

Some inaccurate claims have popped up in post-shooting debates over gun control. Some are asserting that automatic weapons are ''already illegal'' in Las Vegas.

That's not exactly true. To start, it's not yet known what kind of weapons Mr. Paddock used. Police reports suggest he had at least 10. The rapid pace at which he fired has led to informed speculation that at least one weapon may have been fully automatic, like a machine gun. But nothing had been confirmed by the time these messages were posted to social media.

Also, while it's true that a provision of the Firearm Owners Protection Act of 1986 banned civilian purchases of machine guns across the country, the provision also grandfathered in weapons that were made and registered before May 19, 1986. In response to a recent Freedom of Information Act request, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives counted some 175,000 transferable machine guns in the national registry as of December 2015.

Several states, like Iowa and Hawaii, have restrictions on the possession of machine guns in addition to the 1986 law. But there are none in Nevada, according to the National Rifle Association, where ''it is lawful to possess, purchase or sell a machine gun or silencer that is legally registered and possessed in compliance with all federal laws and regulations.''

Are you seeing other questionable information about the shooting in Las Vegas? If so, please send us an email at factcheck@nytimes.com

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Document NYTF000020171003eda30006d



National Desk; SECTA
Sniper Inflicts 'Total Chaos' in Las Vegas; Police Seek a Motive as Death Toll Hits 59

By KEN BELSON, JENNIFER MEDINA and RICHARD PÉEZ-PEÑ; Ken Belson and Jennifer Medina reported from Las Vegas, and Richard Péez-Peñ from New York. Reporting was contributed by John Eligon and Kimberley McGee from Las Vegas; Julie Turkewitz from Mesquite, Nev.; Rukmini Callimachi, Jonah Engel Bromwich and Sheri Fink from New York; and Eric Schmitt and Adam Goldman from Washington. 
1,863 words
3 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

LAS VEGAS -- At first, it sounded like fireworks -- a loud, crackling noise. Then the awful realization began to spread, unevenly, through the huge crowd.

It dawned on people when they heard screams, when they saw bloodied victims collapse around them, or when others stampeded for the exits, trampling some of the people in their way.

Many of the terrified concertgoers followed their instincts and crouched or lay flat, not realizing that they remained exposed to a gunman lodged high above them. Others surged into surrounding streets and buildings, leaving behind debris lost in the panic -- drink cups, shoes, and cellphones that kept ringing for hours, as relatives and friends tried to reach their loved ones and find out if they were safe.

By sunrise on Monday, the staggering toll at an outdoor country music festival on a cool desert night was becoming clear: at least 59 people killed, the police said, and 527 injured, either by gunfire or in the flight to safety.

A lone gunman perched on the 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino had smashed the windows of his suite with a hammer, taken aim at a crowd of 22,000 people, and committed one of the deadliest mass shootings in American history. Late on Monday, law enforcement officials said they still had no idea what the motive was.

The police said they found 23 firearms in his suite. And when they searched the attacker's house, they discovered an additional 19 firearms and, according to Sheriff Joseph Lombardo of the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department, ''some explosives, and several thousand rounds of ammo.'' He added that they also found ammonium nitrate, a fertilizer sometimes used in making bombs, in the gunman's car.

The sheriff said some rifles found in the hotel room may have been modified to make them fully automatic. Automatic rifles, which fire multiple rounds with a squeeze of a trigger, are highly regulated, and on videos posted online by witnesses, the rapid-fire sound indicated that at least one weapon was fully automatic.

Down below at the Route 91 Harvest Festival, Melissa Ayala, 41, was drinking and laughing with four friends from California when they heard the gunfire, which at first they thought was fireworks. Then a man near her fell with a bullet wound to his neck. ''There was blood pouring everywhere,'' she said.

And then: ''It was just total chaos,'' she said. ''People falling down and laying everywhere. We were trying to take cover and we had no idea where to go.''

The police identified the gunman as Stephen Paddock, 64, a retiree with no significant criminal history, who liked to gamble and seemed to live a quiet life with his girlfriend in Mesquite, Nev., about 80 miles northeast of Las Vegas. He shot himself to death before the police entered his room.

The Islamic State claimed on Monday that the gunman was ''a soldier of the Islamic State,'' but provided no evidence. The group has generally been accurate in claiming only violence carried out by those directed by ISIS or inspired by their ideology online. However, in recent months, the group has become more sloppy and has made at least two false claims, including for an attack on a casino in Manila and a bomb plot at Charles de Gaulle airport in Paris.

Aaron Rouse, the F.B.I. special agent in charge in Las Vegas, said that so far there was no proof that Mr. Paddock had links to any international terrorist organization.

Speaking at the White House, President Trump called the shooting ''an act of pure evil,'' ordered flags flown at half-staff, and said he would travel to Las Vegas on Wednesday.

On Capitol Hill, Representative Nancy Pelosi, the House Democratic leader, sent a letter to House Speaker Paul D. Ryan calling for him to create a select committee on gun violence to ''study and report back common sense legislation to help end this crisis.''

Previous mass shootings have not generally resulted in changes to federal gun laws. Asked at a news conference about whether the president, who has said that some mass shootings could be mitigated if victims had more liberty to buy guns, would now ask for changes to gun laws, his press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, said that ''there will be, certainly, time for that policy discussion to take place, but that's not the place that we're in at this moment.''

''I think one of the things that we don't want to do is try to create laws that won't stop these types of things from happening,'' she added.

Last Thursday, officials said, Mr. Paddock checked into the gold-tinted, 43-story Mandalay Bay, at the southern end of the string of big hotels that line South Las Vegas Boulevard, the renowned Las Vegas Strip. He took Suite 32135, one of the hotel's ''Vista'' suites, which spread out over 1,700 square feet and offer floor-to-ceiling windows. ''This is the perfect Las Vegas suite for those who seek the perfect views,'' the hotel's website says.

He brought in more than 10 suitcases during his stay, but no one saw anything amiss, the sheriff said.

Over the following three days, the Las Vegas Village and Festival Grounds, northeast of the Mandalay Bay, played host to the Route 91 Harvest Festival, featuring dozens of country music acts.

It was after 10 p.m. Sunday, while Jason Aldean was on stage singing ''When She Says Baby,'' that the first burst of gunfire hit the crowd. At 10:08, someone broadcast on a police radio channel, ''we got shots fired -- sounds like an automatic firearm,'' and less than a minute later, ''It's coming from upstairs in the Mandalay Bay.''

Video of the shooting captured nine seconds of continuous, rapid bursts of fire, followed by 37 seconds of silence from the weapon, as some in the crowd screamed in panic and others looked around in confusion. Mr. Aldean kept singing for a few seconds before realizing what was happening and taking cover.

Gunfire then erupted again and again, in rapid-fire bursts.

Jamey Eller, 66, said she and her friends hit the ground with the first fusillade, and then ''the second round came and we started to belly-crawl.'' As the shooting continued, they decided they had to get up and run.

''We had no idea where we were going,'' she said. ''We just kept hearing shooting. It felt like they were following us.''

Her sister, Cindy McAfee, 56, called her husband, Steve McAfee, who had stayed back in their hotel room -- on the 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay, where the gunman was. ''He was looking down and seeing what was going on and said, 'Just get out of there -- he's not in the venue, he's here,' '' Ms. McAfee said. ''It was absolutely the most scared I've been in my entire life.''

Almost nine minutes after the shooting began, an officer radioed, ''We're still taking gunfire, we're pinned down.'' Seconds later, an officer broadcast: ''We need to snuff the shooter before there are more victims. Anybody have eyes on him?''

Some survivors tried to climb the chain-link fence topped with barbed wire around the nearby McCarran International Airport, until firefighters ripped the fence up from the ground, allowing them to crawl under it.

Krystal Legette, who was visiting from New York, was at the Sundance Helicopters office at the airport, waiting for a sightseeing flight around the city, when, she said, three women burst into the building, screaming, ''They're shooting, they're shooting!'' Then another woman came in, bleeding from a bullet wound in her right arm, and Ms. Legette, a nurse, and three others applied a tourniquet.

More and more people ran into the office, until about 100 had taken shelter there, she said. A worker turned out the lights, locked the doors and told everyone to go inside closets and other areas away from the windows.

Ambulances arrived at the festival grounds quickly, but were overwhelmed. Some victims were rushed to hospitals in cars and the backs of pickup trucks. Paramedics' radio frequencies were so clogged that some used cellphones to call ahead to emergency rooms.

''It was a wide range of injuries, from gunshots to shrapnel wounds, to trample injuries, to people trying to jump fences,'' said Greg Cassell, chief of the Clark County Fire Department.

As survivors poured into nearby streets and buildings, the police swarmed the Mandalay Bay, conducting a room-by-room search starting on the 29th floor, Sheriff Lombardo said. At one point, he said, Mr. Paddock fired at them through the door of his suite, wounding a hotel security guard. The officers backed off, he said, and then SWAT teams went in.

The police also searched for Mr. Paddock's girlfriend, Marilou Danley, thinking that she might have been with him, in part because he had been gambling using a Players Club Card, a kind of casino debit card, that was issued in her name. Later, it was determined that Ms. Danley was out of the country. The police searched the couple's home in Mesquite and another house Mr. Paddock owned in northern Nevada.

Hours after the shooting, as guests returned to the Mandalay Bay to retrieve luggage, those who had been at the concert were still in shock.

Ms. Ayala and her friends from California described how they had run for several minutes, reaching the top of the MGM Grand parking lot, where they continued to see the chaos on the Strip below. They called their children, worried that it would be the last time they spoke.

They flagged down a driver who agreed to take them to a friend's timeshare, far off the Strip.

''It wasn't until we got there and locked the door behind us that we felt safe,'' Ms. Ayala said. ''That was the first time I really breathed.''

Running for cover Sunday night after a gunman opened fire at the Route 91 Harvest Festival, an outdoor concert in Las Vegas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID BECKER/GETTY IMAGES) (A1); A person in a wheelbarrow is brought to a line of ambulances. More than 20,000 people were at the Route 91 Harvest Festival when a man began shooting. One said, ''We had no idea where to go.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHASE STEVENS/LAS VEGAS REVIEW-JOURNAL, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS); In a hangar at nearby McCarran International Airport, where some of the concertgoers had fled. (PHOTOGRAPH BY POWERS IMAGERY/INVISION, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A14) GRAPHICS: Scene of the Massacre (GRAPHIC BY GOOGLE) (A1); What Happened at the Concert Venue (A14) 

Document NYTF000020171003eda300052



U.S.
Multiple Weapons Found in Las Vegas Gunman’ Hotel Room

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
2,090 words
2 October 2017
07:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

LAS VEGAS — gunman on a high floor of a Las Vegas hotel rained a rapid-fire barrage on an outdoor concert festival on Sunday night, leaving at least 59 people dead, injuring 527 others, and sending thousands of terrified survivors fleeing for cover, in one of the deadliest mass shootings in American history.

Online video of the attack near the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino showed the singer Jason Aldean’ performance at the Route 91 Harvest Festival, a three-day country music event, being interrupted by the sound of gunfire. The music stopped, and as victims fell bleeding, concertgoers screamed, ducked for cover, or ran. “et down,”ne shouted. “tay down,”creamed another.

•he police found the gunman, whom they identified as Stephen Paddock, 64, dead in his room at the hotel. Investigators were still combing through Mr. Paddock’ background and searching his home on Monday.

•he Islamic State claimed that Mr. Paddock was one of its soldiers, but did not provide any evidence of its claim. The F.B.I. said there was no evidence so far that Mr. Paddock had ties to any international terrorist organization, and relatives said he had not displayed strong political or ideological beliefs in their interactions with him.

•peaking at the White House, President Trump condemned the shooting as an “ct of pure evil”nd called for the country to come together, saying, “ur unity cannot be shattered by evil, our bonds cannot be broken by violence.”

The police found an arsenal in the gunman’ hotel room.

At least 23 firearms, including a handgun, were found in Mr. Paddock’ hotel suite, according to the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department. Some were rifles equipped with scopes, said Sheriff Joseph Lombardo of the Police Department, adding that Mr. Paddock used multiple rifles during the attack.

A federal law enforcement official earlier said there were at least 20 rifles in the suite, along with hundreds of rounds of ammunition, including two rifles outfitted with scopes and set up on tripods in front of two big windows. Another official said that among the weapons were AR-15-style assault rifles. Both officials spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to divulge details of the investigation.

Sheriff Lombardo said that Mr. Paddock brought at least 10 suitcases into his hotel room over a period of time.

Sheriff Lombardo said that Mr. Paddock fired through his hotel room door at security guards, striking one in the leg. The guard is still alive, he said. SWAT officers went in after the guard was shot.

In addition to the weapons at the hotel, the sheriff said the police retrieved 19 firearms, as well as explosives, several thousand rounds of ammunition and “lectronic devices”rom Mr. Paddock’ home in Mesquite, Nev.

Who was the gunman?

Mr. Paddock, 64, was described as a high-flying gambler who lived in a quiet retirement community and played golf. Officials said he had no significant criminal history and drew little attention to himself.

Investigators are trying to piece together his financial history to search for clues that could help determine what set him off.

Details about Mr. Paddock’ career and livelihood were sparse, aside from observations by neighbors and family members that he routinely gambled large amounts of money. “e was a wealthy guy, playing video poker, who went cruising all the time and lived in a hotel room,” brother, Eric Paddock, said.

Mr. Paddock and his three brothers were raised by their mother, who told the children their father had died when in fact he was in prison, Eric Paddock said. Mr. Paddock’ father was convicted in 1961 of committing a series of bank robberies, and was sentenced to 20 years in prison, but escaped from La Tuna federal prison in Texas in 1968 and then became a used-car dealer and bingo parlor operator in Oregon.

The family moved around the country, from Iowa to Tucson to Southern California, another brother, Patrick Paddock II, said.

In an interview with CBS, Eric Paddock said that his brother Stephen was “ot an avid gun guy at all.”

“he fact that he had those kind of weapons is just —here the hell did he get automatic weapons?”e asked.

Guests at the Mandalay Bay are in shock.

The hotel was on partial lockdown Monday. While guests were allowed in the hotel through the parking structure in the back of the complex, the exits to the Strip were closed.

The casino floor was largely empty, though a few gamblers played slots. Several guests napped on couches, some covered in towels and bathrobes they had been given overnight.

A bellman at the hotel said the gunman’ car was still in the valet, which had been shut down.

Melissa Ayala, 41, came to the country music festival with four friends from Orange, Calif. They were drinking and laughing when they heard what they thought was fireworks. She did not realize it was gunfire until a man near them was grazed by a bullet and fell to the ground, blood coming from his neck.

“t seemed like rapid fire,”he said. “here was blood pouring everywhere.”

What about the ISIS claim?

The Islamic State claimed on Monday that the gunman was “ Soldier of the Islamic State,”ut the group did not provide any evidence for its claim. The group has generally claimed violence carried out only by those directed by the terrorist group, or else by assailants who were inspired by their ideology. However, in recent months, the group has made at least two false claims, including for an attack on a casino in Manila and a bomb plot at Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris.

Aaron Rouse, the F.B.I. special agent in charge in Las Vegas, said that so far there was no proof that Mr. Paddock had links to any international terrorist organization.

Citing a “ource,”he terror group’ Amaq news agency said the assailant had “esponded to calls for targeting Coalition countries.”

That phrase is a reference to a famous 2014 speech by Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, a former Islamic State spokesman, who called for sympathizers around the world to carry out violence in the group’ name on the soil of countries involved in the fight against ISIS.

In a second bulletin about the Las Vegas shooting, Amaq said the attacker had converted to Islam months earlier.

The gunman recently bought several weapons.

Christopher Sullivan, general manager of Guns & Guitars, a gun shop in Mesquite, Nev., confirmed that Mr. Paddock had bought three guns at his shop — handgun and two rifles —ithin the last year. All the purchases were legal and cleared routine federal screening, Mr. Sullivan said.

“he man does not have a criminal history,”r. Sullivan said of Mr. Paddock.

Mr. Sullivan, who said he had also been contacted by the F.B.I. and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, would not provide detailed descriptions of the guns. “e have cooperated with local and federal authorities,”e said.

He described Mr. Paddock as seeming like “ normal fellow, a normal guy —othing out of the ordinary.”

“s for what goes on in a person’ mind, I couldn’ tell you,”r. Sullivan said. “ know nothing about him personally.”

How did the shooting unfold?

The first reports of the shooting came at 10:08 p.m. local time. Officers were overheard on police radio channels reporting that they were pinned down by gunfire. Shortly before midnight, the Las Vegas police reported that “ne suspect is down,”nd soon after, the police said they did not believe there were any more active gunmen.

The Route 91 Harvest Festival bills itself as “hree days of country music on the Vegas Strip,”nd Sunday night’ performance was the last of the festival. The site of the concert, the Las Vegas Village and Festival Grounds, operated by MGM Resorts, sprawls over 15 acres and has a capacity of 40,000 people. The festival’ website said this year’ three-day concert was sold out.

Tenaja Floyd of Boise, Idaho, said many of the people around her in the concert crowd thought at first that the sounds came from fireworks, but “ knew immediately, that wasn’ fireworks.”he said her mother, Jennifer, threw her to the ground and lay on top of her to protect her. As people started running out of the venue, she said, they thought they might be trampled, so they decided to join the rush to leave.

Video of the shooting captured nine seconds of continuous rapid fire, followed by 37 seconds of silence from the weapon and panicked screaming from the crowd. Gunfire then erupted again in at least two more bursts, both shorter than the first.

The police reported clearing out the Mandalay Bay’ 29th floor and then working their way up to the 32nd floor. A police Twitter post described reports of an “ctive shooter”ear or around the Mandalay Bay casino.

SWAT units swarmed the upper floors of the Mandalay Bay, closing in on the source of the shooting, a room on the 32nd floor where they found the gunman, the sheriff said. “e believe the individual killed himself prior to our entry.”

Video from the shooting showed Mr. Aldean, the final performer of the night, running off the stage as the gunfire erupted.

Jake Owen, a country singer who was on stage with Mr. Aldean when the shooting began, told CNN on Monday that it was like “hooting fish in a barrel from where he was.”

“his is not an exaggeration: This shooting was going on for at least 10 minutes,”e added. “t was nonstop.”

Concertgoers described hearing round after round of gunfire. “veryone was running, you could see people getting shot,”ail Davis, one of the witnesses, said. “’e never been that scared in my life,”he added. “o have this happen, I can’ wrap my mind around it.”

A Hospital Deals With the Victims

The surge of patients at Sunrise Hospital and Medical Center, within walking distance of the concert, was almost unthinkable. In the first hours, 90 patients arrived at the Level Two trauma center, and by noon on Monday, the total was 180.

Of those, 124 “et the criteria for trauma activation,”aid Dr. Jeff Murawsky, the hospital’ chief medical officer. They included patients with single and multiple gunshot wounds to the head, face, chest, body, arms and, in one case, a finger.

The less severely injured included those who fell or were pushed as they ran. By Monday afternoon, 16 patients had died, some on arrival and others after being treated.

Patients were sorted on arrival in the lobby of the emergency room using a scale of one —ost critical —o five, a system used daily that Dr. Murawsky said helped in the emergency. A separate area at Sunrise was created for those whom the doctors deemed “nsalvageable.”till, Dr. Murawsky said, “ur trauma surgeons don’ feel like we were ever in a situation where we weren’ able to do our best.”

Reporting was contributed by Ken Belson, Jennifer Medina and John Eligon from Las Vegas; Julie Turkewitz from Mesquite, Nev.; Vivian Yee, Jonah Engel Bromwich, Stephanie Saul, Matthew Haag, Rukmini Callimachi, Sheri Fink and Richard Péez-Peñ from New York; Gerry Mullany, Russell Goldman, Austin Ramzy, Alexandra Stevenson and Tiffany May from Hong Kong; Adam Goldman and Eric Schmitt from Washington; Liam Stack from London; and Lizette Alvarez from Miami.

* A Burst of Gunfire, a Pause, Then Carnage in Las Vegas That Would Not Stop

* Stephen Paddock, Las Vegas Suspect, Was a Gambler Who Drew Little Attention

* Preventing Mass Shootings Like the Vegas Strip Attack

Tending to the wounded outside the festival ground. | David Becker/Getty Images | Stephen Paddock in a photo provided by his brother Eric Paddock. | via Associated Press | Officers ran to the scene of the shooting in Las Vegas on Sunday night. | John Locher/Associated Press | Debris and belongings that had been left behind littered the site of the mass shooting in Las Vegas on Monday. | John Locher/Associated Press | Dozens of people were killed and hundreds injured when a gunman opened fire at a country music festival near the Mandalay Bay casino. | By CAMILLA SCHICK, DAVE HORN and CHRIS CIRILLO 

Document NYTFEED020171002eda2001jl



Article of the Day
The Learning Network
Resources for Teaching and Learning About the Las Vegas Shooting

By NATALIE PROULX 
1,788 words
2 October 2017
20:56
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Updated: Oct. 4, 2017

Please note: Before addressing this event in the classroom, you might read our advice on talking about sensitive issues in the news.

Because The Learning Network is for students 13 and older, our resources focus on understanding the Las Vegas massacre and its implications, but parents and teachers of younger students might find this advice, published by The Times after the Newtown shootings, more helpful. Our friends at Scholastic also offer these Resources for Responding to Violence and Tragedy.

You may also consult our resources for teaching and learning about the attacks on Orlando and Newtown.

We will continue to update this post.

_________

The Attack, the Aftermath and Your Reactions

What do you know about the mass shooting that occurred at the Route 91 Harvest Festival in Las Vegas on Oct. 1? What are your feelings about what happened? What questions do you have?

Before you go further, make sure you have all the facts. Read the main article about the shooting and answer the following questions:

1. How did the attack in Las Vegas unfold? Where and when did it occur?

2. How many people were killed and injured? How does the number of casualties compare to that of other mass shootings in the United States?

3. What details are known about the man identified as the gunman, Stephen Paddock, at this point? What questions remain?

4. How did the police respond?

5. How did concertgoers and performers describe the scene?

6. How did the event affect hospitals, casinos, hotels and the airport in Las Vegas?

You can continue to follow the news with these live updates.

_________

The Shooter

What is known about Stephen Paddock, the alleged shooter? What is not yet known?

Following the mass shooting in Aurora, Colo. in 2012, Dave Cullen wrote in an Opinion piece:

Perpetrators of mass murder are usually nothing like our conceptions of them. They are nothing like a vision of pure evil. They are complicated.

Do you agree with this assessment? What is “omplicated”bout Mr. Paddock?

_________

Understanding the Logistics

In the days since the Las Vegas shooting, the Times has compiled data on the weapons used by Mr. Paddock, his preparations and the scene of the massacre. Explore these graphics, videos and audio clips. What sets this shooting apart from other mass shootings in the United States? What factors came together to make this one especially lethal? What questions still remain about what happened that night?

_________

President Trump Responds

Watch or read President Trump’ statement in response to the Las Vegas shooting. What is your reaction to his remarks? What words or phrases stand out to you most, and why?

How, in your view, should our political leaders respond in the wake of violence like this? Why?

_________

Performers Speak Out

[Video: Jimmy Kimmel on Mass Shooting in Las Vegas Watch on YouTube.]

On Oct. 2, many Late Night television hosts dedicated a portion of their show to addressing the Las Vegas shooting. What is your reaction to the segments? Which one resonates with you the most, and why? In your opinion, did these hosts address the event appropriately? If so, what did they say (or not say) that makes you think so? If not, why not?

Read the responses from Jason Aldean and other performers at the country music festival. What feelings and thoughts come up for you as you learn more about the attack?

_________

Celebrating Ordinary Heroes

In times of tragedy, ordinary people often act heroically. During the shooting, people protected loved ones and strangers from bullets and helped them get to safety. In the hours following the attack, nurses, doctors, fire personnel, hospital administrators and volunteers rushed to Las Vegas’ only trauma center to care for hundreds of victims, and lines formed at daybreak outside of blood banks.

In this Op-Ed, one Las Vegas resident writes about Las Vegas hospitality workers taking care of people. What heroes or heroic acts have you read about? What are some things you can do to help in your own way?

_________

Remembering the Victims

One way to respond to a tragedy such as this is by remembering the victims. Read the stories of the people who lost their lives in the Las Vegas attack. How can the victims’ives be recognized, honored, and celebrated?

Consider creating a collage or bulletin board profiling them, like The Lives They Lived or Portraits of Grief series featured in the Times following the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Brainstorm ways you may be able to offer condolences to the families or do a related service learning project that grows out of your thoughts and feelings about this event and the victims’ives.

_________

A History of Mass Shootings

The Times has a timeline of mass shootings in the United States that begins with the Virginia Tech shootings in 2007, though this is just a partial list. Records indicate that on average, a mass shooting takes place every day in the country, though most do not make national headlines.

How does this most recent shooting compare to others? Which of the ones highlighted in this timeline do you remember? What do you notice and what do you wonder as you scroll through this list?

_________

The Gun Control Debate

Events like this inevitably lead to debates about gun laws and gun control. Study this graphic of mass shootings in the United States. What statement do you think it is trying to make? What feelings and thoughts does it bring up for you?

Where do you stand in the gun control debate? Some Times Op-Ed columnists and contributors, including Nicholas Kristof, Robert J. Spitzer and Roxanne Gay, believe that the United States needs stricter gun control laws, while conservative writer Ross Douthat argues that tighter gun regulations might not necessarily be the solution to preventing mass shootings. With whom do you most agree? What challenges prevent gun control legislation from being passed?

What do you think the United States should do to prevent future mass shootings? Read how other students responded to that question after the shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., and add your voice to the conversation by commenting here.

Or, read last fall’ Civil Conversation Challenge on guns, in which we invited teenagers to talk about the issues that divided Americans during the 2016 election. More than 700 responses came in to the questions we posed about gun rights, the Second Amendment and more.

_________

The N.R.A. and Gun Violence in America

The National Rifle Association (N.R.A.) is an American non-profit organization that advocates for gun rights. Listen to The Daily: The Power of the N.R.A. to understand the organization’ connection to the gun control debate in the United States.

How did the N.R.A. become the powerful lobbying group it is today? What does the speaker argue is the relationship between the N.R.A. and gun violence in America? What is your opinion on the N.R.A.’ role in U.S. politics?

_________

How Does the U.S. Compare to the Rest of the World?

Look at the graph above. What does it tell you about gun-related deaths in the United States compared to the rest of the world? What are some possible explanations for the graph? Read the related article or watch this video to learn more about why some argue that gun violence is a uniquely American problem.

_________

Domestic Terrorism

In “Terrorizing if Not Clearly Terrorist: What to Call the Las Vegas Attack?” Scott Shane notes that President Trump did not call the shooting “errorism” Why not? When is a violent act considered “errorism” How does labeling something as “errorism”hange the way we respond to it?

Read Op-Ed columnist Thomas L. Friedman’ thoughts about why Stephen Paddock was not labeled a terrorist. They begin this way:

If only Stephen Paddock had been a Muslim …f only he had shouted “llahu akbar”efore he opened fire on all those concertgoers in Las Vegas …f only he had been a member of ISIS …f only we had a picture of him posing with a Quran in one hand and his semiautomatic rifle in another …

If all of that had happened, no one would be telling us not to dishonor the victims and “oliticize”addock’ mass murder by talking about preventive remedies.

No, no, no. Then we know what we’ be doing. We’ be scheduling immediate hearings in Congress about the worst domestic terrorism event since 9/11.

Do you agree with him? Why or why not?

_________

Fake News

As we remind you often on this site, as news breaks and emotions are high, it is especially important to verify what you read before spreading it on social media. The Times has compiled a list of misinformation that has spread about the Las Vegas shooting. As you scroll through, ask yourself: Would I have “iked”r shared any of these if they came across my newsfeed? If so, look at them closely. What questions might you have asked, or what steps could you have taken, to verify if they were true before you shared them?

Read about the role Google and Facebook played in spreading false information about the Las Vegas shooter and the challenges they face in trying to quell it. Do you think these platforms have a responsibility to stop fake news from spreading? What could be the consequences if they do? What could be the consequences if they don’?

Police officers near Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino on Sunday night in Las Vegas. | David Becker/Getty Images | Volunteers lined up to give blood at University Medical Center in Las Vegas on Monday after the mass shooting at a music festival the night before. | Isaac Brekken for The New York Times | A memorial to the victims on the corner of Sahara Avenue and Las Vegas Boulevard. | Hilary Swift for The New York Times | Flags being lowered to half-staff in Washington on Monday. | Mark Wilson/Getty Images | Firearms at the 2016 National Rifle Association convention in Louisville, Ky. | Ty Wright for The New York Times | Nate Andor and Summer Neria of Huntington Beach, Calif., along the Las Vegas Strip on Monday, where they had attended the concert Sunday night at which dozens of people were killed and hundreds wounded. | Isaac Brekken for The New York Times | Dozens of people were killed and hundreds injured when a gunman opened fire at a country music festival near the Mandalay Bay casino. | By CAMILLA SCHICK, DAVE HORN and CHRIS CIRILLO 

Document NYTFEED020171002eda20066a



World; Middle East
U.S. Service Member Killed by Roadside Bomb in Iraq

By HELENE COOPER 
258 words
2 October 2017
17:54
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —n American service member in Iraq was killed on Sunday by an improvised roadway bomb, the Pentagon said Monday.

A second service member was injured, the Defense Department said. Pentagon officials declined to release the identities of the victims or the location of the bombing, pending notification of family members.

Defense Department officials said that the two service members were involved in the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq. Since the war against the Islamic State began in 2014, 13 American service members have been killed in Iraq and Syria.

Defense Department officials said in recent days that the Islamic State had been thrown into disarray by continued coalition attacks, and that the Iraqi Security Forces, backed by the United States, were well on their way to reclaiming most of the country back from the extremist Sunni group.

In recent months, Iraqi forces have taken back the important cities of Mosul and Tal Afar.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* \b ISIS\b0 , Despite Heavy Losses, Still Inspires Global Attacks

* Iraqi Prime Minister Arrives in Mosul to Declare Victory Over \b ISIS\b0 

* Revived After Mosul, Iraqi Forces Prepare to Battle \b ISIS\b0  in Tal Afar

An Iraqi fighter inspected an area adorned with an Islamic State flag in Mosul in March. Pentagon officials declined to give the location of a bombing that killed a United States service member in Iraq on Sunday. | Khalid Mohammed/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020171002eda2004ph



Europe Edition
Briefing
Catalonia, Marseille, Puerto Rico: Your Monday Briefing

By PATRICK BOEHLER 
1,374 words
2 October 2017
06:02
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•atalonia’ disputed referendum on independence from Spain descended into violence. Hundreds were injured as riot police officers sent from other parts of the country dispersed voters, at times using rubber bullets, and seized ballots.

This video shows some of the violent clashes. Here are some of the best photos on a day in which even high-level soccer games turned political. One of our correspondents spent the day with high school students in Barcelona who used diversions to sneak ballot boxes to safety.

In the end, both sides claimed victory: The Catalan government said that 90 percent of some 2.3 million voters were in favor of secession. The government in Madrid said that the referendum had been disrupted. Unions called a strike for tomorrow.

_____

•n one of the deadliest shootings in U.S. history, a gunman firing from the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino in Las Vegas killed more than 50 people and injured at least 200 at an outdoor country music festival Sunday night.

The police said they had killed the gunman, identified as Stephen Paddock, 64. Here are the latest updates.

•n southern France, two women were killed yesterday in a knife attack at Marseille’ main train station. The assailant was then fatally shot by a military patrol. Prosecutors said they had opened a terrorism investigation.

Another such attack occurred in Canada, where the police arrested a man suspected of driving two vehicles into pedestrians and stabbing a police officer, injuring five people. The police said that they found an Islamic State flag in one of the cars but that they believe the suspect was acting alone.

_____

•n Iraq, thousands of civilians are fleeing the Iraqi military’ push to evict the Islamic State from the city of Hawija, its last major urban stronghold in the country.

Some local officials fear that hundreds of ISIS combatants used the exodus to escape the siege. Our correspondent witnessed the interrogation of one such man detained in Kirkuk.

Separately, Iraqi Kurds appear to have underestimated the depth of international opposition to their vote on independence from Baghdad. Iraqi Kurdistan’ troubled economy is dependent on hostile neighbors, who have steadily increased pressure on the region’ government.

_____

•n the United States, the Trump administration’ response to the devastation caused by Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico became a heated political issue as supplies of food, water and cash dwindled and frustration grew among the island’ 3.4 million residents.

A team of our journalists spent 24 hours with people trying to survive. Here’ what they saw. More supplies and federal government personnel have begun to arrive, but the situation remains far from normal.

At his New Jersey golf club, President Trump lashed out against criticism, implying that residents were not doing enough to help themselves. He plans to travel to Puerto Rico tomorrow.

_____

•cross Germany, city halls opened on Sunday as a new law went into effect to allow the country’ first marriages for same-sex couples.

In Berlin, the country’ first such married couple —odo Mende and Karl Kreile, above —xchanged a long kiss after they were pronounced husband and husband.

“he transition to the term ‘arriage’hows that the German state recognizes us as real equals,”r. Kreile said.

Business

•limate change is making airport planners think again,  adding major expenses to the global air travel industry.

•cross Europe, calls to better protect on-demand workers are growing more vocal.

•he backlash against the gig economy has in part been fueled by practices at Uber. Here’ the latest on the power struggle in the ride-hailing company’ board room.

•Monarch Airlines, the British carrier, ceased operations, leaving about 110,000 travelers stranded overseas.

•itcoin has had a tumultuous year in trading. Our in-house expert compiled this explainer on the virtual currency and looked at why some prefer Ethereum, a global computer network with its own virtual currency, called Ether.

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•“ave your energy Rex.”hat was Mr. Trump telling Rex Tillerson, his secretary of state, on Twitter not to bother trying to de-escalate tensions with North Korea. Mr. Tillerson said over the weekend that the U.S. had direct lines of communication with Pyongyang. [The New York Times]

•estern officials said Russian (and Belarusian) military maneuvers last month, known as Zapad, far exceeded in scope and scale what Moscow had said it would conduct. [The New York Times]

•n Britain, leaders of the Conservative Party have gathered for their annual conference. We look at how the party’ most unabashed elitist has developed a cult following. [The New York Times]

• suspect in the killing of four Americans, including a U.S. ambassador, in the Libyan port city of Benghazi in 2012 will stand trial in Washington today. [The New York Times]

•halifa Hifter, the former Libyan Army officer who now controls most of the country’ east, has initiated a political campaign to propel him into government in Tripoli, the capital. [Bloomberg]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ecipe of the day: Hunan beef with cumin, a fragrant stir-fry.

•ere’ how couples can move to a new home without driving each other crazy.

•hen considering making donations, it’ helpful to start by asking what motivates you.

Noteworthy

•.J. Simpson, the former football star and actor, above, was paroled after serving nine years in prison on charges related to an armed robbery in 2007.

•he Nobel Prizes will be announced this week, beginning today with the prize for physiology or medicine.

•xperts at the Louvre are working to determine whether a sketch of a naked, mysteriously smiling lady who looks strikingly like the Mona Lisa was drawn by Leonardo da Vinci.

•t Paris Fashion Week, the elusive stylist of Brigitte Macron, the first lady, was nowhere to be found. And, finally, happiness has become something of a wider theme at this year’ shows, our critic notes.

Back Story

Today, India is celebrating Gandhi Jayanti, honoring the birthday of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi in 1869.

For leading the nonviolent struggle to win India’ independence from the British Raj, he is considered the father of the nation. But first, he helped lead the fight against apartheid in South Africa.

Starting in the 1890s, his focus was on improving the lot of Indians there, but by the time he left in 1914, he had embraced the empowerment of blacks as well, saying, “his land is theirs by birth.”

Beloved around the world for standing up for the humble and eschewing violence in the pursuit of justice, he is often quoted. But he is also often misquoted.

These are some of the statements commonly attributed to him, but for which there is no authoritative corroboration:

“e the change you wish to see in the world.”“n eye for an eye will make the whole world blind.”

And: “First they ignore you, then they laugh at you, then they fight you, then you win.”

That last has resurfaced recently, cited in tweets by Mr. Trump and a leader of the German far-right party Alternative for Germany.

Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

This briefing was prepared for the European morning. Browse past briefings here.

We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.

Felipe Dana/Associated Press | Sebastien Nogier/European Pressphoto Agency | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | Al Drago for The New York Times | Felipe Trueba/European Pressphoto Agency | Illustration by Andrew Roberts | Pool photo by Lintao Zhang | Craig Lee for The New York Times | Brooke Keast/Nevada Department of Corrections, via Associated Press | Underwood and Underwood 

Document NYTFEED020171002eda20018h



T Magazine
On Being Jewish, American and a Writer

2,965 words
2 October 2017
11:50
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In a moment when being Jewish in America suddenly feels threatened in a way it hasn’ in decades, the idea of a distinctly Jewish novel — concept that has persisted in literature since the turn of the 20th century —as become increasingly urgent. Three fiction writers and one cartoonist ruminate on Jewish identity and its relationship to Israel and the U.S. in 2017.

Irving Howe, the late editor and critic, once described the overall vision of The Partisan Review, where he and so many other great Jewish writers of the 1940s and ’0s found a home, as an attempt to “hake off the fears and constraints of the world in which we had been born,”dding that “hen up against the impenetrable walls of gentile politeness we would aggressively proclaim our ‘ifference,’s if to raise Jewishness to a higher cosmopolitan power.”

As fiction by Jewish novelists moved further away from the shtetl and into more secular —r perhaps just contemporary —round, the idea of a Jewish author as some kind of outlier in the canon diminished, and yet the concept of the Jewish novel has persisted in American literature, a notion reinforced intermittently by critics, by readers and by many Jewish authors themselves. Now, three major voices in contemporary fiction —oshua Cohen, Nathan Englander and Nicole Krauss —ake an argument for the necessity of a Jewish novel at a time when white supremacists can be seen on TV chanting “ews will not replace us.”ll three writers were born between 1970 and 1980, and all have published books this year that grapple in some way with Jewish selfhood and, notably, its relation to Israel —erritory where few living American authors besides Philip Roth have previously gone in their work. Cohen’ “Moving Kings” is about a New York-based moving company made up of former Israeli soldiers; Englander’ “Dinner at the Center of the Earth”s a political thriller partially set during the Second Intifada; and “Forest Dark,”y Krauss, focuses on an American philanthropist who travels to Tel Aviv, and is also a meditation on writing itself.

The larger question animating all of these books turns on the definition of home. It is perhaps no surprise that this particular generation of Jewish writers is looking to Israel, as both an ideal and a cautionary tale, at a time when America feels increasingly foreign, less and less like home. (Each author has spent significant time there.) Above all, though, their central concern is one of identity —f being Jewish, American and a writer, and how the order of those terms matters in 2017, if at all.

______

Nathan Englander

Author of “inner at the Center of the Earth”

I never recovered from my first book tour. Not because of what happened on the ground —hich was a joy. It’ what I saw, crisscrossing America, from the sky. The whole country, cut up into squares. We just can’ help marking boundaries, making categories and, mercy upon us, putting up walls. Those flights took place right when I was being minted as a writer, and, to my surprise, discovering I was a “ewish-American”riter to boot. A hyphenate. Which is definitely not how I’ seen myself. And definitely not how I look at others when I read. I was aware of my subject matter, but very-young-me was resistant to the label. I felt I was being asked to consider myself a “ype”f American, to see myself as other from inside my own mind. But I didn’ see a Jew when I looked in the mirror; what I saw were gentiles when I looked at everyone else. As for seeing Jews, I’ been living in Jerusalem for three years by then, excited to witness the peace process that I’ moved there for (and which was still in full swing in 1999). It was in Israel that I was tagged as American. I’ finally been fully assimilated into my native culture —nly from 6,000 miles away.

Of course, Israel and Palestine clearly have their own organic attraction for Americans. Twain was covering the Palestine beat 150 years before me. And if we’e looking at the current wave of writing about Israel specifically, there are a million reasons to focus on the place, from the complicated politics, to the tragedy of the never-ending conflict, to the continued occupation that I believe it is imperative to explore. There is the turmoil of the region and a host of looming existential threats.

But if harking back to those early book-tour flights, to the delineation of boundaries, and the endless crisscrossing of those divisions from above, it’ partially the idea of shifting identity that drew me, all these years later, to a character who is American but Israeli, who is both patriot and traitor, who inhabits more than one self, by virtue of being a spy.

That’ what I latch onto when thinking about contemporary American Jewish novels engaging with Israel, the ideas revolving around fluidity, of borders drawn and redrawn, of changing landscapes and altered realities. As for my initial discomfort with being labeled, I don’ know if it’ age that has changed me as much as the current climate here, in America, my home. But I’ telling you, with white supremacists resurgent and wielding power, this pulled-pork-loving, drive-on-Saturdays secular Jew has never been happier to be called a Jewish-American Novelist. One yarmulke isn’ even good enough for me, these days. I’ writing this with a half-dozen stacked, like pancakes, on top of my head.

The great Jewish American novel is ...

How about I trade you a novel for a few short stories? I’ go with Grace Paley’ “Goodbye and Good Luck”1956), for its voice and for making me cry every time, and I.B. Singer’ “Spinoza of Market Street”1961), for its quiet transcendence, and Philip Roth’ “onversion of the Jews”1958), for asking the big questions. —ATHAN ENGLANDER

______

Nicole Krauss

Author of “orest Dark”

Israel first showed up in literature, in the book of Genesis, as an idea: God’ idea, to be precise, someplace Abraham hadn’ yet been, but where he needed to go to in order to become something. It proved a compelling one, with real pathos and propulsive narrative power (see: Exodus). But by the time those first works of Jewish literature were being composed, Israel was a reality —he opposite of an idea: in flux, raw, complex, messy —nd it wasn’ long before that reality took over the narrative, adrenalizing it and complicating it morally. No one would mistake Abraham or Moses for flesh-and-blood men, or even literary characters in the modern sense, individuals with their own private meaning. But along with the reality of Israel came David —ily, charismatic, cunning, magnetic, brutal, a hero so flawed that he could only be real. A cutthroat warrior, a murderer, an ambitious politician hungry for power, willing to do whatever it took to become king, a man who manipulated the love of Saul, Jonathan, Michal, Bathsheba, of everyone who ever came close to him. A historical David almost certainly existed: In 1993, an inscription was found at Tel Dan in the north of Israel, which dates from the ninth century B.C., and refers to the “he House of David.”ho knows who and what that David really was? But in the hands of the genius who wrote the Book of Samuel, David’ live spark, and his real Israel, became the raw material for one of literature’ greatest and most iconic characters.

How many times has Israel swung from idea to reality and back again? It was an idea when Moses led the Jews toward it through the desert, and then it was real for a while until Nebuchadnezzar razed it in the sixth century B.C., after which it became an idea again during 50 years of exile, when Jews yearned for it, wrapped their souls around it and spilled verses of poetry about it while they prospered in Babylon. From the time that Cyrus allowed the Jews to return to Judea again, they were subject first to the Persians, then to a series of Hellenistic kingdoms and finally to the Romans, and during that time Israel was neither fully a reality —n independent political entity —or solely an idea. Some might try to argue that after the destruction of the Temple in A.D. 70, Israel was returned again to the realm of Jewish idea, where it remained for nearly two millenniums, until in the early 20th century it shifted from an idea about origin, about the distant past, to an idea about being and about the near future. It shifted from pathos to pragmatism and through force of violent will was soon pressed back into existence again, restored to reality. Others might point out that as Jews continued to dwell on the land after the destruction of the Temple, and produce works of great importance like the Mishnah and the Palestinian Talmud, Israel continued to function as reality for the minority who remained behind in the Levant, while it became an idea for the majority in exile. What is indisputable is that for more than 2,500 years, ideas of Israel operated on the Jewish psyche as powerfully as the historical realities of the place, and more often than not were more primary and active than its reality.

The idea of modern Israel entered literature in 1902 in Theodor Herzl’ utopian novel, “ltneuland,”ut at what point did the reality of modern Israel begin to take over the narrative of Jewish literature? Was it with the emergence of the novels by the first generation of writers who grew up in it and were shaped by its society, writers like Amos Oz and David Grossman, or was it when it proved irresistible as a subject to American Jewish writers like Philip Roth? Of his novels set in Israel, “The Counterlife”as published in 1986 and “Operation Shylock”n 1993. The reality of Israel was already decades old by then, old enough to be noisy with attributes and crisis, but still too young to achieve autonomy from the idea that engendered it, one that Israeli schoolchildren and soldiers are indoctrinated in: that the foundation of their state was an act of self-preservation after the Holocaust. For that autonomy to happen, Israeli society needed to surprise itself, to stumble into its own generative powers, which happened with the explosion of Tel Aviv culture, or rather counterculture, in the first years of the 21st century. As Israeli artists, inventors and youth claimed the city, the culture they began to pump out was the antithesis of the one at large that grew out of a diasporic, Ashkenazi, religious, post-Holocaust idea. Instead, it was a modern, secular, Middle Eastern reality without cultural precedent. For the first time in the country’ history, there was new Israeli music, food, art and humor that reflected the physical and emotional reality of a fraught and urgent Jewish existence whose context is Arabic rather than European. It’ no coincidence that Israeli society hijacked the narrative of itself around the time that modern Hebrew, also forcibly willed into fresh existence, fully caught up with the complex conditions of the lives of its native speakers: For language itself is generative, and to be able to describe is to be in the possession of creative power.

So it is that diaspora Jews find, for the first time in 2,000 years, that they can’ claim Israel as their idea, or its reality as an extension of their own. However related, it is something authentically other now, and the Jews of America and Europe, most of whom don’ speak Hebrew, have only narrow access to the inner conversation of Israeli being, and can only look upon it from the uneasy position of being neither inside, nor yet entirely outside, beyond the range of its consequences. Israel, which is making sense of itself, has confused our own sense of being, and the novel goes straight toward that confusion, just as it will always go toward heat, toward what is still undecided and so most alive.

The great Jewish American novel is ...

Do you mean novel by a Jewish American writer, or novel about Jewish American themes? I love “Herzog”1968), but I don’ know that Saul Bellow ever went as passionately and profoundly into Jewish American themes as Roth did (in part because he was busy going so passionately into countless other things, too). So if it’ the latter, I might have to say “he Counterlife”1987). —ICOLE KRAUSS

______

Joshua Cohen

Author of “oving Kings”

Think about a conversation you’ only have with family. The doors are shut. The windows are down. You can get away with anything. You can goad and prick, you can accuse and insult, not just because a high fence separates you from the neighbors, but also because: Your family will forgive you. There’ food on your plate and drink in your glass; you’l always have a seat at the table.

Now, think about a talk you might have with strangers. Out in the street. Among other strangers. In broad daylight. Suddenly, you’e worried. Suddenly, you have to explain yourself. You have nothing to rely on. No mutual history, or not much. No mutual culture, or not much. All you have in common is a language, whose words seem to mean different things to different people, who all speak them with different accents that seem to signify different experiences of class and education and ethnicity and race —hough any judgments you wind up making, you’l have to ignore, or else accept as manifestations of your own prejudice.

In America, now more than ever, I’ convinced that we Jews have to hold our family conversations out in the open; we have to say the private things that might publicly shame; the narrow things that might widely offend; and we have to do all this not just in our school and work existences, but also on social media —hich isn’ quite a safe space, let alone a warm kitchen wafting with unconditional love.

Still, our table talk must aspire to become our national talk; all of our dirty laundry, and dirty manners, must be aired. Take it from a writer: Broadcasting your parochial disputes relieves psychic pressures and disarms your enemies by forcing them to engage you as an individual. Converting shame into strength upholds the primacy of the self while vanquishing all haters.

Here is how it’ done: In my opinion, the great Jewish Question in America today is whether Jared Kushner should be excommunicated —nd whether Ivanka Trump should be too. Of course, every family’ table since Eden has had its share of bad apples (Sheldon Adelson), and every family member has, or should have, a different idea of who’ the worst (Netanyahu). For example, I suspect that my parents, at this moment, are finding themselves far fonder of my brother and sister.

Jews in America are always being called upon to declare their loyalties —hich of our identifiers do we put before the hyphen, and which do we put after: “ewish”r “merican” This recurrent query —hich Jews in America ask themselves with all the breeziness of an online test, and anti-Semites in America ask with all the gravity of an Ellis Island examination —s inevitable but pointless. Jews are more secure in contemporary America than they have been in any other country in Jewish history. This is because America is a country in which the citizens define the ideologies, not the other way around. This, ultimately, is what the fundamentalists hate: America’ constitutive capacity for change, which they regard as the evil face of self-determination. Nazis, Klansmen, ISIS —ll fundamentalists resent the mutability of human life and the fact that, in a technologized world, no manner of racial or ethnic or religious or cultural purity can ever be guaranteed, as if an “nalienable”ight.

The country I dream of is a place in which all humans are free to take their indoor voices out into the streets, both as proud members of families —owever myriad, however defined —nd as their own liberated individual selves. America has been this country only rarely; Israel has been this country almost never. The one country I’e ever lived in that’ consistently fulfilled this dream has been the Novel.

The great Jewish American novel is ...

Moishe Nadir was the most famous of the many pseudonyms of Yitzchak Reyz. Harvey Fink has lovingly translated a handful of Nadir’ books into English. My favorite remains the idiosyncratically punctuated, numbered miscellany of what Fink calls “yrical-philosophical prose poems,”ntitled “rom Man to Man,”ublished on the Lower East Side in 1919. —OSHUA COHEN

Vanessa Davis, known for her autobiographical comics, like 2010’ book “ake Me a Woman,”hich is about growing up Jewish in Florida (among other things), examines a circular debate about Israel and Palestine in this original comic for T. | Illustration by Vanessa Davis | Englander in Lifta, on the outskirts of Jerusalem, in 1999. The author lived in Israel from 1996 to 2001. | Debbie Hill | Joshua Scott | Krauss, whose new novel is partially set in Tel Aviv, in Israel at age 15. | Courtesy of Nicole Krauss | Joshua Scott | Cohen in the Negev, in southern Israel, around 1993. | Courtesy of Joshua Cohen | Joshua Scott 

Document NYTFEED020171002eda2002bd



National Desk; SECTA
'Soon,' 'Very Soon,' 'Eventually': A Detailed List Of Things Trump Said Would Happen

By WILSON ANDREWS, LINDA QIU and KEVIN QUEALY 
862 words
2 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
13
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

We're going to be submitting a health care plan ''as soon as our secretary's approved'' 8 MONTHS AGO We'll be filing a plan to repeal and replace Obamacare ''as soon as our secretary is approved and gets into the office'' 8 MONTHS AGO The Affordable Care Act will be history ''soon'' 8 MONTHS AGO Less expensive and really great health care within a year'' 7 MONTHS AGO Obamacare will be repealed ''very soon'' 7 MONTHS AGO A health care plan will be released ''fairly soon'' 7 MONTHS AGO A health care reform plan will be coming out ''soon'' 7 MONTHS AGO Health care reform will get taken care of ''ideally soon'' 6 MONTHS AGO Obamacare will fold ''very, very soon if something isn't done'' 6 MONTHS AGO Obamacare will cease to exist ''at some point in the near future'' 6 MONTHS AGO Obamacare will explode ''soon'' 6 MONTHS AGO Democrats will make a deal on health care ''as soon as Obamacare folds'' 6 MONTHS AGO Health care reform is going to happen ''at some point'' 5 MONTHS AGO A good chance 

of getting health care reform ''next week or shortly thereafter'' 5 MONTHS AGO Health care in the U.S. will be great ''soon'' 4 MONTHS AGO An Obamacare replacement bill ''as soon as we can do it'' 3 MONTHS AGO A great answer on health care reform ''soon'' 3 MONTHS AGO Health care reform that reduces premiums 60 to 70 percent ''very soon'' 2 MONTHS AGO The Senate is going to be forced to make a deal on Obamacare repeal ''at some point'' 12 DAYS AGO We're going to repeal and replace Obamacare ''eventually'' 10 DAYS AGO We will win on health care reform ''eventually'' 8 DAYS AGO Eventually, we'll win on health care reform, ''whether it's now or later'' 8 DAYS AGO There will be a repeal on my desk ''at some point'' 6 DAYS AGO We will have the votes for health care reform ''but not for the reconciliation deadline of Friday'' 5 DAYS AGO We'll have the electrical grid problem solved ''relatively soon'' 8 MONTHS AGO Announcing very, very big infrastructure projects ''soon'' 6 MONTHS AGO Announcing a signature infrastructure project beyond roads and bridges ''very soon'' 5 MONTHS AGO A very big infrastructure plan is going to come ''soon'' 5 MONTHS AGO An infrastructure plan will come ''a hundred percent very soon'' 5 MONTHS AGO We'll be making big investments in repairing our badly depleted infrastructure ''soon'' 5 MONTHS AGO The administration will file an infrastructure plan ''over the next two or three weeks, maybe sooner'' 5 MONTHS AGO We'll be submitting an infrastructure bill ''in the not-very-distant future'' 2 MONTHS AGO A commitment to rebuilding the depleted infrastructure of the United States ''very soon'' 1 MONTH AGO Planning is starting on the wall ''immediately'' 8 MONTHS AGO Construction begins on the wall ''as soon as we can; as soon as we can physically do it'' 8 MONTHS AGO Starting negotiations with Mexico about who will pay for the wall ''relatively soon'' 8 MONTHS AGO We're going to start building the wall ''very soon'' 7 MONTHS AGO We will start building the wall ''soon, very soon'' 7 MONTHS AGO We're going to have a wall ''ahead of schedule'' 7 MONTHS AGO Beginning construction of a great, great wall ''soon'' 7 MONTHS AGO The wall is ''way ahead of schedule'' 6 MONTHS AGO The wall will get built ''soon'' 5 MONTHS AGO The wall will be brand new ''eventually'' 18 DAYS AGO The wall will come ''later'' 18 DAYS AGO The wall will happen ''very soon'' 18 DAYS AGO We're going to have the final choices about the border wall done ''soon'' 10 DAYS AGO We're going to be doing tax policies ''very soon'' 7 MONTHS AGO We're going to have tax reform ''at some point very soon'' 5 MONTHS AGO We're going to be announcing a tax plan ''very soon'' 5 MONTHS AGO We're going to be submitting a tax bill ''in the very near future'' 2 MONTHS AGO We're going to get into great detail on tax reform ''over the next two weeks'' 23 DAYS AGO Very interesting items will come to the forefront about alleged wiretapping of Trump Tower ''over the next two weeks'' 6 MONTHS AGO He will release his tax returns ''at some point'' 4 MONTHS AGO MS-13 will be gone from America's streets ''very soon''4 MONTHS AGO The North Korean problem will be solved ''at some point'' 4 MONTHS AGO He will announce whether there are tapes of his conversations with James Comey in the Oval Office ''maybe sometime in the very near future'' 3 MONTHS AGO Raqqa and Mosul will be liberated ''soon'' 2 MONTHS AGO ISIS will be wiped out ''soon'' 2 MONTHS AGO The U.S. will decide whether it will stay in the Iran nuclear deal ''very soon'' TWO WEEKS AGO

Document NYTF000020171002eda20005p



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Two Women Are Killed in a Knife Attack at a Train Station in Southern France

By AURELIEN BREEDEN 
865 words
2 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

PARIS -- Two women were killed in southern France on Sunday by an assailant armed with a knife, in an attack that forced the evacuation of a major train station, the authorities said.

The assailant was fatally shot by a military patrol after killing the women in front of the Saint-Charles train station in the Mediterranean port city of Marseille. The attack interrupted train service and unnerved the country as it debated the government's new security bill.

The Paris prosecutor's office, which handles terrorism cases nationwide, said on Sunday that it had opened a terrorism investigation, but the authorities said the assailant's motives were not entirely clear.

''This act could be of a terrorist nature, but at this hour we cannot affirm it,'' said Géard Collomb, the French Interior minister, who is in charge of domestic security.

Mr. Collomb, who arrived in Marseille on Sunday evening and spoke to reporters at the train station, did not identify the assailant or the two victims, saying only that they were ''young women.''

The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack several hours later, calling the assailant one of its ''soldiers.''

The group's Amaq news agency said the man had been inspired by calls to carry out attack in Western countries. In 2014, ISIS called on sympathizers to commit violence using any means available, including stabbings, in those countries whose militaries were fighting the terror group in Iraq and Syria.

The group's claim of responsibility could not be independently verified.

Asked about reports that the attacker yelled ''Allahu akbar,'' or ''God is greatest'' in Arabic, at the moment of the attack, Jean-Claude Gaudin, the mayor of Marseille, said that ''a certain number'' of witnesses had said they heard him do so, but he added that they were still being interviewed by the police for further details.

''We have video images that will enable us to assess the situation,'' Mr. Collomb said, referring to security camera footage in the station. ''What is strange on the video is that the person starts to commit his crime on a first person, then he runs away, and then he turns back to kill the second person.''

A military patrol that had rushed to the scene after hearing cries of panic and seeing people running fired warning shots at the attacker, Mr. Collomb said, and then shot and killed him when he rushed at them.

Soldiers and armed police officers with protective gear barred access to the train station for much of Sunday afternoon, and the national railway operator urged travelers to avoid the station, but the authorities said later in the day that train service was slowly returning to normal.

France has been on high alert for acts of terrorism since 2015, after a string of attacks that killed more than 230 people. The deadliest attack was an assault in November 2015 by coordinated teams of Islamic State operatives who killed 130 people in and around Paris, prompting officials to declare a state of emergency.

The state of emergency, which enables the authorities to raid homes and place people under house arrest without the authorization of a judge, has been renewed several times and will end on Nov. 1.

But Parliament is expected to vote soon on a bill that would give security forces additional powers, some similar to those in the state of emergency, to monitor suspects, conduct raids and search bags or vehicles. Civil rights groups have criticized the legislation.

In a statement on Sunday evening, Éouard Philippe, the French prime minister, expressed ''anger and outrage'' after the attack and praised the soldiers who had ''neutralized the criminal and stopped his killing spree.''

''We will not drop our guard,'' Mr. Philippe added on Twitter.

So far in 2017, there have not been large-scale attacks like the ones that struck Paris in 2015 and Nice in 2016, but France has grown wearily accustomed to smaller, sporadic attacks, especially against police officers and soldiers patrolling sensitive or crowded sites.

In September, a man wielding a knife was arrested after he attacked a military patrol in one of the biggest metro stations in Paris; but no one was injured. In August, a driver plowed into a military patrol in Levallois-Perret, a suburb just north of the capital, injuring six soldiers.

Other attacks have been carried out by mentally ill residents, who sometimes imitate acts of terrorism, according to officials.

In August, a man with a history of psychiatric disorders rammed a vehicle into two bus stops in Marseille, killing one woman, but the authorities said the episode was not related to terrorism.

In September, four American college students traveling through the Saint-Charles station were attacked with acid by a psychologically disturbed woman, officials said.

Follow Aurelien Breeden on Twitter: @aurelienbrd.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Police officers outside the main railway station in Marseille on Sunday after French soldiers shot and killed an attacker. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SEBASTIEN NOGIER/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) 

Document NYTF000020171002eda20004k



FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
How Fake News Turned a Small Town Upside Down

By CAITLIN DICKERSON 
5,845 words
1 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
46
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

On a Tuesday morning in June 2016, Nathan Brown, a reporter for The Times-News, the local paper in Twin Falls, Idaho, strolled into the office and cleared off a spot for his coffee cup amid the documents and notebooks piled on his desk. Brown, 32, started his career at a paper in upstate New York, where he grew up, and looks the part of a local reporter, clad in a fresh oxford and khakis that tend to become disheveled over the course of his long days. His first order of business was an article about a City Council meeting from the night before, which he hadn't attended. Brown pulled up a recording of the proceedings and began punching out notes for his weekly article. Because most governing in Twin Falls is done by a city manager, these meetings tend to deal with trivial subjects like lawn-watering and potholes, but Brown could tell immediately that this one was different.

''We have been made aware of a situation,'' said the first speaker, an older man with a scraggly white beard who had hobbled up to the lectern. ''An alleged assault of a minor child and we can't get any information on it. Apparently, it's been indicated that the perpetrators were foreign Muslim youth that conducted this -- I guess it was a rape.'' Brown recognized the man as Terry Edwards. About a year earlier, after The Times-News reported that Syrian refugees would very likely be resettled in Twin Falls, Edwards joined a movement to shut the resettlement program down. The group circulated a petition to put the proposal before voters. They failed to get enough signatures to force a referendum, but Brown was struck by how much support around town the movement attracted. In bars after work, he began to overhear conversations about the dangers of Islam. One night, he heard a man joke about dousing the entrance to the local mosque with pig's blood.

After he finished watching the video, Brown called the police chief, Craig Kingsbury, to get more information about the case. Kingsbury said that he couldn't discuss it and that the police reports were sealed because minors were involved. Brown made a couple phone calls: to the mayor and to his colleague at the paper who covers crime. He pieced together that 12 days earlier, three children had been discovered partly clothed inside a shared laundry room at the apartment complex where they lived. There were two boys, a 7-year-old and a 10-year-old, and a 5-year-old girl. The 7-year-old boy was accused of attempting some kind of sex act with the 5-year-old, and the 10-year-old had used a cellphone borrowed from his older brother to record it. The girl was American and, like most people in Twin Falls, white. The boys were refugees; Brown wasn't sure from where. In his article about the meeting, Brown seems to anticipate that the police chief's inability to elaborate was not going to sit well with the people whose testimony he had just watched.

That weekend, Brown was on his way to see a movie when he received a Facebook message from Jim Dalos Jr., a 52-year-old known to Twin Falls journalists and police as Scanner Man. Dalos is disabled; he works six hours a week as a dishwasher at a pizzeria but spends most of his time in his apartment, sitting in a reclining chair and drinking Diet Pepsi out of a 52-ounce plastic mug, voraciously consuming news. He reads the local paper, old issues of which litter his living-room floor, and keeps the television blaring -- usually Fox News. He got his nickname because he constantly monitors an old police scanner, a gift he received as a teenager from his father, and often calls in tips to the media based on what he hears. He also happens to live at the apartment complex, Fawnbrook, where the laundry-room incident occurred.

Dalos told Brown that he had seen the police around Fawnbrook and that the victim's mother told him that the boys had been arrested. He also pointed Brown to a couple of Facebook groups that were created in response to the crime. Brown scrolled through them on his cellphone and saw links flying back and forth with articles that said that the little girl had been gang raped at knife point, that the perpetrators were Syrian refugees and that their fathers had celebrated with them afterward by giving them high fives. The stories also claimed that the City Council and the police department were conspiring to bury the crime.

Over the weekend, Brown plowed through his daily packs of cigarettes as he watched hundreds, then thousands, of people joining the groups. Their panic appeared to be piqued by a mass shooting, the deadliest in American history, that had just occurred at Pulse nightclub in Orlando. The perpetrator had declared allegiance to ISIS. The commenters also posted stories that claimed refugees were responsible for a rash of rapes in Europe and that a similar phenomenon in the United States was imminent. ''My girl is blond and blue-eyed,'' one woman wrote. ''I am extremely worried about her safety.''

The details of the Fawnbrook case, as it became known, were still unclear to Brown, but he was skeptical of what he was reading. For one thing, he knew from his own previous reporting that no Syrians had been resettled in Twin Falls after all. He woke up early on Monday to get a head start on clarifying things as much as possible in order to write a follow-up article. Before he got into the office, a friend texted him, telling him to check the Drudge Report. At the top, a headline screamed: ''REPORT: Syrian 'Refugees' Rape Little Girl at Knifepoint in Idaho.''

As the only city of any size for 100 miles in any direction, Twin Falls serves as a modest hub within southern Idaho's vast agricultural sprawl. Its population of about 45,000 nearly doubles each day as people travel there to work, primarily in the thriving agribusinesses. But its bucolic rhythms still allow for children to play outside unattended and make driving a meditative experience. Surrounding the city and sprinkled among its tidy tract neighborhoods, potatoes, alfalfa, sugar beets and corn grow in fields. Half a million dairy cows in the area produce three-quarters of the state's milk supply. Because of its location, Twin Falls is home to major food processors like Chobani Yogurt, Clif Bar and Glanbia Nutritionals, a dairy company. All have large facilities in town and have helped to push down the unemployment rate to just under 3 percent, below the national average. The wealth of easy-to-find low-skilled jobs made Twin Falls attractive as a place for resettling refugees, and they began arriving in the 1980s, at that time mostly from Cambodia and the former Yugoslavia. Nearly 2,500 refugees have moved to the town over the years.

Most Twin Falls residents are churchgoing, and about half of those are Mormons. Locally owned stores and restaurants are generally closed on Sundays, and the city has not voted for a Democratic presidential candidate since Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1936. Liberals often register as Republicans just to have an opportunity to participate in the electoral process, by voting in the primaries. If a Republican is going to win regardless, the thinking goes, they would at least like to play a role in deciding which one prevails.

The same qualities that bind the townspeople together can, in turn, be alienating to newcomers. The refugee community has begun to experience this effect as its demographic makeup has changed. Over the past decade and a half, as conflict spread across North Africa and the Middle East, Twin Falls started to resettle larger numbers of refugees with darker skin who follow an unfamiliar religion -- two things that make it difficult to blend into a town that is 80 percent white.

On a national scale, an ascendant network of anti-Muslim activists and provocateurs has exploited the fears brought on by these changes, finding a platform and a receptive audience online. The narrative they espouse -- on blogs with names like Jihad Watch -- is that America, currently 1 percent Muslim, is in the midst of an Islamic invasion. Central to the worldview of these bloggers, some of whom have celebrity-size social-media followings, is that Muslims have a propensity toward sexual violence. They seize on any news item that bolsters this notion. Perhaps their biggest touchstone is an incident that took place in Cologne, Germany, on New Year's Eve in 2015. Mobs of men, many of them asylum seekers from the Middle East, pick-pocketed and groped more than a thousand women in and around a train station. The German police acknowledged the incident had taken place only under pressure, as the women's stories began to leak out through the media. This established, for these activists, the contours of a narrative that they believe has been repeating itself. The Fawnbrook incident quickly drew their interest.

What happened in Twin Falls was sadly somewhat commonplace but not in the way the activists believed. The local Police Department investigates sex crimes on a weekly basis, and in about half a dozen of those that proceed to court each year, the victims and the accused are both minors. ''If it's younger kids, it's them being curious,'' J.R. Paredez, the lead investigator on the case, explained to me. Some children who act out sexually have been victimized themselves, he said, while others have been exposed to explicit material at home or at school or, as is more common recently, on their cellphones. ''As they start to get older, there's more of the actual sexual component to it.''

Two weeks after the incident, the boys were charged with lewd and lascivious behavior against a minor. (The 14-year-old who lent his cellphone to the boys was initially charged with the same crime. He was not present in the laundry room, and his charge was eventually reduced to make him an accessory.) In Idaho, this statute applies to physical contact ''done with the intent of arousing, appealing to, or gratifying the lust or passions or sexual desires of such person, such minor child, or third party.'' Paredez said that the cellphone video made clear what specifically had happened between the children, but that he couldn't show it to the reporters who asked him about it, because doing so would have constituted criminal distribution of child pornography. He called most of the details that he read about the case on the internet ''100 percent false, like not even close to being accurate.'' (The family of the accused declined to comment.)

As more time passed without a solid account of what happened inside the laundry room, lurid rumors continued to surface online and came to dominate conversations in grocery stores and at school events. And while the City Council members did not have control over the case, the bloggers who wrote about it placed much of the blame on them.

On the Monday when Twin Falls was the top story on Drudge, the City Council held another weekly meeting. Normally only a handful of people attend, and Brown is one of the few reporters among them. But that night, the auditorium filled until there was standing room only, and television news crews appeared from Boise and other nearby cities. When it came time for public comments, one man got up and praised the city's handling of the case, followed by more than a dozen others who laid into the council members. Terry Edwards handed each of them a small copy of the Constitution and told them to do their jobs. A woman named Vicky Davis, her hair in a satiny white bob, stood up and proclaimed that Islam had declared jihad on America.

''They are not compatible with our culture,'' she said. ''They hate us. They don't want to be Americans. They don't want to assimilate. What do you need to see? What more proof do you need?''

This was a highly unusual meeting, but Brown wasn't exactly surprised. Several months earlier, when the anti-refugee activists began to organize, he started reading up to try to better understand their views. He picked up a book by Ann Coulter and began to follow the anti-refugee blogs. At the meeting, he felt as if he were hearing all that he had read being repeated aloud by his neighbors.

Kingsbury, the police chief, read from a statement while fumbling with a thicket of microphones piled onto the lectern by visiting reporters. In between exasperated breaths, he explained why he could not disclose the details of the incident but said that he could address some of the misinformation that was spreading online. There was no evidence of a knife, he said, or of any celebration afterward or of a cover-up, and no Syrians were involved: The boys were from Sudan and Iraq. ''I'm a kid who grew up in Idaho,'' he said. ''Law enforcement takes these types of allegations very seriously. However, we can't act on them within an hour. It's not like a crime show.'' He told the audience that the boys had been arrested, to applause.

But online, Kingsbury's words only inflamed the activists more. Just after midnight, someone posted his work email address on Jihad Watch, along with those of the council members and the mayor. A commenter on another website called The Muslim Issue posted the phone numbers and email addresses for the town's government officials, the head of the refugee-resettlement center and some administrators at the college, which runs the refugee resettlement program. From there, the information spread to more blogs and to the comments sections of far-right news outlets with massive audiences.

By 9 the next morning, messages were pouring into the inbox of the mayor of Twin Falls, Shawn Barigar, nearly every minute. Barigar grew up in a neighboring town and went to work in Boise as a television news anchor before moving back to start a family. His even keel and the air of sophistication he picked up while living in a comparatively big city have made him popular politically. He is left of the town on many social issues, which has made some of his constituents suspicious of him. But most of the people who contacted him that summer were from other states and even other countries. Some people demanded that the city pay for a new car and apartment for the victim and her family. Others said that local officials' attempts to correct inaccurate details about the incident were veiled efforts to suggest that no crime had occurred at all, in order to protect the refugees. Others accused him of being a ''globalist,'' a word that has taken on many definitions but in this case meant he was part of a vast, arcane conspiracy. They believed that establishment politicians wanted to turn red states like Idaho blue by starting wars and then importing refugees from those war zones as cheap labor who would not only displace American workers but also reliably vote Democratic.

Many of the people who wrote to the mayor had a much simpler goal: to unleash their hatred of Islam. One message, with the subject line ''Muslims,'' said that refugees were committing rapes and hit-and-runs and urinating on women and that the mayor was guilty of treason. ''It's out of the bag, [expletive],'' it read. ''We will and are holding you responsible for any and all crimes committed by these quote refugees. No courts. No police. Just us. You will answer to us in the darkness of night.''

The next day, Camille Barigar, the mayor's wife, arrived in her office at the college, where she ran the performing-arts center, and started listening to her voice mail. In a calm, measured voice, a man who sounded as if he was reading from a script went on for nearly four minutes. ''I wonder, Miss Barigar, if your residence was posted online and your whereabouts identified, how you would feel if half a dozen Muslim men raped and sodomized you, Miss Barigar, and when you tried to scream, broke every tooth in your mouth,'' he said. ''And then I wonder how you'd feel if, when you went to the Twin Falls Police Department, they told you to run along, that this is simply cultural diversity.''

The caller said that life was ''becoming difficult'' in the United States, just as it had in England. He referenced Jo Cox, a British member of Parliament who spoke out in support of refugees and later ''met with opposition in the form of a bullet to the head.''

''She's dead now,'' he said. ''They've buried her.''

The Twin Falls story aligned perfectly with the ideology that Stephen Bannon, then the head of Breitbart News, had been developing for years, about the havoc brought on by unchecked immigration and Islamism, all of it backed by big-business interests and establishment politicians. Bannon latched onto the Fawnbrook case and used his influence to expand its reach. During the weeks leading up to his appointment in August 2016 to lead Donald J. Trump's campaign for president, Twin Falls was a daily topic of discussion on Bannon's national radio show, where he called it ''the beating heart'' of all that the coming presidential election was about. He sent his lead investigative reporter, Lee Stranahan, to the town to investigate the case, boasting to his audience that Stranahan was a ''pit bull'' of a reporter. ''We're going to let him off the chain,'' he said.

Then 50, Stranahan was relatively new to journalism. He had spent a few decades as a television producer and a graphic illustrator in Los Angeles, and on the side he shot erotic photography, which is how he met his wife. Stranahan's transition into journalism began during the television writers' strike of 2007 and 2008. To keep himself entertained, he created parody political advertisements and posted them on YouTube. One of the first was a satirical Rudy Giuliani ad, asking Republican primary voters to support him because he had taken good care of his mistress, offering her private security courtesy of the N.Y.P.D., whereas Mitt Romney ''didn't even bother'' to take on a paramour. Stranahan says that within weeks, the videos led to invitations to appear on CNN and to meet with a vice president at NBC and to a job offer, which he accepted, writing political comedy for The Huffington Post.

In college, Stranahan was a libertarian and even attended Ayn Rand's funeral. But when he moved to California, he became a liberal, vehemently opposing the Iraq war and the presidency of George W. Bush. He voted for Barack Obama in 2008. Two years later, Stranahan interviewed Andrew Breitbart, a fellow Huffington Post alumnus, for an article he was writing about Jon Stewart's Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear. They spoke for more than three hours, bonding over their shared love of Depeche Mode. Eventually, Breitbart became Stranahan's mentor, converted him to conservatism and offered him a job. In 2011, Breitbart took Stranahan to the Conservative Political Action Conference and introduced him to Michele Bachmann, who, in Stranahan's recollection, convinced him that she had uncovered disturbing details about Islam that no one in the establishment was willing to talk about. Stranahan says this conversation was the genesis of his concerns about the religion.

Stranahan arrived in Idaho in August, after covering the national party conventions. The sealed nature of the case prevented any journalist from an exhaustive examination, and the accused and the victim's families refused to speak to the mainstream media. But Stranahan thrived in the void of facts. He was granted one of the few interviews with the victim's family, but his account of the crime offered little more information than others' had -- and far more inaccuracies, according to the police and the county prosecutor. He described what took place as a ''horrific gang rape'' and wrote graphic details about the incident, which the Twin Falls Police say are untrue. On Breitbart radio, Stranahan openly wondered whether Barigar, the mayor, was ''a big, you know, Shariah supporter.'' And he suggested repeatedly that mass rapes by refugees had occurred in Europe and were inevitably coming to the United States. ''If you want to wait until your country turns into France or Cologne, Germany. If you want to wait, you can wait,'' he warned the audience. ''But if you want to watch it and stop it now, you've got a chance to do it in November.''

Stranahan says his Breitbart editors sent him to Twin Falls to report on the ''Muslim takeover'' of the town. (Breitbart denies this and says it's ''absurd.'') But he soon became enamored of a grander theory about what was happening in southern Idaho: globalism. He wrote that local businesses received government kickbacks for employing foreigners instead of Americans. (Stranahan did not cite any evidence of this, and it is untrue, according to the state Department of Labor.) And he often referred to a Syrian refugee crisis, though no Syrians were ever resettled there. Then, to bring the story full circle, he claimed these Muslim refugees were being used to replace American workers and that the government, big business and law enforcement were either conspiring to conceal the sexual-assault case or intentionally looking the other way, in order to keep the machine turning.

''Bottom line, this is bad for business,'' he told me in an interview last winter, explaining his interpretation of the city officials' rationale: '' 'I'm not really going to look into this too deeply because if I find out the truth, if I discover what actually happened, if I figure out the truth, it's not really good for business.' '' Stranahan believed that Chobani, a Greek-yogurt company, was at the center of the scheme. Breitbart had been covering the company for months, ever since the owner, Hamdi Ulukaya, a Turkish-born businessman, made a speech at the World Economic Forum at Davos encouraging other chief executives to pledge financial and political support to refugees.

While he was in town, Stranahan embedded with critics of the refugee program. They drove him to some of his interviews and to the yogurt factory to shoot drone footage. Stranahan doesn't get around well on his own in part because he has been mostly blind in one eye since grade school, when a neighborhood kid threw a rock at him, shattering his right optic nerve. Rather than a round pupil, his is jagged-edged, and so large that it nearly covers his iris. He shuffles when he walks because of neuropathic foot pain from diabetes, which he regulates by eating a ketogenic diet, usually one meal a day, consisting entirely of protein and fat. In Twin Falls, he subsisted most days on blackened chicken from Popeyes.

During the three months he was in Twin Falls, City Council members refused his interview requests, leaving him stuck inside an echo chamber with the activists, which he amplified online. When I was in Twin Falls, I found myself empathizing: These same activists refused to speak with me. One of the most outspoken among them is a woman named Julie DeWolfe, who lives atop a grassy hill 20 minutes outside town and who spent significant time with Stranahan. When I went there to ask for an interview, she came outside with several barking dogs and told me to leave. ''The company you work for is not trustworthy,'' she said.

As the summer came to a close, The Times-News was bombarded with threatening phone calls and email from all over. After it received a threat that was deemed credible enough to engage the F.B.I., the editor of the paper told Brown and the other reporters to conduct their interviews outside the office and ordered the entire staff to walk in pairs when going out to their cars. For months, the reporters covered protests around town, which were widely hyped on social media but, for the most part, sparsely attended. At least once the Police Department deployed plainclothes officers into the crowds, with instructions to look after the journalists. Later, it turned out that fake Facebook accounts linked to the Russian government helped to spread stories about Twin Falls and even organized one of the rallies there. The event was also poorly attended but is the first known Russian attempt to spark a demonstration on American soil.

The phone and email attacks continued through the fall and spiked each time a new conspiracy theory was posted online. One council member told me that she gained 15 pounds from the stress. At night, Shawn Barigar would lie down with his iPad and spend hours reading stories that called him a crook, a liar or an ISIS sympathizer. He had to shut down his Twitter account after someone accused him of having been convicted of sexual assault. Before he could debunk the myth, the post had spread, leaving untold numbers of constituents under the impression that he was a rapist. He stopped sleeping and struggled to focus at work or to be present with his family. He and his wife say they bickered all summer.

''It was like being in a hole,'' he told me, his eyes welling up with tears. ''It was all-consuming.''

Stranahan now works out of a trendy shared workspace in Washington, across the street from the White House. He quit his job at Breitbart, which he said was being mismanaged in Bannon's absence, to host a drive-time FM radio show with Sputnik, a state-run Russian news outlet. He told me that he jumped at the chance to transition to a Kremlin-funded outfit and, knowing that it would be controversial, spoke to every media outlet that inquired about it, in order to draw even more people to his work.

He expressed no contrition about the reporting he did in Twin Falls, though many of the conclusions that he drew on the radio and online have been debunked. Still, many of the outlets that covered Twin Falls made only minor tweaks to their stories or did nothing at all. Many of the falsehoods that were written about the Fawnbrook case still appear at the top of a Google search of the city.

The most transparent course-correction resulted from a lawsuit against Alex Jones, the publisher of InfoWars, for its misleading stories about Chobani. After initially vowing to fight the yogurt company in court, Jones retracted several stories and issued an apology in order to make a lawsuit go away. Stranahan said that his editors forced him off the Twin Falls story during the fall and suggested that they had done so under threat from Chobani. (Breitbart denies this.)

Stranahan and I spoke a handful of times over the course of the last year, each time for several hours. Talking with him feels like being inside one of his conspiracy theories. When you ask him a question, he begins to answer and then immediately swerves in a different direction, bouncing like a pinball between topics that barely connect to one another -- from the Fawnbrook case to clitorectomies and stoning, then Syrian refugees, then a prominent Wahhabi cleric -- and seems to increase in velocity as he ricochets off them. It's an exhausting exercise, but also a fascinating one. He seems perpetually on the precipice of pulling the argument together, sparking just enough curiosity that you let him keep going. Stranahan uses this talent most effectively in his work, painting himself as a champion of people who are understandably uninformed about other cultures and religions based on their own experiences. ''It's just easy to brand these people as a bunch of Islamophobic, racist yokels,'' he told me, with a hint of disgust in his voice. ''I just don't like it.''

Stranahan struck me as passionate about his stories; not about their veracity but about the freedom he and the critics of refugee resettlement should have to speculate as they wanted without being belittled by the fact-mongering mainstream. When I reached him by phone this June, he told me he was planning to travel back to Idaho for more reporting on Fawnbrook, now that he was no longer constrained by his editors at Breitbart. He told me that he believed that he had uncovered another dimension of his globalist theory related to Chobani's participation in the federal school-lunch program. He felt compelled to follow up on the earlier coverage, because he was frustrated that Alex Jones and others were forced to retract their stories and apologize under pressure. ''I don't like people getting shut up like that,'' he said. ''Even if their stories have problems, I don't like journalists getting shut down.''

I started to ask why anyone should be allowed to publish false information for the express purpose of angering their audience and pushing them further away from those with whom they disagree, but Stranahan cut me off. ''Hey, I'm walking into the White House right now,'' he said. He had just arrived for a press briefing with the president's spokesman. ''Let me call you back.''

This April, the boys accused in the Fawnbrook case admitted guilt -- the juvenile court equivalent to pleading guilty -- and were sentenced in June. The judge prohibited city officials from commenting on the outcome of the trial, but juvenile-justice experts told me that the boys would most likely be placed on probation and required to attend mandatory therapy to correct their behavior. Even in Idaho, a state with tough sentencing requirements, the law bars anyone under 10 from being jailed and only allows it in extreme cases for anyone under 12.

Late one Monday night in June I received a phone call from Dalos, the Scanner Man. He asked if I had heard about the ''fireworks flying around Twin Falls.'' The news of the boys' fate had somehow reached the public. ''The suspects didn't go to jail or nothing,'' he said, adding that people in town were ''irate.'' Facebook posts about the story were again flooding his feed. ''They're blaming it on Muslim law,'' he said. One of the articles circulating, from a site called Bare Naked Islam, included a photograph of the judge in the case with a large red arrow pointing toward his head, next to the caption ''Corrupt Judge.'' Another article published the judge's home address and phone number, inciting another flood of harassment, a year after the initial onslaught.

Shawn and Camille Barigar's bickering has subsided, but they have discovered that they disagree over whether Islamic teachings conflict with American social norms. ''I can't take the leap,'' Shawn told me, ''that because you are Muslim therefore you are reading the Quran verbatim, and you're going to go out and do genital mutilation.'' Camille said she supported the local resettlement program but thought that her husband's unwillingness to even consider cultural differences or acknowledge any nuance was naïe. ''I think we've got to be careful,'' she said. ''And I don't want to be afraid to talk about it entirely or, like, sound racist.'' It is precisely this discomfort that provides an opening for people like Stranahan to dominate the conversation.

Part of the reason a fear of Islam has persisted in Twin Falls is because the local leadership refused to defuse it, according to Matt Christensen, 36, the editor of The Times-News. While Brown wrote articles that sorted out the truth about the Fawnbrook case, Christensen was publishing commentary that castigated the people who were spreading falsehoods. He told me that he had closed-door meetings with city officials, in which he asked them to write guest editorials doing the same, but none of them did. Christensen suspected that they were afraid of one of the most reliable political dangers in the region, the same force that leads would-be Democrats there to register as Republicans: being outflanked on the right is the quickest way to lose your job.

''Behind closed doors, they would all tell you they were pro-refugee, and we wanted them to step forward and make that declaration in a public arena, and it just never really happened,'' he told me. ''That was frustrating to us especially at the beginning because it really felt like the newspaper was out there all alone.'' He continued: ''There were days where we felt like, Godammit, what are we doing here? We write a story and it's going to reach 50,000 people. Breitbart writes a story and it's going to reach 2, 3, 4, 5, 10 million people. What kind of a voice do we have in this debate?''

The refugee resettlement center received a dramatic increase in donations from local residents during the last year. But those in the town who support the program have often been drowned out by the relatively smaller, but louder, group of activists who oppose it. Brown said he expected to see an anti-Shariah bill introduced in the State Legislature when the next session starts in 2018. Bills like this, which try to bar Islamic law from being used in American courts, have been introduced in the past two years in Boise but never passed. He speculated that the momentum of the past year could force a different outcome. ''There are a lot of people who feel like society is changing too quickly, like the community is changing too quickly,'' he told me. ''And who view other people not like them or who don't speak their language as a threat or a sign that their culture is going to be weakened. And they want to do what they can to stop that.''

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Caitlin Dickerson is a national reporter for The Times. She has covered changes in immigration policy and often profiles the lives of immigrants, including those without legal status.

(MM46-MM47); NATHAN BROWN, WHO COVERS POLITICS FOR THE LOCAL NEWSPAPER, THE TIMES-NEWS.; JIM DALOS JR. , THE ' 'SCANNER MAN'' WHO CALLS IN TIPS TO LOCAL MEDIA. (MM49); SHAWN BARIGAR, THE MAYOR OF TWIN FALLS.; CAMILLE BARIGAR, THE MAYOR'S WIFE, WHO WORKS AT THE LOCAL COLLEGE.; LEE STRANAHAN, A FORMER INVESTIGATIVE REPORTER FOR BREITBART NEWS. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY HARRIS MIZRAHI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM51) 

Document NYTF000020171001eda10007a



NEWS ANALYSIS
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Kurds' Vote for Independence Only Adds to Their Obstacles

By DAVID ZUCCHINO; Reporting was contributed by Alissa Rubin and Muhammad N. Mahmud from Erbil, Falih Hassan from Baghdad, and Clifford Krauss from Houston. 
1,657 words
1 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq -- After a century of yearning, the Kurds of Iraq have managed, at last, to pull off a vote for independence, but not without antagonizing nearly everyone in perhaps the world's most volatile region.

The question now is whether an arid, landlocked proto-state dependent on hostile neighbors can overcome is own shortcomings -- and Iraq's disruptive retaliation -- to build a viable path to independence.

With its troubled economy and dearth of democratic institutions, its prospects were already tenuous. Its best hopes lay in its oil reserves and American support, but Turkey has threatened to cut off its oil pipeline, and the relationship with the United States soured after the Kurds rebuffed its entreaties to cancel the vote.

Rather than negotiate and then seek international recognition, as the United States and others had asked, the Kurds forged ahead with the referendum.

But if anything, the vote, while satisfying the Kurds emotionally, may have set back their national aspirations.

Now, after a 93 percent ''yes'' vote on Monday, the Kurds are beseeching Baghdad to negotiate. Baghdad is not only refusing, but has demanded that the vote results be annulled and has moved to isolate the region, known as Kurdistan.

The last nation to win independence, landlocked South Sudan in 2011, has had a rocky start but at least was internationally recognized and had American backing. Kurdistan is all alone in a dangerous neighborhood.

For the Kurds, the vote was a potent and historic touchstone, a declaration to the world that they this is their moment and they are not turning back.

''This is an irreversible step toward independence,'' said Peter W. Galbraith, a former American diplomat with close ties to the Kurdish leadership.

But the Kurds may have underestimated the depth of international opposition.

Before they had even stopped celebrating, Iraq and its two powerful neighbors, Turkey and Iran, immediately went to work to negate the vote. Iraq fears losing a third of its country, as well as oil and natural gas reserves. Turkey and Iran fear that independence for Iraq's Kurds would embolden separatist ambitions among their own Kurdish minorities.

The fierce reaction has exposed Kurdistan's distinct vulnerabilities and shortcomings. The region's first days after the vote were spent not laying the groundwork for statehood, but struggling to escape a tightening noose.

On Saturday, Iraq moved to take control of the international border crossing leading into the region from Turkey, officials said in Baghdad.

Iraq has forced the suspension of international flights to Kurdistan's two international airports, and threatened to close land crossings linking Kurdistan and the rest of Iraq.

Iraq's Parliament has asked Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi to bring charges against Kurdish leaders who participated in the referendum and to send troops into disputed areas claimed by both the Kurds and Baghdad.

Turkey and Iraq are conducting military maneuvers on Iraq's borders near Kurdistan. Turkey has threatened to close its border crossing into Kurdistan, which relies on imported goods and food from Turkey and, to a lesser extent, Iran.

Iraq and Iran plan joint military maneuvers along their border next week, aimed at securing Iraqi control of three border crossings from areas controlled by the Kurdish Regional Government, Iran's military said Saturday.

A healthy democratic government might weather the storm. But the Kurdistan Regional Government lacks the foundations of a democratic state -- rule of law, free and fair elections, civil society and a legislature with real power to challenge a dynastic executive leadership.

''We don't have rule of law -- we have a monarchy,'' said Rabbon Marof, a member of the Kurdish Parliament and a leader of the ''No for Now'' movement that opposed the vote.

The region's president, Massoud Barzani, remains in power two years after his term expired. The Kurdish Parliament was paralyzed for two years until it met two weeks ago to rubber-stamp the referendum Mr. Barzani had already set in motion.

The government is a Barzani family enterprise. Mr. Barzani is the son of the former Kurdish leader Mustafa Barzani. Massoud Barzani's son Masrour Barzani heads the security council in his father's government.

Massoud Barzani's nephew, Nechirvan Barzani, is prime minister. The president's uncle is Hoshyar Zebari, Iraqi's former foreign minister and Mr. Barzani's top adviser on the referendum.

Denise Natali, an expert on Kurdistan at National Defense University in Washington, says the issue for the Kurds may not be whether the region can transform itself into a state but the kind of state it would become: ''poor, failed, and unstable.''

Mr. Zebari acknowledged in an interview on Friday that the regional government had ''shortcomings,'' but he said it was more democratic and secure than the rest of Iraq. He said the independence vote would force more accountability.

The region is an economic weakling dependent on oil. It earns roughly $8 billion a year from oil shipped through Turkey via a pipeline that Ankara now threatens to shut down.

Shutting down the pipeline would also cost Turkey, which earns between $500 million and $1 billion a year from it, according to regional experts. But the Turks could absorb a shutdown far easier than the Kurds.

Even with the pipeline flowing, the Kurdish economy is in dire straits. Oil revenues have plunged as the price of petroleum has fallen worldwide, depriving the government of its main source of revenue. The Kurdish government is $20 billion in debt, analysts say, and has not been able to pay all its soldiers and pays public employees only about 40 percent of their salaries.

''Kurdistan is not ready because economically, it is a mess,'' said Joost Hiltermann, a Middle East specialist at the International Crisis Group. ''I don't see independence happening,'' he added. ''It's all about capability, not desire.''

Moreover, more than half of Kurdish oil revenue comes from the oil fields of Kirkuk, a city that lies at the heart of the standoff with Baghdad.

Kurdish troops seized the multiethnic city after Iraqi troops fled an Islamic State assault in 2014.

Kurds consider Kirkuk a spiritual homeland. ''To Kurds, Kirkuk is their Jerusalem,'' said David L. Phillips, a former State Department adviser who has worked on Iraq for 30 years.

But Baghdad considers the Kurdish claim illegitimate, and Iraq's Parliament has asked Mr. Abadi to dispatch troops to seize Kirkuk's oil fields.

Nor can the Kurds expect a lifeline from the United States, which protected them from Saddam Hussein's executioners with a no-fly zone in 1991 that provided breathing space to carve out the autonomous enclave.

Washington feared the referendum would fracture Iraq and undermine the American-led coalition fighting Islamic State militants. Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson said Friday that the United States did not recognize the referendum, which he said ''lacks legitimacy,'' and urged the Iraqis and Kurds to ''remain focused on defeating ISIS.''

The Kurds believe they have a trump card in pesh merga fighters, who have played a pivotal role in the coalition. They held the referendum now, in part, because they feared losing their leverage if the coalition drives the militants out of Iraq.

But for the Kurdish leadership, there is no going back. Mr. Zebari said the Kurds' relationship with Iraq was irrevocably broken, and the Kurds worry that Iran's influence on Iraq's Shiite-led government -- and on Shiite militias incorporated into the Iraqi Army -- will only strengthen.

''Instead of partnership, they are advocating majority rule by the Shiia, which will make us always a minority and always a loser,'' Mr. Zebari said.

Mr. Barzani bet that a broad public mandate for independence would provide leverage against Baghdad in negotiating a separation. But there are no negotiations, at least not yet.

Mr. Phillips said Iraq would ultimately negotiate on ''a friendly divorce,'' with the United States as a likely intermediary.

''Negotiations are in Baghdad's interests,'' Mr. Phillips said. ''Picking a fight with the Kurds would merely exacerbate conflict and instability.''

One possible way out, analysts said, could be a Kurdish confederation with Iraq, with constitutional power-sharing. Another, Mr. Phillips said, may involve shared governance of Kirkuk, with power distributed among ethnic groups.

If Kirkuk were somehow resolved or set aside, Iraq might well be willing to negotiate independence for the three governorates the Kurds have run virtually on their own for a quarter century. But even then, Mr. Hiltermann said, Iran and Turkey would not go along.

But Mr. Galbraith said that if Baghdad refuses to bargain in good faith, the Kurds may unilaterally declare independence at some point.

''It's not an open-ended process,'' he said, reflecting the Kurdish view. ''You have to have an outcome which ultimately ends in independence.''

Mr. Zebari said the Kurds were willing to take the long view and patiently negotiate day-to-day obstacles on the path to eventual independence.

''We have said from the start that this is not a risk-free project,'' he said.

Kurds celebrating in Erbil, Iraq, after Monday's referendum, in which 93 percent voted for independence. Iraq, Turkey and Iran wasted no time in trying to undercut the results of the vote.; Kurds registering to vote in Erbil. For many, a former diplomat said, the vote was ''an irreversible step toward independence.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Left, oil fields in Kirkuk, Iraq, the source of much of Kurdistan's oil revenues, which have plunged along with the price of petroleum. Right, an airport in Erbil, one of two Kurdish international airports. Iraq has suspended international flights to both airports. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANDREA BRUCE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A8) 

Document NYTF000020171001eda10006m



FICTION
Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Divided Loyalties

By PETER HO DAVIES 
954 words
1 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
19
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

HOME FIRE

By Kamila Shamsie

276 pp. Riverhead Books. $26.

Kamila Shamsie's challenging and engrossing new novel, ''Home Fire,'' which was longlisted for the Man Booker Prize, has been given a ghastly urgency by the attacks in London in June, and the focus in their aftermath on ''homegrown'' terrorists.

Like Khuram Butt, one of the London Bridge assailants, Parvaiz, the misguided young catalyst of Shamsie's novel, is a supporter of the Arsenal soccer team. He and his ISIS recruiter, a supporter of Real Madrid, bond over their mutual admiration for Mesut Ozil, the German star of Turkish descent who has played for both teams, and is a practicing Muslim. It's a tiny but resonant detail (one the author doesn't pause to unpack), indicative of the subtle intimacy of Shamsie's work. The Pakistani-born author of six previous novels -- this is her first set predominantly in Britain, where she now resides -- she's acutely attuned to the vagaries of allegiance, whether to nation, faith, family or club. Our loyalties, she suggests, are far more complex, more shifting, than the fatuous ''cricket test'' once suggested by the Tory politician Norman Tebbit for measuring an immigrant's assimilation according to whether they support the home team.

The ''Home'' of Shamsie's title refers both to Britain -- a key character rises to the post of home secretary, the minister responsible for immigration and security -- and to the London households of two very different immigrant families, the Pashas and the Lones. Isma Pasha has raised her siblings, twins Aneeka and Parvaiz, since their mother and grandmother died; the Lones are Karamat, a rising political star, his feckless son, Eamonn, and his Irish-American wife, Terry. The Pashas are wary Muslims -- conscious of the general cloud of suspicion hovering over the community, and secretive about their own particular family history. Karamat, by contrast, is a public figure, at once highly assimilated (a ''coconut'' to his critics) and proudly exceptional (he revels in the nickname ''Lone Wolf''), while Eamonn is so blithely deracinated that he asks Isma, in reference to her headwear, ''Is that a style thing or a Muslim thing?'' These two families -- separated, since both are British after all, by class as much as piety -- are swiftly, if somewhat contrivedly, drawn together. What seems at first like a potential love triangle twists into more complex political entanglements, though a recurring theme is how youthful radicalization is a form of ideological infatuation: ''We thought it was some kind of secret affair, his first time in love,'' Isma notes of her brother's furtive behavior.

Shamsie is achingly good at capturing the claustrophobic self-consciousness of British Muslims. Aneeka translates GWM for Eamonn as ''Googling While Muslim.'' Isma, a Ph.D. candidate, is wise to the othering effects of language, wryly noting the superfluousness of ''chai tea'' and ''na'an bread,'' as well as more insidious word choices:

''The 7/7 terrorists were never described by the media as 'British terrorists.' Even when the word 'British' was used, it was always 'British of Pakistani descent' or 'British Muslim' or, my favorite, 'British passport holders,' always something interposed between their Britishness and terrorism.''

The pull of competing identities upon these characters is further played out in the names they choose or that are bestowed upon them. Parvaiz's father, who long ago abandoned the family to become a jihadi, nonetheless adopted ''Abu Parvaiz'' -- father of Parvaiz -- as his nom de guerre (a phrase Parvaiz initially hears as ''numb digger,'' demonstrating a typically British tin ear for French). While Karamat enjoys his Lone Wolf sobriquet, Aneeka is crudely called ''Knickers'' by the tabloids.

In fact these names disguise more deeply buried identities. Isma is a stand-in for Ismene, Eamonn for Haemon, Aneeka for Antigone -- all figures from the tragic Greek myth, told most famously by Sophocles.

We're seeing a glut of novelistic rehashes of classical and classic texts. Margaret Atwood recently followed up her retelling of the ''Odyssey'' in ''The Penelopiad'' with a reimagining of ''The Tempest'' in ''Hag-Seed.'' But Shamsie's choice is nonetheless notable. She places herself in the same predicament as her characters. Just as they wrestle with their clashing duties to family, faith and nation, she wrestles with their prescribed narrative roles. Beyond this, of course, it's a shrewdly subversive move to tell this immigrant story via a tale so central to the Western canon. In doing so, Shamsie quietly capsizes easy sound bites about a ''clash of civilizations.''

Still, for all its brilliance, there's some cost to this strategy. The timelessness of the tale at times feels at odds with its timeliness, the fated quality of the narrative at odds with the psychological choices of the individual figures. This is perhaps an inherent risk in translation from stage to page, one that dogs the latter part of the book. There's an ambitious stylistic shift -- Aneeka's section is told in poetic fragments interrupted by a chorus of media reports -- but the overall effect is distancing. We lose touch with Aneeka, and never quite get close to Karamat, whose political crisis feels schematic, less inevitable than predictable. The upshot is a headlong final act that aims at stark political theater but at times comes off as only stagy. Tellingly, much of this closing action is viewed through screens, the way most of us engage with terror. And yet, at its finest, the quiet emotional power of ''Home Fire'' is that it draws us close to that horror -- behind the scenes of tragedy.

Peter Ho Davies's most recent novel is ''The Fortunes.''

Kamila Shamsie (PHOTOGRAPH BY ZAIN MUSTAFA) 

Document NYTF000020171001eda10003o



Foreign Desk; SECTA
As Kurdish Borders Close, Region's Leader Warns Iraq

By ROD NORDLAND and DAVID ZUCCHINO; Rod Nordland reported from Erbil and David Zucchino from Baghdad. Omar al-Jawoshy and Falih Hassan contributed reporting from Baghdad, and Alissa J. Rubin and Kamil Kakol from Erbil. 
1,264 words
30 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq -- The president of Iraq's Kurdish region warned on Friday that the Kurds might be forced to retaliate if the central government persists with what his spokesman called a ''very aggressive'' stance toward the pro-independence referendum.

Overseas flights were canceled on Friday from the international airport in Erbil, hours before a ban by the Iraqi government took effect, while officials in Baghdad warned that land borders might also be closed. There were also reports of internal highway closures.

''We are hopeful that these are all temporary measures,'' said Vahal Ali, director of communications in the office of Massoud Barzani, the Kurdish region's president. ''We want this to be a peaceful transition, but if Baghdad decides not, there is a lot we can also do.''

Mr. Ali was critical of threats by Baghdad to ask Turkey to cut a vital oil pipeline, which provides most of the estimated $8 billion the Kurdish region earns annually from oil revenue, and a request from the Iraqi parliament to move troops into the oil-rich, Kurdish-held city of Kirkuk. ''Baghdad's response to the referendum was very aggressive, so we don't know what will happen,'' the spokesman said.

Iraqi Kurds overwhelmingly voted in favor of independence in a referendum on Monday, which Mr. Ali said obliges Mr. Barzani to negotiate independence from the rest of Iraq. Baghdad has refused to enter such negotiations, and Mr. Ali said that if it maintained that attitude, Kurdistan would be forced to unilaterally declare independence.

''President Barzani was obligated to conduct the referendum and now is obligated to respond to that result,'' Mr. Ali said. ''We've repeatedly said we can negotiate, but that has to be on the question of independence.''

Kurdish officials have expressed dismay at the absence of support they have found internationally, with the United States and other powers, as well as the United Nations, critical of the decision to even hold the referendum, and none expressing approval for the pro-independence result.

Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson bluntly expressed the American rejection of the referendum and its outcome in a statement released on Friday, saying ''the vote and the results lack legitimacy.''

Hoshyar Zebari, who helped lead the referendum drive in the Kurdish region and was formerly Iraq's foreign minister, said that criticism of the vote from the United States had ''emboldened Baghdad'' to take a hard-line position toward the Kurds. Baghdad's threatened retaliation was, he said, ''very damaging and provocative, and illogical and destructive.''

Mr. Ali said the Kurds were hopeful that international allies would eventually come around to the idea of Kurdish independence, and said they were heartened at some individual voices praising the referendum result. He cited, for instance, Charles E. Schumer of New York, the minority leader in the United States Senate, who on Wednesday praised the Kurdish independence vote.

Iraq's influential Shia spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, in his Friday sermon in the southern city of Karbala, was strongly critical of the Kurdish move. ''Any individual steps toward division and separation and the attempt of making this thing reality will lead to internal and external reaction and bad consequences that would damage our dear Kurdish citizens in the first place and maybe lead to what is more dangerous than that, God forbid, and will give way for many regional and international sides to intervene in Iraqi affairs,'' Ayatollah Sistani said.

On Friday, military officials in Baghdad confirmed that the strategic highway linking Mosul and the northern city of Dohuk, in Kurdish-held territory, was closed by the Iraqi military for several hours. In addition, protests by civilians forced the closure of the Kirkuk-Baghdad highway on Friday. Saad al-Hadithi, the spokesman for Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq, said that land borders would also be closed between Iraq's Kurdish region and Turkey and Iran, but there was no confirmation if that had happened.

The Iraq border agency announced that it was sending convoys of police officers and Interior Ministry officials to guard three key land border crossings between the Kurdish region and Syria, Turkey and Iran beginning on Saturday.

Mr. Ali said that he was aware of no such move and that it would be unconstitutional.

He said that cutting off the Kurdish region's trade with Turkey, which he said totals $17 billion a year, would hurt everyone.

He also warned of measures that the Kurdish regional government could take if Iraq's crackdown on air travel and the borders continued, including severing internet and mobile telephone coverage, much of it based in the region, and even the supply of cement, most of which comes from the region.

''The list is very long. There's a lot we can do, if we're talking about that,'' he said. ''We could cut off communications. We can also close the Erbil International Airport to domestic flights, to Baghdad and Najaf.'' That, he said, would hurt many Iraqi officials whose family members live in the Kurdish region. ''The families of all their policy makers live in Erbil because it's not safe in Baghdad anymore,'' Mr. Ali said.

Mr. Ali also scoffed at Iraqi threats to move troops into Kirkuk, the oil-rich city claimed by both Arabs and Kurds. Kurdish forces took control of most of the city after Islamic State extremists chased the Iraqi army out in 2014.

''They're talking about sending troops?'' Mr. Ali asked. ''They couldn't enter Kirkuk under ISIS, they couldn't liberate it then, and now?''

Flights after 5 p.m. on Friday were canceled by international airlines flying out of Erbil, according to travelers at the airport. The Iraqi ban took effect at 6 p.m.

Prime Minister Abadi's office released a statement that the Kurdish region's two international airports, in Erbil and Suleimaniya, could be reopened as soon as Kurdish officials transferred control of them to the federal government. Kurdish officials said that was not going to happen.

The Kurdish region's minister of transport, Mawlood Bowa Morad, accused the Iraqi government of having issued orders to shoot down any airliners that defied its ban on international flights into Erbil or Suleimaniya airports. ''There is a military order that if any flights are coming in, they are going to shoot them down,'' Mr. Morad said, during an interview at the nearly deserted Erbil airport after the 6 p.m. deadline had passed.

Producing his smartphone, Mr. Morad displayed a scan of what he described as a document that had come from a high official in Prime Minister Abadi's office, issuing the shoot-down order to the Ministry of Defense in Baghdad. Officials in Mr. Abadi's office said that the document was a forgery, and that the official who supposedly had signed it was a retiree with no authority.

Follow Rod Nordland and David Zucchino on Twitter: @rodnordland @davidzucchino

Protesters gathered on Friday to condemn Iraq's ban on international flights at the airport in Erbil, in the region where Kurds have voted for independence. Turkish and Iraqi forces, left, conducted exercises this week in Turkey near the region's border. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; ILYAS AKENGIN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170930ed9u00034

