 


Foreign Desk; SECTA
Afghans Say U.S. Strike Hit Civilians

By KHALID ALOKOZAY and FAHIM ABED; Rod Nordland contributed reporting from London. 
675 words
12 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

JALALABAD, Afghanistan -- Afghan officials said on Friday that American warplanes killed 16 civilians as they tried to flee an area in eastern Afghanistan controlled by Islamic State militants, but the United States military insisted the dead had been extremist fighters.

Hajji Saz Wali, the governor of Haska Meena District in the southern part of Nangarhar Province, said the victims included women and children, with eight of the dead from one family, and four others from a second. It was the second time since July 24 that an airstrike in that district killed civilians, according to Afghan officials.

The latest victims died Thursday afternoon when the vehicles they were traveling in were hit by American airstrikes believed to be targeting Islamic State militants in the area, Mr. Wali said. It is not known how many were wounded, he added.

A spokesman for the American military in Kabul said that those killed in the airstrikes had been seen loading weapons into a vehicle. ''The strike was conducted in the middle of open terrain,'' said the spokesman, Bob Purtiman. ''There was zero chance of civilian casualties.''

Attaullah Khogyani, the spokesman for Nangarhar Province's governor, confirmed that casualties had occurred but declined to give details.

Mohammada Khan, 42, a truck driver, said in a telephone interview that he had lost six members of his family -- including two children and two women -- in the airstrike, which hit a minibus in which they were fleeing.

''We got to the area of the bombing and put their body parts in a truck and brought them to Jalalabad city, where we buried them this morning,'' he said. ''There were no ISIS members in the area. It was not a valley or a mountainous area. It was a clear area, and they should understand that people in the vehicle are civilians, as the car was a civilian car.''

Mr. Khan added, ''But it was God's will, so we cannot say anything.''

On July 24, Afghan officials said, nine civilians were killed in an American airstrike on a prayer ceremony held in Haska Meena, near the border with Pakistan, by relatives of ISIS members who had been killed.

The American military asserted that that strike, too, targeted fighters. ''This is the second false claim of civilian casualties in the same district within the last three weeks,'' the military said in a news release.

As American airstrikes continue at a rapid pace, there have been a number of such episodes in recent months.

Claims of civilian deaths from airstrikes have occurred this year in Kunduz in the north and in Helmand Province in the south, often as a result of fighting in areas where it can be difficult to distinguish insurgents from civilians.

Haska Meena District, also known as Dih Bala District, is in a rugged area neighboring Achin District. Achin was long a stronghold of the Islamic State and was where the United States dropped the so-called mother of all bombs in April, the largest conventional bomb ever deployed, on a tunnel and bunker complex where insurgents had taken refuge.

That led Islamic State fighters to seek new refuge, including in the Tora Bora cave and tunnel complex in Nangarhar, which Osama bin Laden once used as a hide-out. The Islamic State fighters are believed to be relatively few, and in the Nangarhar area they fight against both the Afghan government and the more numerous Taliban insurgents.

The United States military has deployed Special Forces and airstrikes against Islamic State militants in Afghanistan and says it has killed dozens of the group's leaders and hundreds of fighters this year.

Casualties among Afghan civilians, especially women and children, have risen to a record this year, according to a recent report from the United Nations. Most of those deaths have been attributed to insurgents, particularly through suicide bombings, rather than to airstrikes and other pro-government actions, the report said.

Document NYTF000020170812ed8c0003a



World; Europe
Imam in Switzerland Urged Burning of Muslims Who Don’ Pray, Prosecutors Say

By MELISSA EDDY 
478 words
11 August 2017
16:48
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BERLIN —he Swiss authorities have charged an imam from Ethiopia with inciting violence by calling in a sermon for local Muslims who refused to pray to be burned alive, prosecutors said on Friday.

The imam was associated with the An’ur mosque, which had become known as a hub for Islamist extremist activity. Prosecutors in Zurich said in a statement that their colleagues in Winterthur, where the mosque was, had charged him on Aug. 2 with calling for violence and violating immigration law.

Switzerland has been spared the terrorist attacks by Islamist extremists that have hit European countries like Britain, France and Germany, but the Swiss authorities have nonetheless been accused of failing to clamp down swiftly and strongly on radicals.

The man, who was not further identified, in keeping with Swiss privacy law, is charged with calling in a sermon in October for the denunciation of Muslims in the community who did not pray, “nd for those who continue to refuse to do so to be killed by burning them in their homes,”rosecutors said.

He is further suspected of sending people graphic images of execution methods that he acquired over social media, they said. Prosecutors are seeking a sentence of 18 months in prison and then to bar the imam from the country for 15 years.

The imam was detained, along with three others involved in the An’ur mosque, in November 2016. He remains in custody; the others have been released for lack of evidence.

This year, the Swiss authorities identified more than 500 people with connections to the country who were using social media to propagate extremist ideals.

Switzerland has been seeking to integrate the 450,000 Muslims living in the country and, like many of its European neighbors, has been trying to strike a balance between allowing them freedom of religious practice while encouraging them to accept Western norms. In January, a court in Basel ruled that two Muslim girls must be enrolled in mandatory mixed swimming lessons, despite opposition from their parents.

According to Swiss news media, several men were radicalized at the An’ur mosque before traveling to Syria to join the militant group Islamic State.

In February, 10 people were arrested on suspicion of attacking two members of the community who had spoken with journalists about the content of a sermon.

The mosque has since closed, Swiss news media reported.

The imam also faces charges of violating immigration law by working in the country in that role for more than four weeks without the requisite permit, prosecutors said.

Follow Melissa Eddy on Twitter @meddynyt.

* Germany Bans ‘rue Religion’uslim Group and Raids Mosques

* How \b ISIS\b0  Built the Machinery of Terror Under Europe’ Gaze

* Ankara, Berlin, Zurich: A Day of Terror

Document NYTFEED020170811ed8b004pi



Foreign Desk; SECT
U.N. Warns of New Wave of Displaced Iraqis as Fight Against  ISIS  Continues

By NICK CUMMING-BRUCE 
521 words
9 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

GENEVA -- The United Nations said on Tuesday that it was bracing to cope with hundreds of thousands of civilians likely to flee their homes as Iraqi security forces begin operations to drive Islamic State forces from their last remaining strongholds in Iraq.

Iraqi forces recaptured Mosul in July after nine months of fighting that caused the evacuation of more than 950,000 residents and left large swaths of the western half of the city in ruins. Lise Grande, the United Nations coordinator in Iraq, said the Iraqis were poised to begin operations to recapture the towns of Tal Afar and Hawija, as well as the Euphrates valley in western Anbar province.

''We think that by the end of those operations, several hundred thousand more civilians are likely to be displaced,'' Ms. Grande told reporters in Geneva, adding a new layer of deprivation to one of the world's biggest humanitarian crises.

Hundreds of thousands of Mosul residents have already returned to the city, she said, but more than 3.3 million Iraqis remain displaced from their homes by conflict across the nation. Aid agencies expect that figure to increase to about 3.5 million as military operations unfold in the coming months, she said.

A new wave of displacement would add to the complex protection and security challenges confronting Iraqi authorities and aid agencies as the battle against the Islamic State moves forward.

A month after Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi declared victory in the battle for Mosul, the federal police on Tuesday closed off the old city in the eastern half of Mosul and declared a curfew because of the threat of Islamic State cells reportedly operating in underground tunnels. Aid organizations working in Iraq reported that fighters from the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIS and ISIL, have stepped up attacks against villages south of Mosul.

Since the recapture of Mosul, Ms. Grande said, ''it's very clear that the threat to civilian populations where ISIL still has a stronghold has increased dramatically.''

The United Nations is also looking at measures to address the threat of revenge attacks and other reprisals against Sunni families suspected of sympathizing with or supporting the Islamic State, she said.

The United Nations is particularly concerned about more than a thousand families that are outside the protection of Sunni tribes and, thus, ''very, very, very vulnerable,'' Ms. Grande said.

United Nations agencies and the Iraqi authorities are discussing the possibility of opening a camp where families could choose to relocate for their protection, she said.

Human rights organizations say the dangers to suspected sympathizers are underscored by the disappearance of as many as 600 people held by Shiite militias after the recapture of the predominantly Sunni city of Falluja from the Islamic State last year.

Diplomats in Iraq are concerned that those militias, which the government kept out of the campaign to recapture Mosul, are active again in surrounding areas and may take an active part in operations against remaining Islamic State strongholds.

Document NYTF000020170809ed890004p



BOOKS OF THE TIMES
The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
Siblings Changed By Love and Jihad

By DWIGHT GARNER 
1,091 words
9 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Kamila Shamsie's new novel, longlisted for this year's Man Booker Prize, is a bold retelling of Sophocles' ''Antigone.'' Its epigram (''The ones we love ... are enemies of the state'') is from Seamus Heaney's 2004 translation and reworking of the play. The novel begins with an airport interrogation.

A Londoner of Pakistani descent, Isma, has a student visa and is flying to study sociology at Amherst College. Because she's Muslim and wears a hijab, she knows to expect delays and perhaps worse at security.

Dark wit plays beneath her trepidation. She has prepped for this moment with her sister. If you're asked about the queen, her sister has said, respond, ''As an Asian I have to admire her color palette.''

The interrogation is no joke. It lasts hours. Isma's clothes are frisked so thoroughly that the security hirelings seem to be ''not so much searching for hidden pockets as judging the quality of the material.''

Her browser history is audited. This novel dilates on what Shamsie calls GWM -- ''Googling While Muslim.'' An officer wants to ''know her thoughts on Shias, homosexuals, the Queen, democracy, 'The Great British Bake Off,' the invasion of Iraq, Israel, suicide bombers, dating websites.'' Dame Edna and ''Brexit'' are about the only topics omitted from this pop quiz.

It's a scene that sets the tone for this ingenious and love-struck novel. Isma is eventually allowed to take off. ''Home Fire'' takes flight as well.

This novel may seem to wobble in the minutes after its landing gear retracts. There are lurching shifts of tone as it moves between matters of the heart and of state.

Do not panic. Order something from the drinks cart. Shamsie drives this gleaming machine home in a manner that, if I weren't handling airplane metaphors, I would call smashing.

''Home Fire'' is set in contemporary London, in Amherst, Mass., and in the Middle East. It plays freely with Sophocles' drama but hews to its themes: civil disobedience, fidelity and the law, especially as regards burial rights.

Isma has left behind in London younger siblings, Aneeka and Parvaiz, 19-year-old twins. Isma raised them after their mother's death.

They barely knew their father, a jihadist who died after being tortured at Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan. His fame has tainted their lives in the West. Parvaiz is adrift and haunted, however, by his father's legacy.

He is recruited by ISIS. He joins its media division in Syria. He quickly discovers he has made a mistake. ''Home Fire'' is largely about Aneeka's attempts to help her twin come home.

Louise Glük, in her poem ''Tango,'' observed, ''Of two sisters/one is always the watcher,/one the dancer.'' While Isma looks on from America, Aneeka begins to whirl.

Aneeka falls into an affair with Eamonn, the son of Britain's new home secretary, Karamat Lone, a man of Muslim background.

Eamonn is wealthy and beautiful, with ''perfect half-moons in his fingernails.'' Is this love? Or is Aneeka maneuvering to win his father's help in getting her brother home? Or both?

Lone, the home secretary, is among Shamsie's most sophisticated creations. He's had to thread many needles while rising in British politics. He's mocked by some for becoming ''Mr. British Values. Mr. Strong on Security. Mr. Striding Away from Muslim-ness.''

Shamsie humanizes him. She writes about his ''extravagant snort, which his children were always amazed he could restrain from in public life.'' The best story told about Lone is probably the one about the time Eamonn was pining over a lost love, a woman his father found diffident. We read about a moment reminiscent of ''The Godfather'':

''The door of his bedroom had been kicked open and Karamat Lone had walked in, knees buckling slightly under the weight of the halibut in his arms, ice chips glinting on its skin. He had lowered the massive fish onto his son's bed, with the single word 'replacement.'''

Shamsie, who was raised in Karachi, in Pakistan, and lives in London, is vastly better known in England than in the United States. This is her seventh novel. Twice a finalist for the Orange Prize, she was one of Granta's Best of Young British Novelists in 2013, and writes essays and criticism for The Guardian.

There are occasional small blunders in ''Home Fire.'' A consideration of grief, for example, becomes a word goop. ''Grief spread its wings large like an eagle, grief huddled small like a porcupine,'' Shamsie writes, ''grief needed company, grief craved solitude; grief wanted to remember, wanted to forget.'' Grief wants to be left alone.

These moments are rare. Her humor mixes freely with her intellection. There is a disquisition on ''ecosystem beards,'' so named because they are so large they contain entire small worlds.

The humor fades into fatalistic meditations on life lived while straddling worlds. Aneeka comes up with a plan to get her brother home, a plan that will have consequences for everyone in this novel.

It's a plan so intrepid that Aneeka is asked if she or her brother stopped ''to think about those of us with passports that look like toilet paper to the rest of the world who spend our whole lives being so careful we don't give anyone a reason to reject our visa applications? Don't stand next to this guy, don't follow that guy on Twitter, don't download that Noam Chomsky book.''

''Home Fire'' builds to one of the most memorable final scenes I've read in a novel this century. It takes place live on international television.

I won't give away what happens, but something about this scene reminded me of a scene from Satyajit Ray's 1955 film ''Pather Panchali,'' as described by Salman Rushdie in his essay collection ''Imaginary Homelands'' (1991).

''When he shows his wife, Sarbajaya, the sari he has brought for the dead girl, she begins to weep,'' Rushdie wrote, ''and now he understands, and cries out, too; but (and this is the stroke of genius) their voices are replaced by the high, high music of a single tar shehnai, a sound like a scream of the soul.''

There is high, high music in the air at the end of ''Home Fire.''

Home Fire

By Kamila Shamsie

276 pages. Riverhead Books. $26.

Follow Dwight Garner on Twitter: @DwightGarner

(C1);  (PHOTOGRAPH BY ZAIN MUSTAFA) (C6) 

Document NYTF000020170809ed890003e



magazine
Braving Cancer Amid the Chaos of Syria; Feature

By CAELAINN HOGAN 
5,082 words
8 August 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

On a hazy morning this spring, at the entrance of the Al-Bayrouni cancer center in northeast Damascus, a wall of tires teetered atop a long mound of dirt. Where there were no tires, jagged sheets of metal or rusting barrels had been propped up to create a makeshift shield. The edges of the flat roof were lined with barrels and sandbags. The 500-bed facility, the biggest oncology hospital in Syria, stands on the edge of an old highway, near the Al-Assad and Harasta suburbs, overlooking an active front line between government and opposition forces. As the engines of passing warplanes sucked at the air overhead, soldiers patrolled the grounds. For the government, the highway is a direct supply line to the police hospital and barracks beside the cancer center. For the opposition, controlling the road would provide them a chance to break a siege that has left most medical facilities destroyed or empty.

From the guard’ bunker, the face of Bashar al-Assad surveyed those arriving through dark aviator glasses. Throughout the hospital, too, Assad’ face beamed down from framed portraits hung on nearly every ward. In the front lobby, Syrian and Palestinian flag bunting was draped from wall to wall. On the side of the building that faced the front line, many wards lay empty, scattered with unplugged monitoring machines, unwound bandages and creased bedsheets. Divots in corridors marked where shrapnel had knocked chunks of plaster from the walls. A wad of chewing gum had been stuck across a crack in a pane of glass. The army had soldiers stationed on the hospital’ top floor; young men with guns slung over their shoulders paced the halls there, while a gaggle of white-uniformed nurses sat in a room nearby. One made a heart shape with her hands and blew a kiss at a rose-framed picture of the president. With the medical staff now outnumbering the patients, her days at the hospital were boring, she complained.

That day, like most days in recent months, the rainbow row of colored seats leading to the ward for children with cancer were almost all empty. Most of the mothers and fathers who did make it to this waiting area had faced a harrowing choice: Travel with their children along a road they knew had been the target of mortar fire, to a hospital that overlooked a front line; or stay put and pray the conflict would soon end, knowing that the disease could be spreading through the bodies of their children. Some of the parents had to leave their other children behind in cities being bombed, unable to see them for months, living alone in shelters and cheap hotels so their sick children could get treatment. One woman from Raqqa told me she paid thousands of Syrian pounds to a smuggler to walk by foot with her months-old baby, across terrain strewn with mines —fraid that if they were caught she would be beheaded, but knowing that if they stayed, her newborn son would die from the cancer.

In one room, the lighter-fluid stench of chemotherapy clung to a girl’ spindly body like a cloud. The shaking of the walls, as airstrikes found their mark nearby, couldn’ shift the smell; it left a rusty taste in the mouth, stung the eyes. The 9-year-old was sitting up in bed, a blue blanket pulled over her legs. Her eyes were set intensely on the pen in her hand, drawing the round outline of a smiley face, next to shaky letters that spelled out her name: Shahd.

Shahd had grown accustomed to the sound of bombings. In east Damascus, the front line of the battle between government forces and the opposition had fluctuated since she arrived two months earlier. Her head was fuzzy bald, though her eyebrows remained. When she smiled —outh wide open, like the face she’ drawn on the page —er teeth glinted a translucent gray, blackened by the intensity of the treatment. Shahd knew she was sick, but her mother had never spoken the word ‘‘ancer’’o her. The diagnosis was Ewing’ sarcoma, a rare form of cancer occurring in bones and soft tissue. A tumor on the eighth vertebrae of her spine restricted the movement of her legs. By the time she reached the hospital, Shahd’ cancer had spread throughout her body. But over more than five journeys back and forth between the hospital and her home for chemo, some of the cancer had retreated and shrunk. She even regained some sensation in her legs. As long as they could still reach the hospital, her mother felt she still had control over her daughter’ disease.

Seven-year-old Fatima Hadeed, a leukemia patient, had come from ISIS-held Raqqa; she sat on her bed in a swaddle of pink duvet, quietly watching everything around her as the orange chemo liquid flowed steadily from an IV bag. Damaged veins ran like strikes of lightning along the tops of her hands and up the soft fleshy skin of her inner arms. Just over a month earlier, she shared the room with 9-year-old Samar Hatabi, who grew up in Aleppo, in one of the now-gutted neighborhoods on the eastern side of the city. Samar also had leukemia. When she wasn’ wearing the heavy-fringed wig that she put on to go outside, the short hairs sprouting from her bald head heralded the return of a widow’ peak. The girls’arents would sometimes chat about the treatments their children were undergoing. They avoided speaking of what was happening in the cities they had left behind.

Throughout the ward, mothers sat sentry beside each bed. They had come from all over Syria to the front line just for this, to hold the hands of their children and stay with them, sleeping on pullout armchairs. At Children’ University Hospital, in the Mezze neighborhood of Damascus, parents were not allowed to stay in the rooms. There was no space.

The children receiving treatment at Al-Bayrouni no longer reacted to the rattling windows and walls after each strike. Instead they talked about the things that young kids usually do: The last time they were in school. Their favorite hobbies. What they wanted to be when they grew up. The parents showed me photos from when their children still had hair. The eyes and the corners of the mouth matched up, but there was a vast distance between then and now. The cancer had worn down the children and claimed parts for itself.

The country where they have grown up has also been stripped of what their parents used to cherish. It is barely recognizable but still theirs. When airstrikes hit nearby, a woman reassured Shahd and the other children that it was the government. ‘‘t is us,’’he stressed. ‘‘t’ normal, it’ us.’’ wondered what that ‘‘s’’eant to these families, who had come from both sides of the front lines.

In Syria these days, people talk about a ‘‘ancer of fears.’’hey blame the tumors in the bodies of their children on the traumas of war: on the daily fear of government airstrikes and opposition attacks; on the fumes breathed in from the use of dirty fuel since the oil fields were taken over by ISIS; on bodies weakened and warped from shortages of food. Many fear that even if the war ends, the conflict will mark the health of future generations. The effects of the carcinogenic materials used in the war will most likely only be reflected in Syrian cancer rates years down the line. An oncologist working in a clinic in besieged Eastern Ghouta, the site of chemical attacks, already reported significantly rising rates of cancer in her patients.

The fear of the parents at Al-Bayrouni —hat the war was the cause of their children’ cancers —s hard to prove or disprove. But the effects of the war on treatment and survival rates are clear. Delays in treatment can quicken progression and worsen outcomes. With cancer, after all, timing can be everything. If caught early, roughly 70 percent of patients with Ewing’ sarcoma, the rare cancer Shahd was fighting, are alive five years later; but after the disease has spread, that figure drops to around 30 percent. For the most common form of childhood leukemia, five-year remission rates can reach 85 percent, but this can depend on its stage at diagnosis and how rapidly the cancer responds to treatment. The six-year conflict has claimed the lives of more than 300,000 Syrians, but as of 2014, 200,000 more have died from chronic diseases, including cancer. Of the millions who have fled the country, an estimated 27,000 were skilled physicians, more than half the total number of medical doctors who worked in the country before the conflict. Half the nation’ hospitals and health centers have been destroyed, in many cases deliberately.

The Al-Bayrouni cancer center once received as many as 1,400 patients a day. Doctors there had high hopes of expanding the center, but now most of the beds lie empty, with wards damaged by shelling abandoned. After years of conflict, most hospitals, including Al-Bayrouni, face shortages of medicines and medical equipment, as well as a limited number of oncology professionals. The Ministry of Health’ national cancer registry has reported that this year an estimated 25,000 new cancer patients will be in need of treatment. But the actual number of cancer patients is very likely much higher, possibly up to three times that number, because of disruptions in the registry’ reporting and the mass displacement of people. In Damascus, oncology facilities have been overwhelmed, with patients coming from all over Syria to the capital. The Syrian government provides anticancer medicine free of charge in its public oncology facilities, but since the war began, these are not always available. Wars are expensive, and so the health budget has repeatedly been cut. The World Health Organization, according to a report it published in April, needs almost $7 million in the coming year to increase access to treatment for Syria’ cancer patients. People who must procure medicine or medical supplies on their own turn to private pharmacies or black-market traders. But since the war began, the average salary of working Syrians has plummeted to around $70 a month. The cost of a single course of chemo can be equivalent to a year’ salary.

These days, even the provision of health care has become politicized. American brand medicines once on the shelves of hospital pharmacies are now imported from government allies like Iran. Areas under siege are often cut off from medical supplies, and the only hospitals fully equipped to treat cancer patients are in government-controlled places, meaning free treatment is readily available to only those who can safely enter those areas.

Every day, a bus takes up to a dozen cancer patients from the Bab Al Hawa Hospital, the largest in opposition-held Syria, across to Turkey. The border is open to those with a medical referral, but only 30 people with chronic diseases like cancer are allowed per day. The waiting list is months long. Before the war, most would have gone to Damascus for treatment. But fear of the disease’ progressing competes with the fear many have of going to a government-run facility, knowing that they came from opposition areas. Some recount stories of patients arrested while trying to reach government hospitals or made to pay bribes at each checkpoint.

In Gaziantep, a sprawling Turkish city, I visited a hostel that has been set up specifically for Syrians battling cancer in exile. A 35-year-old tailor named Jaber Abu Ali described the journey he took across the border every 20 days from opposition-held Idlib for chemo. He was not able to bring his pregnant wife and two young children across, so he had to go back and forth for treatment. Both he and his friend at the hostel, a 25-year-old named Ehsan Barakat, said it was impossible to seek treatment in Damascus. Ehsan traveled all the way from Dara’, the birthplace of the revolution, to Turkey for treatment, even though Al-Bayrouni was only a few hours’rive from his home. On the way, he was captured by ISIS for one day. He had to pay a smuggler $200 to take him around government-held areas. Ehsan was hopeful that his thyroid cancer would be cured, but Ali was facing what seemed like an impossible battle. When I asked where his cancer had spread, Ali’ hand rested on his abdomen, his side, his chest, his rib cage: The cancer was in his colon, his kidneys, his lungs. There was never cancer in his family before, he said. He blamed the war.

The risk of traveling in Syria had complicated treatment for almost everyone. Early on, as the war shifted and metastasized, roads became lifelines between different territories, crucial thruways of communication and control. Opposition forces were constantly trying to take over sections that connected the main bastions of government control. When fighting intensified, checkpoints often closed. Patients who were on buses, sick from chemo, were stuck for hours in the cold and in the heat, delirious from fatigue and fear, pain rippling through their bodies. Even for people in Harasta, in neighborhoods that had been under siege for years, it sometimes seemed impossible to reach Al-Bayrouni, though it was just a few minutes up the road.

The day I met Shahd, she had finally been told that she could go home after a two-week stay at the hospital. She had completed the round of chemo within a few days, but it had taken longer than usual for her to gain enough strength for the journey back to her home in Tartus, a government-held city on the Mediterranean coast, three hours north by car. Her cancer was advanced, which gave her a lower chance of ever being cured. But the treatment reduced the pain and the spread of the disease and could give her years more with her family. Even the slimmest of chances was worth the journey for her mother, Sabah.

When it was time to leave, a nurse pulled the blue curtain around Shahd’ bed, and she and Sabah helped change the girl’ clothes. They lifted Shahd gently into a wheelchair, her legs limp in front of her in baggy green pajamas. Sabah paced a small circle in heeled boots, making last arrangements over the phone for their trip. A man in army fatigues joined them, a cousin named Basel, who was stationed nearby. He wheeled Shahd down to a waiting car and lifted her into the back seat. The rumbles of the bombings in the distance continued as they sped off toward the sounds to catch a 1 p.m. bus.

Sabah had defied many people’ advice in taking her daughter to Al-Bayrouni. Other parents at the hospitals in the city told her that terrorists were stationed along the edges of the road; they warned her that she could be shot on the way or blown up by a stray mortar shell. But Sabah had spent a month in Damascus waiting in crowded hospital hallways for her daughter to receive treatment. They were far from home, and she was close to losing hope. ‘‘e decided we will go to Harasta, even if there are hundreds of terrorists,’’abah said. ‘‘e can’ wait much longer.’’hey had made their first journey through a thick fog, watching the white blur of shapes pass by on the screen of Sabah’ mobile phone, filming as the bus hurtled past the twisted frames of wrecked cars, like strange trees lining the road, afraid to watch with their own eyes.

For the family of Samar, the young leukemia patient from Aleppo, the ordeal began in July 2016. The girl’ face began to turn yellow and then her walking became unsteady and painful. Her father, Ahmad, took her to the clinic run by the Red Crescent relief organization, next to the Aleppo University Hospital, where she stayed for more than two weeks for tests. When her leukemia was eventually confirmed, the doctors referred her to Basma, a support association for children with cancer, which operated the ward in the Al-Bayrouni hospital. The Al-Kindi Hospital in Aleppo, which used to be a top cancer center and a rival to Al-Bayrouni, had been destroyed in the war, occupied both by rebel and regime forces at different stages. It remained in the control of pro-government forces but was being used as a type of military base.

On Aug. 1, Ahmad and Samar’ mother, Faiza, took Samar to Damascus. They gave her painkillers before the journey. For nine hours they traveled on a crowded bus. It had been a long time since they had left Aleppo, and the country they once knew now seemed almost entirely foreign. On the outskirts of their city, people displaced from the violence had set up camp in abandoned buildings. Bunkers piled with sandbags and checkpoints marked with oil barrels dotted the highway. They passed cities like Homs, whose decimation they had seen only in YouTube videos. At the time, the opposition forces controlled half of Aleppo, and in Harasta, pro-government airstrikes were hitting nearby. But Ahmad and Faiza had never questioned their decision to go to Damascus. Even though the roads were treacherous and the cost of traveling would leave their family nearly destitute, it was the only way to get the treatment their daughter needed.

In Damascus, they found themselves at Children’ Hospital in Mezze, with its notorious overcrowding. Mezze is a mostly upmarket neighborhood, where the main public and university hospitals are situated, as well as a number of foreign embassies. The evening I visited the hospital, it was Mother’ Day in Syria, and waiters in the upscale restaurants nearby were carrying cakes alight with sparklers to tables of gathered families. But on the ground floor of Children’ Hospital, where the wards are too crammed for mothers to join their children, nearly 100 women were bedding down for the night. They stretched out on plastic chairs or curled atop thick blankets on the floor. By the elevators, they pressed their foreheads to the ground in prayer.

Faiza couldn’ bear for Samar to stay there, so on their fourth day in the city, they made their first journey to Al-Bayrouni. They traveled back and forth every four or five days for the next five months. In between treatments, Samar’ family shifted from one hotel to another, always desperate to find a cheaper room. They continued to pay rent for their apartment in Aleppo, where Samar’ sister and brother remained. Ahmad was unemployed when Samar became sick; an injury had cost him his job at the local knitting factory. Ahmad and Faiza wanted to return to Aleppo, but they were afraid that if they did, the war would make it impossible for them to get back to Al-Bayrouni and Samar would miss her treatment. ‘‘ refused to hear anything about what happened in Aleppo,’’hmad told me. ‘‘f I heard someone talk about that, I would go away. We decided to not think of any other thing but our daughter.’’

Fatima, Samar’ roommate at Al-Bayrouni, lived less than a 10-minute drive from Children’ Hospital, in the district of Mezze 86. It is a neighborhood of mainly Alawites, the Shia sect that Assad belongs to, but a far cry from the upscale houses closer to downtown. People from some of the wealthier areas of the city would most likely call it a slum. In the dappled light of their living room, Fatima’ mother, a petite 34-year-old named Mediyah, scrolled through her phone for updates on the situation in Harasta.

Her daughter was barely a year old when the revolution began in Syria. It was the girl’ grandmother, also named Fatima, who first noticed that the girl, then 6, was sick. At a local clinic in Raqqa, the doctor ran a blood test and suspected leukemia. It took a month to get a full diagnosis. The grandmother was determined that the girl be taken to Damascus for treatment. By the time she left her home with her uncle, Fatima’ round little face was turning yellow.

Fatima and her uncle traveled by bus in the opposite direction from Damascus, through ISIS territory, to the heavily bombed, opposition-held border town of Azaz, where refugees cross to Turkey. Then they took another bus to Aleppo, Fatima weak and in pain, and crossed front lines to government-held territory. It took them a week to get to Damascus. Fatima was close to death when they arrived. Mediyah followed soon after, when it was clear her daughter would have to remain in Damascus. After a five-hour bus ride to another town, she took an airplane operated by a private donor that sometimes helped transport cancer patients and their relatives to the capital. ‘‘y husband promised me he will try to come here,’’ediyah said. ‘‘t’ too expensive here; he couldn’ come right away.’’

Over the first month, Mediyah and Fatima’ uncle took the girl to the hospital a dozen times as an outpatient. When they realized it would be too difficult to travel back to Raqqa, Mediyah found the apartment in Damascus and the girl’ grandmother joined them. Both women refused to speak about how they had managed to get out of Raqqa, ISIS’ de facto capital. They declined even to speak the caliphate’ name, only acknowledging there were ‘‘rmed groups’’here. Relatives abroad, they told me, had sent money to help them make the journey and to survive in Damascus. They wouldn’ say anything about the men in their family, not the men’ jobs or what they had done during the war. Both women became panicked and tight-lipped whenever the subject was raised.

The doctors had said it would take five years to consider Fatima cured of the leukemia. Her regular trips to the hospital would gradually decrease, dwindling to only a checkup every few months, but until Fatima was given the all-clear and Mediyah felt her daughter was safe, she was determined to stay in Damascus.

Mediyah tried to calculate in her head the number of times over the last eight months that she has taken Fatima to Al-Bayrouni, but she gave up after a few minutes and shrugged. On the days Fatima needed to be at the hospital for treatment, Mediyah took a local bus to a minivan to a point where they could transfer again for a short but tense drive to the hospital. Sometimes there was shelling on the highway. ‘‘he war is easier on me than the sickness of my child,’’he said. On their last trip, the bus drove very fast, speeding through the checkpoints because of the fighting. It still took them an hour and a half to reach the hospital. And yet she preferred the journey to the front lines than going to the busy wards in Damascus. Despite the airstrikes around the hospital, she and Fatima felt at home there. Fatima recognized the doctors and the nurses. She could go to the art room to draw sometimes, when she was feeling strong enough. Mediyah could sleep beside her bed at night.

While Fatima and Mediyah were at Al-Bayrouni, the elderly Fatima cared for the five other children, sometimes for more than a week at a time. When they were all together in the apartment in Mezze, they rarely went out, except to go to the shops for food or to the pharmacies for Fatima’ treatment. When I visited them at their home, all six children, three boys and three girls, sat together on a mattress on the floor. The youngest was only a year and a half old; the oldest was 14, a quiet boy who looked small for his age. Fatima sat with a bright wool hat over her smooth head, looking taller out of the hospital bed, her legs akimbo in jeans and sneakers, jostling with the siblings who sat with her. The window beside them faced the wall of another building, with electric wires hanging low over the narrow lane.

By the summer, the cost of living there was impossible for the family to afford. They gathered their belongings again to travel to Tabqa, a city recently reclaimed from ISIS. There, Fatima’ father was waiting for them. Though the streets were still littered with rubble, bodies buried beneath, it was close to the place they considered home.

In May, after months of silence, a WhatsApp message came from Sabah, who was back home in Tartus. ‘‘hahd died,’’he message read. Shahd would have turned 10 in two weeks. She died on the ward at Al-Bayrouni, her mother at her side.

They had made the journey back to the hospital three times over those months. After each chemo session, Shahd would lose her appetite completely, her body weakening. As she lost strength, the tumors in her body made gains. ‘‘he cancer reached all the way to her brain,’’abah said. In the final weeks, Shahd slipped into a coma. The Alawites believe that each person is born from a star and will return again to the sky, after taking many forms here on Earth. Though her daughter’ departure left a hollow pit inside her, Sabah took strength from her belief that she would be reborn. ‘‘ wish for that,’’he said. ‘‘’ waiting for her return.’’

Shahd’ body was taken to a plot of land owned by her father’ family in a rural area far from their home, surrounded by mountainous forests, near the sea. Shahd was buried on the edge of a field that lay in the shade of tall oaks and the delicate boughs of walnut trees. There is no threat of violence on the road there, and Sabah and her surviving daughters can visit her without fear.

Not every parent who lost a child to cancer at the hospital had the chance to take that child home to be buried. Samar, who had sometimes shared Fatima’ room, died on the last day of January. She was buried just south of Damascus. When I visited Faiza and Ahmad in Aleppo, empty fields and even the stretch of a salt lake were dotted with the angular skeletons of buildings and the twisted frames of burned-out cars, punctuated by tanks or military bunkers. Less than three months earlier, after a brutal siege, east Aleppo was reclaimed by the Syrian Army, and when I arrived, families were picking their way through the streets, returning to collapsing buildings that used to be homes.

Ahmad met me outside the doorway of a lightless building downtown. A grassy verge opposite the house was a crooked skyline of scattered headstones in the dark, one of the improvised graveyards throughout the city. The family had moved from east Aleppo five years ago, their neighborhood besieged, their house eventually destroyed. Up two flights of a concrete stairwell, Ahmad sat on the carpeted floor of their small rental apartment with Faiza and their 20-year-old son, Abdulsalam, and 22-year-old daughter, Aisha. In Ahmad’ hands was a lilac plastic bag, crisscrossed with creases from being folded and unfolded. One by one, he gingerly removed pieces of paper from the bag, the records that documented the last months of his daughter’ life. From a shelf, Faiza pulled out a dusty black plastic bag and removed two of Samar’ pink school bags. On an old mobile phone that she used as a photo album, she scrolled through pictures of her daughter in Damascus: Samar grinning in a park, her hip cocked and her hand on her waist, a glossy black bob wig on her head.

In the last days of her life, Samar could not walk, so Ahmad carried her wherever they went. They would take a bus to the hospital; they took a taxi only once, on the last day of her life, when she became so ill she was choking for air. ‘‘he couldn’ breathe anymore, she couldn’ breathe alone,’’e said. Ahmad cupped his palms around his phone and showed me the last photo he took of his daughter. She was laid out on a hospital table, a small cocoon he could scoop easily in his arms, her small, sunken face wrapped in a delicate white shroud.

Ahmad was saving money to travel back to Damascus, to visit his daughter’ grave. A week after my visit with him, I went and saw it myself. It was in a brand-new section of a martyrs’emetery that opened several years ago to provide cheaper graves to meet the demand for burial space since the war. A bare plot marked Samar’ final resting place. There was no headstone, only a number, which Ahmad had memorized by heart, just as he remembered her age: 9 years, 22 days.

Caelainn Hogan lives in Dublin. She has written for Harper’ Magazine, The New Yorker and Vice.Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Sabah Abrahem and her 9-year-old daughter, Shahd Ghareb, who was fighting Ewing’ sarcoma, prepare to leave the Al-Bayrouni cancer center in Harasta after receiving a chemotherapy treatment. Young patients at Children’ Hospital. Mothers waiting topass the security checkpoint to enter Children’ Hospital in Damascus. Fatima Hadeed, 7, in the apartment where her family lives in the Mezze 86 neighborhood of Damascus. Photograph by Sebastiá Liste/NOOR for The New York Times Photograph by Sebastiá Liste/NOOR for The New York Times Photographs by Sebastiá Liste/NOOR for The New York Times Photographs by Sebastiá Liste

‘he war is easier on me than the sickness of my child.’

Document INHT000020170810ed8800001



Book Review Desk; SECT
Reading, Writing and Refugees

By ALEXANDRA ALTER 
1,303 words
7 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Here is a guide to some of the new and forthcoming children's books about Muslim refugees, ranging from picture books for toddlers and early readers to young adult novels.

Picture Books

'Lost and Found Cat,' by Doug Kuntz and Amy Shrodes, with illustrations by Sue Cornelison

In the fall of 2015, Amy Shrodes was volunteering at a seaside kitchen on the Greek island of Lesbos, serving tea to refugees arriving from Syria and Iraq, when she found a bedraggled white cat. The creature was clearly not one of the island strays. Ms. Shrodes asked around and learned that the cat had come in one of the boats from Turkey, but in the chaos, had become separated from his owners. Ms. Shrodes took the cat in, and made a Facebook page in hopes of finding his family through social media. It turned out, the cat's name was Kunkush, and the family he belonged to -- a woman named Sura and her five children -- had fled from Mosul, Iraq, to escape the violence. They had settled in Oslo, and eventually saw a news report about Kunkush and the efforts to find his owners. The family was reunited with Kunkush in February 2016.

Kunkush's tale -- a rare war story with a happy ending -- has been adapted into two picture books. ''Lost and Found Cat,'' by Ms. Shrodes and Mr. Kuntz, was published by Crown Books for Young Readers in January and is aimed at 4- to 8-year-olds; ''Kunkush: The True Story of a Refugee Cat,'' by Marne Ventura, with illustrations by Beidi Guo, comes out this month from Raintree.

Ms. Shrodes said that by centering the story on a missing cat, they approached the difficult subject of the refugee crisis in a way that wasn't too frightening for young readers.

''With a cat as the protagonist, the story can be softened a little bit,'' Ms. Shrodes said. ''It's an easier way for people to open their minds.''

'My Beautiful Birds,' by Suzanne Del Rizzo

Most of Suzanne Del Rizzo's illustrations tell cheerful, whimsical stories. Her artwork has appeared in a book about a pig that desperately wants to fly, and one about a gerbil.

But in ''My Beautiful Birds,'' published in March by Pajama Press, Ms. Del Rizzo ventured into darker territory, as she told the story of Sami, a Syrian boy who evacuates his home when the fighting becomes too dangerous and has to leave behind his pet pigeons.

The author, who lives in Oakville, Ontario, said that she wrote the book because her own children had been asking about the conflict in Syria and she struggled to explain it to them. Then she saw an article about a boy in the Zaatari camp who had tamed some wild birds, and thought his story could be the basis for a picture book. The boy's story is accompanied by colorful, mixed-media images, made of clay. ''I wanted to find more kid-friendly resources to approach the topic, because it's pretty scary stuff,'' she said.

'Stepping Stones,' by Margriet Ruurs, with art by Nizar Ali Badr

Nizar Ali Badr makes art from stones that he gathers and arranges into shapes that tell a story. When the Canadian children's author Margriet Ruurs came across photographs of his work on Facebook -- images of desperate families walking with all their belongings on their backs -- she immediately wanted to use his artwork as a foundation for a picture book about refugees. It took her months to finally reach Mr. Badr, who lives in Latakia, Syria, and doesn't speak English. But eventually she asked if he would team up with her on a children's book that told the story of families leaving their homes to escape the war.

Their book, ''Stepping Stones,'' a dual-language picture book from Orca Book Publishers, in English and Arabic, has been a best seller in Canada. The book has been used in classrooms and for fund-raisers to support Syrian families that resettled in Canada. Ms. Ruurs said that she had received calls from teachers who told her the book resonated with students from refugee families. ''I've had librarians and teachers phone me and say, 'The children in my class said, ''This is me, it's about me, it's my story.'''''

'Dear World,' by Bana Alabed

This fall, Simon & Schuster will publish a memoir by Bana Alabed, an 8-year-old girl whose family fled Aleppo for Turkey in late 2016. Bana chronicled her experience of the Syrian war on Twitter, where she now has more than 367,000 followers. In the spring of 2019, Simon & Schuster Books for Young Readers will publish a picture book adaptation of the memoir, for 4- to 8-year-olds.

Middle Grade

'Escape From Aleppo,' by N. H. Senzai

This forthcoming coming-of-age novel follows Nadia, a Syrian girl who turns 12 as the Arab Spring begins in 2010. After a failed democratic uprising in Syria, civil war breaks out and Aleppo is bombed, forcing Nadia's family to evacuate. The novel will be released in January by Simon & Schuster/Paula Wiseman Books.

'Refugee,' by Alan Gratz

Mr. Gratz's middle-grade novel, which Scholastic published in July, alternates among three narratives that explore the lives of child refugees in different decades and parts of the world. The stories, which are interconnected in surprising ways that are revealed at the end, feature a Jewish boy whose family flees Nazi Germany on the St. Louis ocean liner; a Cuban girl who leaves Havana in 1994; and a Syrian boy from Aleppo, whose family survives a bombing and struggles to make it to Germany, where they will seek asylum. By weaving the stories together, Mr. Gratz draws parallels between the plights of refugees decades ago with those seeking asylum today.

'The Boy in the Wine Cellar,' by Katherine Marsh

Ms. Marsh, a former managing editor for The New Republic, explores the plight of refugees in Europe in this novel, which will be published by Putnam children's division. The story features an American boy living in Brussels who helps a 14-year-old Syrian refugee who has lost his family and is hiding from the authorities.

Young Adult

'A Land of Permanent Goodbyes ,' by Atia Abawi

In her forthcoming novel, Atia Abawi, a foreign correspondent who covered the conflict in Afghanistan, tells the story of Tareq, a Syrian boy who survives a bomb strike that kills some of his family members, and then must escape ISIS-forces in Raqqa. He, his sister and cousin eventually make a run for Greece.

Ms. Abawi, whose parents left Afghanistan as refugees, visited a refugee camp in Lesbos, Greece, when she was researching the novel, and saw connections between her own family's flight to safety and the risks that desperate Syrians were making to escape an entrenched civil war. ''As a former refugee I saw a familiarity that I couldn't shake,'' Ms. Abawi wrote in an author's note. Philomel Books is to release the novel in January.

'The Lines We Cross,' by Randa Abdel-Fattah

A coming-of-age story with a Romeo-and-Juliet-like romance at its core, ''The Lines We Cross'' unfolds in Australia, where Mina, a Muslim refugee from Afghanistan, has settled with her family. She forms an unexpectedly flirtatious friendship with Michael, whose parents are hard-core anti-Muslim and anti-immigration activists. The novel was published by Scholastic in May.

Ms. Abdel-Fattah said that she wrote the novel in hopes that Mina might make young readers empathize with refugees. ''Some readers have written to me and said it had changed their whole perspective on the refugee debate,'' she said.

Document NYTF000020170807ed870005n



The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
Children's Books Wade Into Refugee Territory

By ALEXANDRA ALTER 
1,416 words
7 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Some of the most shocking images from the crisis in Syria have been photographs of children: the body of a drowned toddler lying on a Turkish beach, the expressionless 5-year-old boy from Aleppo, shellshocked, bloodied and ash-covered, after being pulled from the rubble of a bombed building.

Now, a number of children's books authors, moved by these images and other news reports, are taking on the subject in fiction to humanize and personalize the ongoing conflict for young readers. More than a dozen new and forthcoming titles feature young Muslim refugees as protagonists, ranging from picture books aimed at readers as young as 4 to a cluster of novels for middle and high school students that delve into the murkier aspects of the refugee crisis. Some of the books touch on challenging issues like the rise of the Islamic State and the sectarian rift between Sunnis and Shias.

Suzanne Del Rizzo's picture book ''My Beautiful Birds'' is based on an article she read about a Syrian boy living in Jordan in the Zaatari refugee camp who had tamed wild birds. In her book, she writes from the perspective of Sami, a boy who trains pigeons and must leave his birds behind when his family evacuates from their home in Syria and walks to a refugee camp in Jordan. There, Sami finds solace in caring for wild birds.

To research her young adult novel ''A Land of Permanent Goodbyes,'' the novelist Atia Abawi traveled to Lesbos, Greece, and spoke to Syrians in a refugee camp. Those conversations helped shape her book, which centers on a Syrian family that escapes an ISIS stronghold for Istanbul and then Greece.

In Alan Gratz's middle-grade novel ''Refugee,'' a 12-year-old boy named Mahmoud Bishara flees the violence in Aleppo after his family's home is destroyed, and has to contend with smugglers and militants as his family charts a treacherous course through Turkey and across the Mediterranean to Europe. His younger brother, Waleed -- based on Omran Daqneesh, the Syrian boy famously photographed after the bombing -- is too traumatized to even cry.

''I wanted to make individual refugees visible and turn statistics into names and faces that kids could relate to,'' Mr. Gratz said.

The wave of children's books about Muslim asylum seekers is arriving amid the worst refugee crisis the world has seen since World War II, as millions of civilians -- many of them children -- flee the wars and insurgencies in Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan. The Syrian civil war alone has uprooted more than two million children, according to Unicef.

''It's really important to engage children with the world as it is, and the world right now is a very complicated place,'' said Zareen Jaffery, executive editor of Salaam Reads, a Muslim-themed children's imprint at Simon & Schuster.

Some of these new novels explore perilous journeys, as refugees entrust their lives to smugglers and navigate war zones controlled by rebel groups and extremists. In ''Escape From Aleppo,'' a middle-grade novel by N. H. Senzai, a Syrian girl named Nadia flees her country for Turkey after civil war breaks out after the failed democratic uprising.

Others focus on the discrimination and sense of displacement faced by Muslim asylum seekers. ''The Lines We Cross,'' a young adult novel by Randa Abdel-Fattah released by Scholastic in May, centers on a teenage Muslim refugee from Afghanistan who is accosted by Islamophobes and nationalists in Australia, where her family runs a restaurant. The girl, Mina, develops a crush on a boy whose parents are anti-immigration, anti-Muslim activists. ''In a political environment where there's such a demonization of refugees, I wanted readers to understand what their lives are like,'' said Ms. Abdel-Fattah, who lives in Sydney.

Mr. Gratz said that he expected a book like ''Refugee,'' an unflinching and sympathetic look at people whose lives are upended by war and oppression, might repel some readers. ''There certainly will be people who will assume that I wrote it to push an agenda,'' he said.

''Refugee,'' which Scholastic released on July 25 with a first printing of more than 200,000 copies, originally began as a novel about the St. Louis, a German ocean liner carrying nearly 1,000 Jews fleeing Hitler during World War II. The ship was turned away from Cuba and the United States and returned to Europe, where many of the passengers died in the war. Mr. Gratz saw disturbing parallels between the historical episode he was researching and the current plight of Syrian refugees, and decided to weave together the stories of three children: a Jewish boy whose family tries to escape Nazi Germany on the St. Louis; a Cuban girl who leaves Havana in a raft during that island's food shortages in 1994, and Mahmoud, the Syrian boy whose family escapes to Europe.

When he finished the novel this year, Mr. Gratz added an author's note that addresses President Trump's travel ban, and says that the United States has accepted less than 1 percent of the roughly five million refugees who have fled Syria.

''When I began writing this book as a response to the Syrian refugee crisis, I had no idea how timely it would be when it finally came out,'' he said.

Teachers and librarians have embraced these titles as a way to explain the refugee crisis to children, and Mr. Gratz has been invited to speak at more than 40 schools around the country.

Mollee Holloman, an elementary school librarian in Manteo, N.C., who helped organize a recent book signing for Mr. Gratz that drew around 80 children, said she hoped ''Refugee'' would give children more empathy for those displaced by war. ''He's giving us the perspective of a child, and that helps these students see outside the world they're living in,'' Ms. Holloman said.

In Canada, where more than 33,000 Syrians resettled in 2016, picture books featuring Syrian refugee characters are being used in some public schools to explain the crisis and give students perspective on what some arriving Syrian students might have been through.

The Canadian children's book author Margriet Ruurs has spoken to thousands of students at schools around the world about her book ''Stepping Stones,'' which follows a family fleeing a war in an unnamed country and features images by the Syrian artist Nizar Ali Badr, who uses small stones to create human figures.

For a reading last fall at a British Columbia library, Ms. Ruurs was joined by Serina Khaldi, a 9-year-old girl from Aleppo whose family recently settled in Salt Spring Island, where Ms. Ruurs lives. ''Stepping Stones'' has text in both English and Arabic, and Serina read the story in Arabic. ''My daughter is very shy, but she was excited,'' said Samer Khaldi, Serina's father.

Carrie Gelson, an elementary school teacher in Vancouver, has used ''Stepping Stones'' and other picture books about Muslim refugees in social studies. She told the class, ''You meet these students in your class and it's important that you know their stories.'' One of the picture books she read aloud was ''My Beautiful Birds,'' Ms. Del Rizzo's story about a Syrian boy living in a refugee camp in Jordan.

Ms. Gelson was eager to share ''My Beautiful Birds'' with one student in particular: Nour Alahmad Almahmoud, a 12-year-old Syrian girl whose family came to Canada from a refugee camp in Jordan in late 2015. When Nour first read the book this spring, she was overwhelmed and ran outside in tears.

''I cried because it's like this book makes me remember everything,'' Nour said in an interview over Skype. ''I felt like this family in the book is my family.''

She asked to take the copy home for the weekend to show her parents and siblings. Ms. Gelson told her the book was hers to keep.

Alan Gratz's new book, ''Refugee,'' is about a 12-year-old boy fleeing violence and a destroyed home in Aleppo, Syria. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEREMY M. LANGE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C1); Above, the ''Refugee'' author Alan Gratz during a signing at Quail Ridge Books in Raleigh, N.C. Left, several refugee-themed books written for young readers. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JEREMY M. LANGE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; JAMES NIEVES/ THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C4) 

Document NYTF000020170807ed870004r



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Attack by Taliban and  ISIS  Kills Dozens in Afghanistan, Government Officials Say

By MUJIB MASHAL, FAHIM ABED and NAJIM RAHIM; Mujib Mashal and Fahim Abed reported from Kabul, and Najim Rahim from Kunduz, Afghanistan. 
958 words
7 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan -- Dozens of civilians and militia forces were killed in northern Afghanistan in what officials on Sunday described as an attack by Taliban fighters teamed up with a commander claiming allegiance to the Islamic State. If true, the open cooperation between the militant groups, which have sometimes fought turf battles in the past, could be further trouble for the struggling Afghan government.

Sayad district, in northern Sar-e-Pul province, had put up a fierce defense over the past two years against attacks by insurgents as other parts of the province seemed to be buckling under Taliban pressure. Several local officials say the Taliban joined forces with Sher Mohammed Ghazanfar, a local commander claiming allegiance to the Islamic State, to overrun the Mirza Olang area. Then he turned to blocking local militiamen, as well as civilians, from fleeing.

''According to our credible information, 50 people have been killed,'' said Sharif Aminyar, the district governor of Sayad. Mr. Aminyar said 18 of the people killed had been members of the Afghan Local Police, a government militia, and other local militias on the government payroll. The rest were civilians.

''It was a joint Daesh and Taliban operation,'' Mr. Aminyar said, using the Arabic name for the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIS or ISIL. ''The Taliban were led by Mullah Nader and Daesh was led by Sher Mohammed Ghazanfar.''

''Despite several demands for air support and the special forces,'' he said, ''the demands were ignored by central government. They told us the air force was busy in other provinces.''

Zabihullah Mujahid, a spokesman for the Taliban, denied any cooperation with the Islamic State on the operation and said local residents had misunderstood. ''Ghazanfar is not Daesh -- he is our commander in Sar-e-Pul, a very active commander, and he is under our command, our flag,'' he said. ''He has allegiance with us.''

Mr. Mujahid denied allegations of civilian casualties, and said only militiamen had been killed.

Residents described a government effort over several days to try to evacuate people, a task that became impossible after militants overran the area.

Abdul Qadir, 25, said he had managed to escape with his mother, wife and two children. But his father and brother were not so lucky. Mr. Qadir lost a leg years ago, and he rode his family's donkey, with his two children tied to his back, he said.

''I lost my brother and father,'' Mr. Qadir said. ''Now I have to take care of three families -- my father's family, my brother's family and my own family.''

While the Taliban have been resurgent around the country, exerting increasing pressure in previously safe areas of the north, the Islamic State threat has largely remained contained. The group has been targeted by the Afghan Army and United States air power in its stronghold, the Achin district in Nangarhar province. But other, smaller pockets claiming Islamic State affiliation have also popped up in other parts of the country.

While the Taliban and fighters affiliated with the Islamic State have fought turf battles in the east, officials have long said the groups' interactions in the north have been more complex, with the two often having a symbiotic relationship. Intelligence and security officials have expressed uncertainty over whether what operates as the Islamic State in parts of Afghanistan is really tied to the group's headquarters in Syria and Iraq at all, or if it is just the Taliban and other militant groups with a new identity.

''One of the things we are concerned about here in Afghanistan, the reason we think that the entire world needs to be focused on Afghanistan, is the potential for convergence among the various terrorist groups in this area,'' Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., the commander of NATO and American forces in Afghanistan, said at a news conference in April.

What is clear is that many of the attacks in the country claimed by the Islamic State have targeted the minority Shiites, and often in brutal ways. Last week, suicide bombers claimed by the Islamic State barged into a Shiite mosque in the western city of Herat as worshipers were standing for evening prayer and killed at least 37 people.

Those who were killed in Mirza Olang were also Shiites, belonging to Afghanistan's Hazara ethnic group.

''This was a massacre -- they executed 24 people at once, then they killed a woman and her husband near the mill, four people inside the mosque,'' said Haji Ghulam Mehdawi, commander of local militias in the province.

Mr. Mehdawi said they had been in touch with the Taliban about retrieving the dead. The Taliban, he said, initially agreed for seven people to travel and pick up the bodies but then backtracked, saying seven people were not enough to carry the dead. Another 10 people have been sent in to help.

''The Taliban are saying, 'It wasn't us -- it was Daesh that did it,''' Mr. Mehdawi said, adding, ''What difference does it make? They are both cut from the same cloth.''

Other officials expressed concern that Mirza Olang had served as a buffer for the provincial capital, Sar-e-Pul city, and that now it would be under threat.

''For two years, this was the line of defense for Sar-e-Pul city,'' said Masooma Ramazani, a member of the provincial council. ''They kept trying, and they would be resisted. But now they finally broke the line.''

''These people resisted for so long, I am sure they wanted revenge,'' she said.

Document NYTF000020170807ed870003g



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Best Sellers: Hardcover Fiction: Sunday, August 06th 2017

529 words
6 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

About the Best Sellers:

These lists are an expanded version of those appearing in the August 06, 2017 print edition of the Book Review, reflecting sales for the week ending July 22, 2017. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above it. A dagger (†ndicates that some retailers report receiving bulk orders. For an explanation of our methodology, visit http://www.nytimes.com/best-sellers.

  Weeks


                              est Sellers: Hardcover Fiction

This Last On
Week Week List
  
1         1


THE LATE SHOW, by Michael Connelly. (Little, Brown) René Ballard, a young detective with the L.A.P.D., investigates crimes against two women

2 2 7


CAMINO ISLAND, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A search for stolen rare manuscripts leads to a Florida island.

3 1 2


HOUSE OF SPIES, by Daniel Silva. (Harper) Gabriel Allon, the Israeli art restorer and spy, now the head of Israel’ secret intelligence service, pursues an ISIS mastermind.

4 4 12


INTO THE WATER, by Paula Hawkins. (Riverhead) In this psychological thriller by the author of “he Girl on the Train,”omen are found drowned in a river in an English town.

5 3 4


MURDER GAMES, by James Patterson and Howard Roughan. (Little, Brown ) An expert on serial murder becomes involved in the hunt for a New York City killer.

6 6 6


THE IDENTICALS, by Elin Hilderbrand. (Little, Brown) Complications in the lives of identical twins who were raised separately by divorced parents on Nantucket and Martha’ Vineyard.

7 8 35


A GENTLEMAN IN MOSCOW, by Amor Towles. (Viking) A Russian count undergoes 30 years of house arrest.

8 5 4


USE OF FORCE, by Brad Thor. (Atria/Emily Bestler) The counterterrorism operative Scot Harvath is called in when a missing terrorism suspect drowns off the Italian coast.

9 7 4


THE DUCHESS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte) A 19th-century British duke's daughter, disinherited by her half brothers, flees to Paris to make a new life.

10  1


THE BREAKDOWN, by B. A. Paris. (St. Martin's) In this psychological thriller, a woman is plagued by guilt over not having stopped to help a driver who turns out to have been murdered, and by fear of early-onset dementia.

11 11 5


THE SILENT CORNER, by Dean Koontz. (Bantam) An F.B.I. agent investigates an alarming surge in suicides, including her husband's. The first in a new series.

12  1


BEFORE WE WERE YOURS, by Lisa Wingate. (Ballantine) A prominent South Carolina lawyer, researching her grandmother’ past, learns about a real-life Tennessee orphanage that kidnapped children and placed them for adoption with wealthy people.

13  1


WATCH ME DISAPPEAR, by Janelle Brown. (Spiegel & Grau) When a Berkeley woman vanishes after a hiking trip, her husband and daughter discover disturbing secrets.

14  1


MEDDLING KIDS, by Edgar Cantero. (Doubleday) Four old friends return to the site of their teenage adventures.

15 13 6


TOM CLANCY: POINT OF CONTACT, by Mike Maden. (Putnam) Jack Ryan Jr. helps thwart a global financial crisis. (Tom Clancy died in 2013.)

Document NYTF000020170807ed860002z



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Best Sellers: Combined Print & E-Book Fiction: Sunday, August 06th 2017

543 words
6 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

About the Best Sellers:

These lists are an expanded version of those appearing in the August 06, 2017 print edition of the Book Review, reflecting sales for the week ending July 22, 2017. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above it. A dagger (†ndicates that some retailers report receiving bulk orders. For an explanation of our methodology, visit http://www.nytimes.com/best-sellers.

  Weeks


                              est Sellers: Combined Print & E-Book Fiction

This Last On
Week Week List
  
1         1


THE LATE SHOW, by Michael Connelly. (Little, Brown) René Ballard, a young detective with the L.A.P.D., investigates crimes against two women.

2 3 18


THE WHISTLER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A whistleblower alerts a Florida investigator to judicial corruption involving the Mob and Indian casinos.

3 2 7


CAMINO ISLAND, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A search for stolen rare manuscripts leads to a Florida island.

4 1 2


HOUSE OF SPIES, by Daniel Silva. (Harper) Gabriel Allon, the Israeli art restorer and spy, now the head of Israel’ secret intelligence service, pursues an ISIS mastermind

5  1


BEAUTIFUL MISTAKE, by Vi Keeland. (Vi Keeland) The man a graduate student meets in a bar turns out to be the professor for whom she'll be a teaching assistant.

6 4 26


THE WOMAN IN CABIN 10, by Ruth Ware. (Scout) A travel writer on a cruise is certain she has heard a body thrown overboard, but no one believes her.

7 8 48


A GAME OF THRONES, by George R. R. Martin. (Bantam) In the frozen wastes to the north of Winterfell, sinister and supernatural forces are mustering. Basis of the HBO series.

8 5 18


THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood. (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt) Men and women in a dystopian future. The basis of the Hulu series; originally published in 1985.

9 12 2


THE GUNSLINGER, by Stephen King. (Pocket Books) The first volume of the Dark Tower series, originally published in 1989.

10 11 28


MILK AND HONEY, by Rupi Kaur. (Andrews McMeel) Poetic approaches to surviving adversity and loss.

11  17


LILAC GIRLS, by Martha Hall Kelly. (Ballantine) A story of three women’ lives during and after World War II.

12 7 6


THE IDENTICALS, by Elin Hilderbrand. (Little, Brown) Complications in the lives of identical twins who were raised by their divorced parents, one on Nantucket, one on Martha’ Vineyard.

13  1


LOOK BEHIND YOU, by Iris Johansen and Roy Johansen. (St. Martin's) A serial killer in San Diego leaves behind objects that require the special skills of Kendra Michaels, a hired gun for both the F.B.I. and the C.I.A. The fifth in a series.

14 9 4


USE OF FORCE, by Brad Thor. (Atria/Emily Bestler) The counterterrorism operative Scot Harvath is called in when a missing terrorism suspect drowns off the Italian coast.

15 10 4


MURDER GAMES, by James Patterson and Howard Roughan. (Little, Brown ) An expert on serial murder becomes involved in the hunt for a New York City killer who leaves a playing card at the crime scene.

Document NYTF000020170807ed860002y



World; Europe
A Communist Icon Toppled in Ukraine Is Restored. In England.

By ZEPHIRA DAVIS 
1,090 words
6 August 2017
12:08
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANCHESTER, England —fter 147 years, Friedrich Engels is back in town. Statues of Engels, Karl Marx’ collaborator, may have been ripped down all over the former communist world, but he has returned here, to the city that made him famous.

His resurrection in Manchester, where he conducted research on the working class in the 1840s, is thanks to Phil Collins —he acclaimed artist who has made Engels the centerpiece of his most recent project, “eremony.”

“ started working on this theme about 10 years ago,”aid Mr. Collins, who was nominated for the Turner Prize for British visual arts in 2006. Immersing himself in the history of the Industrial Revolution and of socialism in Manchester, he stumbled upon a quote by a local civil servant, who raised the idea of transporting an Engels statue from Ukraine to Manchester.

Since most Soviet-era statues were removed from their pedestals and destroyed after 1989 —nd an Engels likeness was rather rarer than the ubiquitous Lenin —inding the statue was not easy. Mr. Collins traveled for about a year across Eastern Europe before finally finding his prize in an agricultural compound in a district that he said was once named after Engels in the Poltava region of eastern Ukraine.

The statue, 12 feet tall, had been cut in half and dumped. But on May 15, the halves were hauled onto a truck and sent on their way to Manchester. On its travels through Europe, captured on film, the truck stopped in Engels’ birthplace, Barmen, now part of the city of Wuppertal in northwestern Germany.

The Engels project was funded by the Manchester City Council and was featured recently as the closing event of the biennial Manchester International Festival of the arts. The statue was ceremonially welcomed in front of an art theater called HOME, as a high-spirited crowd gathered in the parking lot to watch the film. The singer Gruff Rhys performed “Communism’ Coming Home.”

“ngels changed the course of history,”aid Noel Callaghan, 45, a local resident.

The ceremony also marked the centennial of the 1917 Russian Revolution, which was inspired by the ideas of Marx and Engels in their “ommunist Manifesto”f 1848. And much of their analysis was based on Engels’ own masterwork, “he Condition of the Working Class in England,”ublished three years before.

In Manchester, Engels is still revered. Alexandra Prodan, a 27-year-old medical secretary from Romania who has been living in Manchester for eight years, said the problem with communism was not with Marxist theory per se. “n practice,”s. Prodan said, communist regimes “ecame totalitarian and oppressive.”

Mr. Callaghan agreed. “orrupt people,”e said, “hey corrupt things, don’ they?”

Ms. Prodan added: “ven in the countries where people were oppressed, people were looking out for each other in a way. There was still a feeling of togetherness against the regime. This is basically what Engels wrote about. You know, it’ about the people coming together.”

Manchester is still mourning after a terrorist attack in May. “e’e still conscious of it,”r. Callaghan said. But in some respects residents seem more united than ever. “ou saw people mobilizing and coming together,”s. Prodan said.

The newly erected statue is not the only tribute to Engels in the city. At the University of Salford, not far from where Engels worked at his family-owned mill, an innovative sculpture of Engels’ iconic beard, meant to be climbed, is intended, the university claims, “o inspire the next generation of artists, musicians and performers.”

The statue is now installed in the city center to grant Engels “fficial recognition,”r. Collins said. Of course, things have changed a bit since his day. The statue now stands among such temples of Western capitalism as a McDonald’ and a Hilton.

The festival’ artistic director, John McGrath, said he expected the statue’ new location to “nvite people to think and ignite debate.”n Mr. Collins’ words: “hat’ interesting about socialism is that it announces itself.”

Why Engels? To Mr. Collins, it’ all about contradictions, “he contradictions we all live in.”

“ngels ran his family’ factory,”nd yet he was dedicated to the emancipation of the working class, Mr. Collins said.

“e was a capitalist by day and a communist by night,”e added.

Like Engels, Mr. Collins suggested: “obody’ outside of a system. We’e all kind of bound to it.”e deemed Manchester to be home to “mportant movements connected with social justice and with resistance.”

Manchester retains a strong air of socialism. Not only did it elect a Labour member of Parliament in the recent general election, but 94 of the 96 city councilors are members of the Labour Party.

“e’e got lots of statues for other 19th-century figures,”aid the leader of the Manchester City Council, Richard Leese. “hy not give one to a German Manchester socialist?”

It was hard to find a dissenting voice at the dedication of the statue. When asked about possibly glorifying a figure whose life’ work came to be associated with political regimes that ended up immiserating countless millions of people, Mr. Callaghan said that was not the point.

“ don’ think we’e necessarily celebrating it,”e said. “ith time, you’e got to acknowledge what happened in the past, don’ you?”

Barbara Woods, 70, who had accompanied her husband to the event, was practically alone in mildly criticizing the idea. “e are for the working class,”he said. “ut I’ not 100 percent sure about a statue.

“ersonally, I don’ see any need for it,”he continued. “ think we should let things lie and rather have a statue of somebody representing the region, not somebody who’ come from somewhere else.”

She suggested another influential part-time Mancunian, who worked at The Manchester Evening News for three years: “hy not George Orwell?”

* Terror Alert in Britain Is Raised to Maximum as \b ISIS\b0  Claims Manchester Attack

* For Manchester, as for Its Libyans, a Test of Faith

A statue of Friedrich Engels in Manchester, England, where he conducted research in the 1840s. The British artist Phil Collins had the statue trucked from Ukraine. | Joel Fildes, via Shady Lane Productions | Mr. Collins found the statue at an agricultural compound in eastern Ukraine. It had been cut in half and dumped. | Yevgen Nikiforov, via Shady Lane Productions 

Document NYTFEED020170806ed860018h



THE THREAD
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The 7.23.17 Issue

737 words
6 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

RE: MOSUL

James Verini wrote about life in Mosul during Iraq's campaign to retake the city from ISIS.

This is the sort of deep journalism only possible with the resources of an established news organization with highly trained professionals reporting, writing, photographing and producing. The details and places in this piece drive home again the incalculable cost of the political decision made by the United States 14 years ago to invade and occupy Iraq without international support, without invitation and especially without any clear idea of how much and how long that decision would continue to affect the United States and its interests. Ralph Begleiter, Ocean View, Del.

When America marched into Iraq with our big stick and whacked that giant hornets' nest, we did not pause to contemplate what comes after the heroic and satisfying act of whacking something. Well, some of us did, but we weren't the ones with the guns. We were armed with flimsy protest signs that bent and fluttered in the streets of Chicago, Madison, San Francisco, New York.

And now, as the gray dust of exploded cinder block drifts through Mosul, we're treated to beautiful, horrific reporting like this. My house is made of wood, not cinder block. My family's only real defense is a robust, serious and courageous democracy. I and others watch in horror at how quickly that defense can begin to crumble, and we wonder what's next. Our leader is a madman. Carl Whiting, Wheeler, Ore.

RE: ABORTION PILL

Ruth Graham wrote about the anti-­bortion movement's campaign to elevate ''abortion-­ill reversal.''

As obstetrician-­ynecologists, we are committed to supporting women in the decisions they make about their reproductive lives. We do this with the most up-to-date and rigorously tested scientific evidence. When it comes to women's health, patients deserve the very best information upon which to base their decisions. The hypothetical possibility of an ''abortion-­ill reversal'' as promoted by Dr. George Delgado may have biological plausibility, but it does not meet this crucial standard of evidence-­ased care. This hypothesis would need to undergo rigorous scientific testing and quality peer review before it could be validly recommended to women. We would welcome a tested and proven method for helping the rare patient who changes her mind after initiating a medical abortion. But until so-­alled abortion-­ill reversal has undergone the same stringent study as any other medical therapy, offering it to women -- to say nothing of requiring their doctors to offer it -- is unethical at best and harmful at worst. Drs. Abigail Cutler, Aileen Gariepy, Meredith Pensak, and Nancy Stanwood, Section of Family Planning, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine

Women having personal agency over our lives and reproduction is essential to our dignity as full human beings. We call that being pro-­hoice. ''Choice'' is the operative word. If a woman has second thoughts after taking the first pill, this is a choice she can utilize to express that choice. It is her decision to make.

The problem comes when legislation denies women the ability to choose. Stripping women of our choice -- aside from being state intrusion into a very personal matter -- deeply infantilizes us, suggesting that we are not mature enough to make that very adult choice for ourselves, while also demanding that we take on the profoundly adult responsibilities of motherhood. Ellen Goldin, Brooklyn

I've had two abortions. The first time was because of birth-­ontrol failure; my diaphragm was not fitted properly. The second time was because of rape. Both occurred when I was 21. I am now 60. I have never regretted either abortion. In fact, I have always felt very grateful that I was able to get safe, legal, affordable abortions a few years after Roe v. Wade.

If women change their minds and want to reverse the process, that's their choice. I had no doubt or uncertainty doing it, and I felt only relief as soon as I knew it was done. It's all about choice. Demand for reversals doesn't mean women really don't want to have abortions. They just want the right to change their mind. Shelley Diamond, San Francisco

Send your thoughts to magazine@nytimes.com.

(PHOTOGRAPH BY PETER VAN AGTMAEL) DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS BY GIACOMO GAMBINERI) 

Document NYTF000020170806ed860007m



POETRY
Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Worlds in a Cell

By ADAM FITZGERALD 
1,378 words
6 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
13
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

FAST

By Jorie Graham

84 pp. Ecco/HarperCollins Publishers. $25.99.

On election night, as millions of anxious Americans watched the results come in, I sat in a hospital room in New Jersey, not far from where I grew up. My mother, who had been battling cancer for more than a year, lay next to me, unconscious, her hand in mine. It was her last night. The next day, everything I knew about the world felt gone. And it was. Without fully realizing it, I've been looking ever since for some way to make sense of this private and public mourning. Jorie Graham's new collection of poems, ''Fast,'' does just that.

In this first volume since her career-spanning selected poems (''From the New World,'' published in 2015), Graham writes an autopsy of self and nation in the face of overwhelming loss. These are poems created while parents are dying and the poet herself is undergoing cancer treatment against the backdrop of ecological crisis and several American wars. What, if anything, links such extremes--between parents and planet, cancer and capitalism, cellphones and ''the war on terror''? Improbable as it sounds, Graham believes that although poetry itself might not reveal the answers, it expresses the continuities of experience that at least let us frame the questions.

If the title ''Fast'' seems more appropriate to an iPhone than a literary text, the opening poem, ''Ashes,'' quickly establishes a more sober tone. ''Manacled to a whelm. Asked the plants to give me my small identity,'' the first line reads. ''No, the planets.'' This elision of the micro (''plants'') into the macro (''planets'') is a trick straight out of the metaphysical poets' playbook; think of John Donne's metaphor of a compass for departing lovers. Yet Graham is more interested in how her ''small identity''--her own life and traumas--can reveal how interconnected we all are. Picturing the hastening approach of catastrophic climate change, where ''we would become glacial melt,'' she imagines the apocalypse also unthawing ''a prehistoric frozen mother's / caress-- or a finger / about to touch.'' Time and space fold together in this elegy for plants, parents and planet. If that sounds horribly claustrophobic, Graham implies, such is life.

One of the volume's greatest poems, ''Deep Water Trawling,'' demonstrates what Graham's late style can accomplish as she finds herself ambushed by mortality yet eager to investigate a world beyond the self. Packed into a dense knot of prose-formatted lines, the poem tangles seemingly unrelated, fragmented thoughts. She's like the Samuel Beckett of ''Molloy,'' as deep-sea diver:

am I human we don't know that--just because I have this way of transmitting --call it voice--a threat--communal actually--the pelagic midwater nets like walls closing round us--starting in the far distance where they just look to us like distance--distance coming closer--hear it --eliminating background--is all foreground--you in it--the only ground-- not even punishment--trawling-nets bycatch poison ghostfishing--the coil of the listening along the very bottom--the nets weighed down with ballast--raking the bottom looking for nothing--indiscriminate--there is nothing in particular you want--you just want--

Graham isn't speaking here as one ''voice'' but as a whole chorus: fishermen (''Ask us anything. How deep is the sea''), fish (''Did you ever kill a fish. I was once but now I am / human''), even machines. The breathless long-line shapes that move throughout ''Fast,'' interrupted by dashes or keyboard-symbol arrows, seem at first more like nets than walls. These poems do swallow everything. But even when her pages risk overcrowding (and what are readers and governments today if not deepwater trawlers of the internet age, collecting without really digesting endless data), Graham counterbalances the pace, often with one- or two-word sentences. They're like many essential air bubbles, allowing us to pause and fully appreciate these virtuoso surfaces.

In ''From Inside the MRI'' this technique turns terrifying. Inserting a contrast drip in her vein to search out cancer, the technician speaks to the poet: ''Can you hear me, he says, squeeze this if problems arise he says, ok? ready?'' What follows is the book's most ecstatic rupture of language. Our primal tool to communicate is stripped of human affect:

if if if if

if yes if yes--here's this to worship--hi hi hi hi--hi hi high high--

high high not not not not highnot highnot not not--are you

ok--next lasts

three minutes--ready? yes?--not not not not be be be be notnot bebe notnot bebe

These loopy stutters, though alarming, could still sound playful. But as the machine reads her body, Graham's mind turns to ''the graven images the mosques the waterworks the UN School--the idea of / shelter.'' What prompts this imagined scene of military occupation in the middle of a medical test? Then the words ''children'' and ''lockdown'' lead to ''their being in solitary no food no light no mattress no / latrine months / go by only who knows what / days are, the mind / dream is taken from them.'' The poem goes on to lament ''the children on Sinjar made to flee during this dying,'' taking us to an Iraqi province brutalized by American airstrikes and ISIS alike. In Graham's temporary confinement in an M.R.I., where words and bodies are reimagined, the afterlife of so much televised death hijacks consciousness.

''Fast'' isn't Graham's first collection to interweave personal and collective history. Her 2005 volume ''Overlord'' is a sort of ''Spoon River Anthology'' for D-Day, in which the voices of dead soldiers and nearby artists dramatize the invasion of Normandy (where Graham lived for a time). Yet here she engages with history less as a poetic influence than as the embodiment of global reality.

The moment I keep returning to comes toward the end of the collection, in a poem called ''Prying,'' where words detonate, one after the other:

your life depends on what says the disappearing air, the dis-

appearing vein, surveil me here, in solitary, entertain me mise-en-scèe,

hear me chain of command, touch me, stain-free middle class American

female subject starting downtown on the drip line,

on the gleaming staff of this protean sentinel, its silver rod

held up, torchful of forgetfulness, streaming, translucent, give me your

mass, your teeming cell-dividing

mass--give me your poverty,

your every breath is screened, your every cell

We find the speaker once more in the middle of her treatment, this time with drugs in her veins. By this point, words like ''solitary,'' ''cell'' and ''mass'' can't help summoning their latent political connotations. As the lines descend into a frightening echo of Emma Lazarus's poem on the Statue of Liberty (''Give me your tired, your poor, / Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free''), the feel-good myth of American democracy explodes. This is not a nation built for immigrants seeking a new and better life. It's a nation where ''subjects'' are policed up and down the ''chain of command.'' Where discovering a tumor ''mass'' might be the greatest fear for some (a ''stain-free middle class American'') but is inseparable from ''mass'' incarceration suffered by others, the ''mass'' surveillance (where ''your every breath is screened'') that affects us all.

Graham refuses to let herself or her readers be ''torchful of forgetfulness,'' reminding us in her shape-shifting poetry that cancer, racial and class warfare, immigrant phobia and nationalism infect us all in dissimilar yet interconnected ways. ''Fast'' is a great book about the nature of social life in the 21st century, a book in which past and future unfold in ''every cell'' across the vast space of a few words.

After the election and my mother's death, I adopted a paranoid logic that insisted these experiences, though seemingly random, were absolutely related. Jorie Graham has studied grief and tracked its symptoms to their sources. A body can indeed tell the story of the world.

ADAM FITZGERALD is the author of two poetry collections, ''The Late Parade'' and ''George Washington.''

Jorie Graham (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEANNETTE MONTGOMERY BARRON) 

Document NYTF000020170806ed860003p



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Australia Details Plot to Bomb a Flight and Charges 2

By JACQUELINE WILLIAMS 
748 words
5 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

SYDNEY, Australia -- The Australian police described on Friday an elaborate terrorist plot in which two men from Sydney tried to place an explosive supplied by the Islamic State on a flight last month, an operation that officials said was among ''the most sophisticated plots that has ever been attempted on Australian soil.''

The two men, who have been charged with planning a terrorist act, were scheduled to appear in court via video link on Friday but did not, and they were refused bail.

The Australian Federal Police said the charges covered an aborted attempt last month to place an explosive on an Etihad Airways flight from Sydney. The discovery of the plot led the authorities to tighten airport security around the nation last weekend.

As part of the plot, one of the men brought the explosive device to the Sydney airport in a piece of luggage, and asked his brother to take the luggage on the plane without disclosing its actual contents. But the bag never made it onto the flight for unknown reasons.

Officials said the plot was the 13th significant threat that the police had exposed and broken up since Australia raised its terrorist threat level to probable in 2014.

''The threat from terrorism is real,'' Michael Phelan, the deputy commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, said Friday at a news conference announcing the charges against the two men, Khaled Mahmoud Khayat, 49, and Mahmoud Khayat, 32. ''This is one of the most sophisticated plots that has ever been attempted on Australian soil.''

Investigators say that parts of the explosive, a roadside bomb, were sent through international air cargo from Turkey through Islamic State operatives in Syria to one of the suspects in Australia, Commissioner Phelan said.

He added that an Islamic State commander told one of the suspects how to assemble the explosive device into ''what we believe was a functioning I.E.D. to be placed on that flight.'' But the bag never got past the check-in counter, much less through airport security.

''As a result of that aborted attempt, there were a number of actions that took place on that day, and we did recover components of that I.E.D.,'' the commissioner said.

Investigators also said that after the airport plot did not succeed, the suspects tried to create an improvised chemical device intended to release ''highly toxic hydrogen sulfide.'' An Islamic State operative in Syria advised the men on which public areas would be best to place the device, the police said.

''There were certainly precursor chemicals that had been produced,'' Commissioner Phelan said. ''But they were a long way from having a chemical dispersion device.''

Officials initially offered few details about the investigation after tightening airport security in response to news of the plot. But in Sydney on Friday, they asserted that investigators had ''completely disrupted this plot.''

The counterterrorism investigation started last week, after the local authorities received intelligence that someone in Australia was planning an attack against what officials described as ''Australian aviation targets.''

Investigators said that person in Australia had been receiving directions from a member of the Islamic State in Syria. The two were introduced by a brother of one of the two men charged on Friday. The brother was a senior member of the Islamic State in Syria, officials said.

After the plot was uncovered, the police and intelligence officials carried out raids last weekend, executing six search warrants throughout Sydney and arresting four people suspected of having connections to the plot. One person was released from custody this week without charges, and another is still in custody.

In Perth on Friday, the justice minister, Michael Keenan, said that had the plot been carried out, it ''could have been catastrophic.''

''Australians will feel very unnerved about hearing this news,'' he said.

But Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said law enforcement's success in disrupting the terrorist plot was a reminder of ''why we are relentless in our determination to keep Australians safe.''

The charges against the men carry a maximum sentence of life in prison.

Police officers on a blocked-off street in Sydney last Saturday. Raids there followed the discovery of an ISIS-linked terrorism plot. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID GRAY/REUTERS); Michael Phelan, right, deputy commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, with a New South Wales official on Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PETER PARKS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170805ed850004k



Contests
The Learning Network
Summer Reading Contest, Week 8 | What Interested You Most in The Times This Week?

By KATHERINE SCHULTEN 
853 words
4 August 2017
13:01
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Update: Winners for this week have been announced.

Welcome to Week 8 of our Summer Reading Contest, which runs until Aug. 24. What did you read, watch or listen to in The Times this week?

Whatever got your attention, just post a comment here by Aug. 11 at 7 a.m. Eastern and tell us all about it.

We hope you’l click around nytimes.com and find your own great articles, features and multimedia, but we know that not everyone who participates has a Times subscription. Because all links to Times content from our site are free, every week we try to help by posting interesting pieces from a variety of sections.

For example, this week you may have read front-page news articles like ...

Justice Dept. to Take On Affirmative Action in College Admissions

Scaramucci Is Out After Only 10 Days

Now Trump Targets Legal Immigration, Urging 50% Cut

Breakthrough Reported in Gene Editing in Human Embryo

Trump Signs Russian Sanctions Into Law

Or, maybe you found stories like these from the Style, Sports, International, Science, Education, Business, Arts, U.S. and sections:

Where All the School’ a Stage, and the List of Success Stories Is Long

Tesla Unveils $35,000 Model 3 Sedan

National Monuments: At Bears Ears in Utah, Heated Politics and Precious Ruins

How to Conquer the Admissions Essay

A Brief History of Emoji Art

Putin Bet That Trump Would Improve Ties. It’ Backfiring.

Is This Dog Dangerous? Shelters Struggle With Live-or-Die Tests

Affirmative Action Battle Has a New Focus: Asian-Americans

How to Survive a Rip Current: First, Don’ Fight It

China’ Internet Censors Play a Tougher Game of Cat and Mouse

The Art of the Taboo Podcast Interview

Venice, Invaded by Tourists, Risks Becoming ‘isneyland on the Sea’

A Solution to Hackers? More Hackers

In a Rohingya Refugee Camp, Soccer Is a Joyful Escape

Campus Political Fights Come Home for the Summer

Developmentally Disabled, and Going to College

In an Unused Harlem Church, a Towering Work of a ‘enius’

Kaepernick and Concussions Continue to Pose Problems for N.F.L.

Turning the Perverse Nature of ‘he Bachelor’nto Art

A Whaling Way of Life Under Threat

Where the Living Play Dead for a Day to Laugh in the Face of Death

Or, maybe you were more into multimedia like ...

Video | Iraq’ Hardball Tactics to Root Out \b ISIS\b0 

Infographic | It’ Not Your Imagination. Summers Are Getting Hotter.

Quiz | What Does Your Microbiome Say About You?

Op-Doc Video | Drive-In Jesus

Photos | Capturing Camaraderie in a Minor League Baseball Team

Infographic | Switching Careers Doesn’ Have to Be Hard: Charting Jobs That Are Similar to Yours

Photos | Poetry in Action

Or, you might be a fan of the Opinion section, finding pieces like ...

The Universe Doesn’ Care About Your ‘urpose’

How We Make Black Girls Grow Up Too Fast

The Past Week Proves That Trump Is Destroying Our Democracy

South Vietnam’ ‘aredevil Girls’

Of Course Abortion Should Be a Litmus Test for Democrats

Whatever caught your eye, tell us about it in the comments.

Need more details? The contest rules are all here, and you can read the work of last year’ winners here. A quick overview, though:

•ou can choose from anything published in the print paper or on NYTimes.com in 2017, including videos, graphics and photographs. (In your response, please include the URL or headline of the piece you pick.)

•e’l post this question each Friday from today through Aug. 18, and you’l have until the next Friday morning to respond with your picks. Then we’l close that post and open a new one with the same question.

•e’l choose at least one favorite answer to feature on our site each week. Winners from this week will be announced on Aug. 22.

•eel free to participate each week, but we allow only one submission per person per week.

•he contest is open to students ages 13 to 19 from anywhere in the world.

_________

While this is the only Student Opinion question we’l be asking this summer, here are 179 questions from this school year, all still open to comment.

Rowers along the Charles River passed the Harvard College campus in Cambridge, Mass., this year. A lawsuit accuses Harvard of discriminating against Asian-Americans in admissions. Related Article | Charles Krupa/Associated Press | The grandparents of the author of “he Universe Doesn’ Care About Your Purpose”ith their new ’2 Ford Thunderbird. | The New World School of the Arts, a small, rigorous magnet high school in Miami, draws a diverse group of talented actors, musicians, dancers and visual artists. Sit in on a few classes in 360 degrees. | By SCOTT MCINTYRE, NIKO KOPPEL and GUGLIELMO MATTIOLI | Some of the methods Iraqi authorities are using to weed out ISIS supporters among Sunni civilians in newly liberated Mosul have heightened concerns over human rights abuses. | By CAMILLA SCHICK and TIM ARANGO 

Document NYTFEED020170804ed840038s



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Bomb Kills Father of Afghan Robotics Team Leader

By MUJIB MASHAL and JAWAD SUKHANYAR 
820 words
4 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan -- When the Afghan female robotics team, made up of teenage students from the western city of Herat, finally made it to a global competition in the United States, the cameras were focused on them. Here was a glimmer of hope from a place so often associated with bloodshed. The girls had made it against all odds, including being denied visas twice.

With a big smile, Fatemah Qaderyan, 14, the team captain, illustrated just how far girls, even from a challenging place like Afghanistan, could go if given the opportunity. Crucial to that, she repeated, was the support of her parents.

On Tuesday night, Fatemah's father, Mohammed Asef Qaderyan, 54, was killed when suicide bombers targeted worshipers at a mosque near their home in Herat.

Roya Mahboob , an Afghan technology entrepreneur who helped arrange the team's trip to the United States, confirmed the death. Jailani Farhad, a spokesman for Herat's governor, also said Mr. Qaderyan had been among those killed.

Condolences to Team Afghanistan's captain,Fatemah whose father passed away in recent attack by ISIS in Herat.His daughter made him so proud pic.twitter.com/9StgUjdHPc -- Roya Mahboob (@RoyaMahboob) August 3, 2017

The assault, for which the Islamic State claimed responsibility, was the deadliest in a string of attacks this year against Shiite places of worship. It left at least 37 people dead and more than 60 others wounded.

The United Nations mission in Afghanistan said this was the fifth attack targeting a Shiite mosque this year, with two of those claimed by the regional branch of the Islamic State.

Most of the dead were buried on Wednesday at Ziarat Sultan Agha cemetery. Thousands of mourners, grieving aloud and chanting prayers, accompanied the coffins of the victims, who ranged from a man in his 70s to a 3-year-old child who had accompanied his father to prayer.

#AFG Crowds weep as coffins of dear and near ones being laid to rest and farewelled for the last time. The weight of these coffins pic.twitter.com/WFvAo0mijn -- BILAL SARWARY (@bsarwary) August 2, 2017

''We never had such a big crowd for funerals; people came from all ethnic groups and religious sects,'' said Qudos Yassenzada, a local elder on the committee that helped arrange the burials.

The Afghan robotics team attracted international attention after its members' visa requests to attend First Global, a competition with participants from 150 countries, were rejected twice.

After a public outcry, President Trump reportedly intervened to let them travel to the United States. Ivanka Trump , the president's daughter and adviser, met with the team and said it was ''a privilege and an honor to have you all with us.''

The team was awarded a silver medal for courageous achievement.

''I am so excited, and very, very happy,'' Fatemah said at the competition, turning the medal over in her hands. ''I still can't believe this happened.''

The girls returned home to a heroes' welcome, with leaders holding receptions for them and awarding them plaques.

''Their success shows that Afghan girls, despite the challenges, can be good inspirations in the field of knowledge and technology,'' President Ashraf Ghani said in congratulating the team.

Ten days later, Fatemah's father was killed, highlighting how short-lived moments of happiness can be amid the increasing violence taking civilian lives. Fatemah ''probably had not had a chance to tell all the stories of her trip and the international reception to her father,'' the BBC Persian site noted.

The attackers, reportedly two of them, entered the mosque as hundreds had gathered for evening prayers. They shot at the worshipers indiscriminately before blowing themselves up. Mr. Qaderyan was shot five times, and his body also had shrapnel wounds, Mr. Yassenzada said.

Upon returning from the United States, Fatemah had expressed concern about the safety of her team, saying the exposure might bring unwanted attention.

''We appeared in front of national and international media, and in our country this is still dangerous that Afghan girls appear before the media,'' she told Abdullah Abdullah , the Afghan government's chief executive. ''Our security should be looked after.''

Mr. Yassenzada said the Qaderyan family was poor, largely relying on the income of one of the sons who has a shop in Herat city.

On Thursday, Fatemah sat at the women's funeral hall in the city, where people had come to pay their respects. She was grieving, flanked by two of her teammates from the robotics team.

Mourners carrying the coffins of victims of Tuesday's attack on a mosque in Herat, Afghanistan, that killed at least 37 people. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES); Fatemah Qaderyan in Washington at the First Global competition, where her all-girl team attracted attention and accolades. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CLIFF OWEN/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170804ed840003p



Foreign Desk; SECTA
South African Held by Al Qaeda for 5 Years Is Released

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI and SEWELL CHAN; Christina Anderson contributed reporting. 
1,006 words
4 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A South African tourist who was abducted nearly six years ago from an inn in Timbuktu, Mali, by the North African branch of Al Qaeda has been freed, officials said on Thursday.

The tourist, Stephen Malcolm McGown, 42, was the last of the ''Timbuktu Three,'' who were abducted in late 2011, to be released. A Dutch citizen was rescued in 2015, and a Swedish man was released in June.

Mr. McGown's captivity had become a cause céère in South Africa, but his freedom came at a price: A retired European intelligence official said on Thursday that 3.5 million euros (about $4.2 million) had been paid.

The retired official, who requested anonymity to discuss delicate information, said that the payment was negotiated through Gift of the Givers Foundation, a South African charity that had campaigned for Mr. McGown's release. The former official said it was transferred by an undercover agent working for French security services in the Adrar des Iforas mountains in the deserts of northern Mali where Qaeda militants have held hostages.

''It was an operation managed by France and South African intelligence through an intermediary,'' the former official said.

South Africa's foreign minister, Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, who announced Mr. McGown's release at a news conference in Pretoria on Thursday, responded vaguely when a reporter asked her whether a ransom had been paid.

''The South African government does not subscribe to payment of ransoms,'' she said. ''That's why I focused on the work we have been doing in the past six years: campaigning, engaging with governments, and with the captors the way we know how. That's what we have been doing. And that's what we can confirm.''

Gift of the Givers had previously been involved in an effort to free Yolande and Pierre Korkie, a South African couple abducted in Yemen in May 2013 by Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. The wife was released, but her husband and his cellmate -- Luke Somers, an American photojournalist -- were killed in December 2014, when United States commandos stormed the village where they were being held.

Imtiaz Sooliman, the founder of Gift of the Givers, did not respond on Thursday to phone and email messages requesting comment.

The United States and Britain have strict no-ransom policies, but other countries, including France and Germany, have taken suitcases of cash to the desert to win the freedom of their citizens. The expenditures were disguised as ''humanitarian aid to Africa.''

The group that held Mr. McGown emerged as Al Qaeda's official branch in North Africa over a decade ago, rising to prominence in large part because of the extraordinary sums it garnered from ransoms. Starting in 2003, with the abduction of 32 European tourists who were freed after government payments estimated to total € million, the group has kidnapped dozens of foreigners, including travelers, aid workers and journalists.

Few people were released without a payment of some kind or some form of prisoner swap. Ransoms in at least some of the cases were negotiated directly by Al Qaeda's central leadership in Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Mr. McGown was freed a few days ago in northern Mali, an area dominated by Islamist militants.

He was taken hostage on Nov. 25, 2011, along with two European tourists: Sjaak Rijke of the Netherlands, who was freed by French commandos in Mali, and Johan Gustafsson of Sweden, who was released in June.

In their capture, the men were taken from the inn and herded into a truck at gunpoint. A fourth man -- a German tourist who refused to get into the truck -- was killed on the spot. Mr. Rijke's wife survived the raid; the gunmen evidently did not notice her.

Ms. Nkoana-Mashabane, the foreign minister, declined on Thursday to discuss the condition of Mr. McGown, now back in South Africa. ''Is he receiving the necessary support -- the requisite for any South African citizen who had gone through this very, very painful experience? The answer is yes,'' she said.

She pleaded with journalists to ''allow him to resettle and regain his freedom.''

Militants released a video showing six captives, including Mr. McGown, last month, before a visit to Mali by President Emmanuel Macron of France. Mr. McGown also holds a British passport.

Ms. Nkoana-Mashabane noted that Mr. McGown's mother died in May, while he was in captivity. ''The government once again extends its deepest condolences to Stephen and his family, as we did when this tragedy befell us,'' she said.

A New York Times tally of ransoms collected by Al Qaeda's affiliates conducted in 2014 found that the group had taken in at least $125 million, with $66 million paid just in 2013.

Unlike the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, Al Qaeda has tended to see hostages as a product that it can monetize. A minority of its hostages have died while in custody, unlike those of the Islamic State, which both ransoms and regularly kills captives.

Sweden's foreign minister insisted that the country does not pay ransoms. In an interview with the Swedish broadcaster SVT that aired on June 29, Mr. Gustafsson expressed gratitude. ''A few days ago, I sat alone and isolated in the Sahara,'' he said. ''Today I sit here together with my family. I am home. I thank Sweden as a country for what they have done.''

In an interview on South African television, Mr. McGown's wife, Catherine, said of their reunion, ''He looked at me and said, 'Wow, your hair's grown!' I said, 'Your hair's longer than mine now!' ''

Follow Rukmini Callimachi @rcallimachi and Sewell Chan @sewellchan on Twitter.

A still from a video of Stephen Malcolm McGown, abducted in late 2011. A ransom of about $4.2 million was reportedly paid. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SITE INTELLIGENCE GROUP, VIA AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170804ed840005n



World; Asia Pacific
Father of Afghan Robotics Team Captain Is Killed in Suicide Bombing

By MUJIB MASHAL and JAWAD SUKHANYAR 
846 words
3 August 2017
10:42
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan —hen the Afghan female robotics team, made up of teenage students from the western city of Herat, finally made it to a global competition in the United States, the cameras were focused on them. Here was a glimmer of hope from a place so often associated with bloodshed. The girls had made it against all odds, including being denied  visa s  twice .

With a big smile, Fatemah Qaderyan, 14, the team captain, illustrated just how far girls, even from a challenging place like Afghanistan , could go if given the opportunity. Crucial to that, she repeated, was the support of her parents.

On Tuesday night, Fatemah’ father, Mohammed Asef Qaderyan, 54, was killed  when suicide bombers targeted hundreds of worshipers at a mosque near their home in Herat.

Roya Mahboob , an Afghan technology entrepreneur who helped arrange the team’ trip to the United States, confirmed the news of the death. Jailani Farhad, a spokesman for the governor of Herat, also said that Mr. Qaderyan had been among those killed.

Condolences to Team Afghanistan's captain,Fatemah whose father passed away in recent attack by ISIS in Herat.His daughter made him so proud pic.twitter.com/9StgUjdHPc  —oya Mahboob (@RoyaMahboob) August 3, 2017  (@RoyaMahboob)

The assault, for which the Islamic State claimed responsibility, was the deadliest in a string of attacks this year against Shiite places of worship. It left at least 37 people dead and more than 60 others wounded. The United Nations mission in Afghanistan said this was the fifth attack targeting a Shiite mosque this year, with two of those claimed by the regional branch of the Islamic State.

Most of the dead were buried on Wednesday at Ziarat Sultan Agha cemetery. Rows of graves had been dug in the morning. Thousands of mourners, grieving aloud and chanting prayers, accompanied the coffins of the victims, who ranged from a 3-year-old child who had accompanied his father to prayer, to a man in his 70s.

#AFG  Crowds weep as coffins of dear and near ones being laid to rest and farewelled for the last time. The weight of these coffins pic.twitter.com/WFvAo0mijn  —ILAL SARWARY (@bsarwary) August 2, 2017  —ILAL SARWARY (@bsarwary)

“e never had such a big crowd for funerals —eople came from all ethnic groups and religious sects,”aid Qudos Yassenzada, a local elder who was part of the committee that helped arrange the burials.

The Afghan robotics team attracted international attention after its members’isa requests to attend First Global, a competition with participants from 150 countries, were rejected twice. After a public outcry, President Trump reportedly intervened to let them travel to the United States. Ivanka Trump , the president’ daughter and adviser, met with the team and said it was “ privilege and an honor to have you all with us.”

The team was awarded a silver medal for courageous achievement.

“ am so excited, and very, very happy,”Fatemah said  at the competition, turning the medal over in her hands. “ still can’ believe this happened.”

The girls returned home to a heroes’elcome, with leaders holding receptions for them and awarding them plaques.

“heir success shows that Afghan girls, despite the challenges, can be good inspirations in the field of knowledge and technology,”he president of Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani , said in congratulating the team.

Ten days later, Fatemah’ father was killed, once again highlighting how short-lived moments of happiness can be amid the increasing violence taking record civilian  lives.

“atemah Qaderyan, who had returned with pride and happiness from America, probably had not had a chance to tell all the stories of her trip and the international reception to her father,”BC Persian wrote.

The attackers, reportedly two of them, entered the mosque as hundreds had gathered for evening prayers. They shot at the worshipers indiscriminately before blowing themselves up. Mr. Qaderyan was shot five times, and his body had also shrapnel wounds, Mr. Yassenzada said.

Upon returning from the United States, Fatemah had expressed concern about the safety of her team, saying the exposure might bring unwanted attention.

“e appeared in front of national and international media, and in our country this is still dangerous that Afghan girls appear before the media,”he told Abdullah Abdullah , the Afghan government’ chief executive. “ur security should be looked after.”

Mr. Yassenzada said the Qaderyan family was poor, largely relying on the income of one of the sons who has a shop in Herat city.

On Thursday, Fatima sat at the women’ funeral hall in Herat city, where people came to pay their respects.

* After Visa Denials, Afghan Girls Can Attend Robotics Contest in U.S. 

* Afghan Girls’obotics Team Wins Limelight at Competition 

Mourners carrying the coffins of victims of an attack on Tuesday on a mosque in Herat, Afghanistan, that killed 37. The Islamic State claimed responsibility. | Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170803ed83002p9



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Under Trump, Shell of a Force In Syria Swiftly Lost C.I.A. Aid

By MARK MAZZETTI, ADAM GOLDMAN and MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT; Eric Schmitt, Matthew Rosenberg and Matt Apuzzo contributed reporting. 
1,640 words
3 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The end came quickly for one of the costliest covert action programs in the history of the C.I.A.

During a White House briefing early last month, the C.I.A. director, Mike Pompeo, recommended to President Trump that he shut down a four-year-old effort to arm and train Syrian rebels. The president swiftly ended the program.

The rebel army was by then a shell, hollowed out by more than a year of bombing by Russian planes and confined to ever-shrinking patches of Syria that government troops had not reconquered. Critics in Congress had complained for years about the costs -- more than $1 billion over the life of the program -- and reports that some of the C.I.A.-supplied weapons had ended up in the hands of a rebel group tied to Al Qaeda further sapped political support for the program.

While critics of Mr. Trump have argued that he ended the program to curry favor with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, there were in fact dim views of the effort in both the Trump and Obama White Houses -- a rare confluence of opinion on national security policy.

The shuttering of the C.I.A. program, one of the most expensive efforts to arm and train rebels since the agency's program arming the mujahedeen in Afghanistan during the 1980s, has forced a reckoning over its successes and failures. Opponents say it was foolhardy, expensive and ineffective. Supporters say that it was unnecessarily cautious, and that its achievements were remarkable given that the Obama administration had so many restrictions on it from the start, which they say ultimately ensured its failure.

The program did have periods of success, including in 2015 when rebels using tank-destroying missiles, supplied by the C.I.A. and also Saudi Arabia, routed government forces in northern Syria. But by late 2015 the Russian military offensive in Syria was focusing squarely on the C.I.A.-backed fighters battling Syrian government troops. Many of the fighters were killed, and the fortunes of the rebel army reversed.

Charles Lister, a Syria expert at the Middle East Institute, said he was not surprised that the Trump administration ended the program, which armed and trained thousands of Syrian rebels. (By comparison, a $500 million Pentagon program that envisioned training and equipping 15,000 Syrian rebels over three years, was canceled in 2015 after producing only a few dozen fighters.)

''In many ways, I would put the blame on the Obama administration,'' Mr. Lister said of the C.I.A. program. ''They never gave it the necessary resources or space to determine the dynamics of the battlefield. They were drip-feeding opposition groups just enough to survive but never enough to become dominant actors.''

Mr. Trump has twice publicly criticized the effort since he ended it. After The Washington Post first reported on his decision, Mr. Trump tweeted that he was ending ''massive, dangerous, and wasteful payments to Syrian rebels fighting Assad.'' During an interview with The Wall Street Journal last month, the president said many of the C.I.A.-supplied weapons ended up in the hands of ''Al Qaeda'' -- presumably a reference to the Qaeda-affiliated Nusra Front, which often fought alongside the C.I.A.-backed rebels.

Michael V. Hayden, a former C.I.A. director, said the president's comments ''might give the agency pause with regard to how much he will have their backs on any future covert actions.''

Gen. Raymond A. Thomas III, the commander of United States Special Operations Command, said during a conference last month that ending the C.I.A. program was a ''tough, tough decision.''

''At least from what I know about that program and the decision to end it, it was absolutely not a sop to the Russians,'' he said. ''It was, I think, based on an assessment of the nature of the program, what we're trying to accomplish, the viability of it going forward.''

A C.I.A. spokesman declined to comment.

President Barack Obama had reluctantly agreed to the program in 2013 as the administration was struggling to blunt the momentum of Syrian government forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad. It soon fell victim to the constantly shifting alliances in Syria's six-year-old civil war and the limited visibility that American military and intelligence officials had over what was occurring on the ground.

Once C.I.A.-trained fighters crossed into Syria, C.I.A. officers had difficulty controlling them. The fact that some of their C.I.A. weapons ended up with Nusra Front fighters -- and that some of the rebels joined the group -- confirmed the fears of many in the Obama administration when the program began. Although the Nusra Front was widely seen as an effective fighting force against Mr. Assad's troops, its Qaeda affiliation made it impossible for the Obama administration to provide direct support for the group.

American intelligence officials estimate that the Nusra Front now has as many 20,000 fighters in Syria, making it Al Qaeda's largest affiliate. Unlike other Qaeda affiliates such as Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the Nusra Front has long focused on battling the Syrian government rather than plotting terrorist attacks against the United States and Europe.

The American officials spoke on the condition of anonymity because they did not want to be identified discussing a program that is classified.

In the summer of 2012, David H. Petraeus, who was then C.I.A. director, first proposed a covert program of arming and training rebels as Syrian government forces bore down on them.

The proposal forced a debate inside the Obama administration, with some of Mr. Obama's top aides arguing that Syria's chaotic battlefield would make it nearly impossible to ensure that weapons provided by the C.I.A. could be kept out of the hands of militant groups like the Nusra Front. Mr. Obama rejected the plan.

But he changed his mind the following year, signing a presidential finding authorizing the C.I.A. to covertly arm and train small groups of rebels at bases in Jordan. The president's reversal came in part because of intense lobbying by foreign leaders, including King Abdullah II of Jordan and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, who argued that the United States should take a more active role in trying to end the conflict.

Given the code name Timber Sycamore, the covert program began slowly, but by 2015 the C.I.A.-backed rebel groups had made significant progress against Syrian forces, pushing into areas of the country long considered to be government strongholds. The offensive gained momentum after the C.I.A. and Saudi Arabia began supplying the powerful tank-destroying weapons to the rebel groups.

But the rebel push in Idlib, Hama and Latakia Provinces in northern Syria also created problems for Washington. The Nusra Front, often battling alongside the C.I.A.-supported rebel groups, made its own territorial gains.

It was Nusra's battlefield successes that Mr. Putin used as one justification for the Russian military offensive in Syria, which began in 2015. The Russian campaign, a relentless bombing of the C.I.A.-backed fighters and Nusra militants, battered the rebels and sent them into retreat.

The program suffered other setbacks. The arming and the training of the rebels occurred in Jordan and Turkey, and at one point Jordanian intelligence officers pilfered stockpiles of weapons the C.I.A. had shipped into the country for the Syrian rebels, selling them on the black market. In November, a member of the Jordanian military shot and killed three American soldiers who had been training Syrian rebels as part of the C.I.A. program.

White House officials also received periodic reports that the C.I.A.-trained rebels had summarily executed prisoners and committed other violations of the rules of armed conflict. Sometimes the reports led to the C.I.A. suspending cooperation with groups accused of wrongdoing.

John O. Brennan, Mr. Obama's last C.I.A. director, remained a vigorous defender of the program despite divisions inside the spy agency about the effort's effectiveness. But by the final year of the Obama administration, the program had lost many supporters in the White House -- especially after the administration's top priority in Syria became battling the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, rather than seeking an end to Mr. Assad's government.

During one meeting in the White House Situation Room at the end of the Obama administration, with C.I.A.-backed rebels continuing to lose ground in the face of withering Russian air bombing, Mr. Brennan pressed the case that the United States continue to back the effort to topple Mr. Assad, according to one person who attended the meeting.

But Susan E. Rice, the national security adviser, shot back. ''Make no mistake,'' she said, according to the person in the meeting. ''The president's priority in Syria is fighting ISIS.''

Backed by Russian aircraft, Syrian government forces gradually began to reclaim areas near the Turkish border that had long been rebel strongholds, and eventually pushed many of the rebels back to the besieged city of Aleppo.

Aleppo fell to Syrian government troops in December.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Russian warplanes and military personnel at an air base outside Latakia, Syria, last year. Russian bombing helped hollow out a rebel army backed by the C.I.A. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RUSSIAN DEFENSE MINISTRY, VIA EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) (A9) 

Document NYTF000020170803ed830004q



Europe Edition
Briefing
Donald Trump , France, Venezuela: Your Wednesday Briefing

By SARAH ANDERSON 
1,249 words
2 August 2017
06:07
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up .)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

_____

•rance is in the middle of a debate over protectionism , as a backlash against globalization deepens around the world.

President Emmanuel Macron campaigned to make the country more business-friendly, but after he blocked a shipyard takeover by an Italian company, some wonder whether he is just like his predecessors.

Separately, despite an order that defused a new migrant crisis in Calais , France appears far from a broader plan on the issue.

_____

•he Trump administration is preparing a broad move against China  over trade, according to people with knowledge of its plans, amid growing worries in the U.S. over a Chinese government-led effort to make the country a global leader in crucial technologies of the future.

The trade case is said to focus on supposed Chinese violations of American intellectual property.

Meanwhile, in a cutting editorial, Beijing fired back at President Trump over his tweets accusing China  of failing to tame its ally North Korea. And Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said the U.S. was not seeking regime change in North Korea.

_____

•efense officials told our national security reporter that the Pentagon and State Department have offered the White House a plan to supply Ukraine  with antitank missiles and other arms.

Vice President Mike Pence , visiting Europe, said that President Trump would “ery soon”ign a law limiting his ability to lift forceful new sanctions against Russia  and that Moscow’ “estabilizing activities”nd support for rogue regimes “as to change.”

Also, the White House confirmed that Mr. Trump was involved  in drafting a misleading statement issued by his son about a meeting with a Russian lawyer.

_____

•n Washington, congressional Republicans bypassed the president  to work toward bipartisan legislation to shore up the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

And the Senate overwhelmingly confirmed Christopher Wray , above, as the next F.B.I. director.

Meanwhile, the Trump administration is preparing to redirect Justice Department resources  toward investigating and suing universities over affirmative action policies deemed to discriminate against white applicants, according to a document obtained by The New York Times .

_____

• new poll shows that global warming is essentially tied with the Islamic State as the most-feared security threat around the world  —xcept in the U.S., where cyberattacks and ISIS are considered the greatest dangers.

On to developments in those two realms. Our photojournalist documented harrowing scenes and battlefield calculations at the front lines of the fight against \b ISIS\b0  in Mosul . And Lewis Pugh, a British endurance swimmer, swam 22 minutes in the freezing Arctic Ocean  to call attention to climate change’ effect on the world’ oceans.

_____

Business

•Volkswagen was barred from receiving European Union research financing  over allegations it misused a previous loan to cheat on emissions. The move comes ahead of a meeting on diesel emissions today  between automakers and the German government .

•pple exceeded revenue expectations  in the quarter that ended July 1 even as buyers waited for new iPhones this fall. But projections suggest at least some phones may be delayed.

•oining Apple, Amazon also bowed to China’ tough new restrictions  on online content.

•ocuments released in a lawsuit against Monsanto  raised new questions about the company’ efforts to influence the news media and scientific research.

•he eurozone economy outperformed Britain  again in the second quarter.

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets .

In the News

•asked agents of the Venezuelan government barged into the homes of two prominent former mayors overnight, hauling them off to jail in the dark. [ The New York Times ]

•n Turkey, nearly 500 suspects in last year’ failed coup attempt went on trial. [ Reuters ]

•.S. border agents are testing a system to scan the faces of people leaving the country in an effort to better identify travelers who overstay their visas. [ The New York Times ]

• ravelers in Europe are facing long lines at airports because of stricter security checks on those entering and leaving the Schengen area. [ BBC ]

•n Moscow, three gang members were killed at a courthouse while trying to escape. [ The New York Times ]

•. K. Rowling apologized to the family of a boy with spina bifida after accusing President Trump of ignoring him. The boy’ mother said Ms. Rowling misinterpreted the situation. [ The New York Times ]

•he interim prime minister of Pakistan, picked to temporarily replace his corruption-scarred predecessor, said he was no “ench warmer.” The New York Times ]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ecipe of the day: Take some time in the morning to make watermelon ice pops . You’l thank yourself later.

•s it possible to drink too much water ?

•ow well do you know the world? Take our quiz .

Noteworthy

•t the Bayreuth Festival, Barrie Kosky’ savvy new staging of Wagner’ “Die Meistersinger von Nünberg” stepped gracefully around the work’ potential land mines, our critic writes.

•n London, our visiting critic considers three plays  that look to the past to consider the uneasy state of the present.

•he British brand behind Wonder Woman’ leather armor is having a major fashion moment .

•he German soccer star Bastian Schweinsteiger has immersed himself in his new city , Chicago.

Back Story

Our departing book critic, Michiko Kakutani, above, has been hailed as the most powerful critic in the English-speaking world .

Her output during 38 years at The Times attracted plenty of response, and on the day she announced her plans to step down , a colleague revealed a letter that Ms. Kakutani received early in her career .

Ms. Kakutani had written a profile of Pat Carroll , an actress who was then portraying the writer Gertrude Stein on stage. She described her home as “illed with books by Stein and about Stein, as well as xeroxed Ph.D. theses and obscure literary journals.”

The next day, Aug. 2, 1979, a letter addressed to “r. Michiko Kakutani”rrived, sent by an employee of Xerox , a company famous for protecting its brand name.

“here is no adjective ‘erox,’”he letter explained. “f in the future you wish to use the name Xerox , it should be used with a capital ‘’nd no ‘d’”

discovered in our office rearrangement, addressed to "Mr. Michiko Kakutani," August 2, 1979 pic.twitter.com/CI2fT7MxhJ  —oe Coscarelli (@joecoscarelli) July 27, 2017  —oe Coscarelli (@joecoscarelli)

Indeed, The Times style arbiters agree .

Richard Samson, who is on The Times’ legal team, said a multitude of companies had objected to their trademarks being used as generic substitutes. “ver the years,”e said, “e have received concerned letters from owners of the trademarks Spinning, Hula-Hoop, Sheetrock, Jeep and many others.”

Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.

_____

This briefing was prepared for the European morning. You can browse through past briefings here .

We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian  and American  mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here  .

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com .

Stephane Mahe/Reuters | Doug Mills/The New York Times | Volodymyr Petrov/European Pressphoto Agency | Eric Thayer for The New York Times | David Goldman/Associated Press | Zohra Bensemra/Reuters | Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Sam Kaplan for The New York Times | Enrico Nawrath/Bayreuth Festspiele 

Document NYTFEED020170802ed820018h



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Climate Change and  ISIS  Are Seen in Poll as World's Greatest Threats

By LISA FRIEDMAN 
1,238 words
2 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Climate change is essentially tied with the Islamic State as the most-feared security threat across much of the world -- except in the United States, where cyberattacks are considered a greater danger than global warming, according to a Pew Research Center report released on Tuesday.

Residents of 13 countries ranked climate change as the greatest threat to national security, while in 17 countries the Islamic State was considered a more immediate problem.

In the United States, however, a gaping partisan divide pushed climate change to third-most severe perceived threat, after ISIS and cyberwarfare. Just 56 percent of Americans surveyed identified global warming as the most serious threat to the country, compared to 71 percent for cyberwarfare and 74 percent for Islamic State attacks.

The American intelligence community concluded that Russia used cyberweapons to interfere with the presidential election last year, perhaps accounting for the heightened sense of threat. The Trump administration has consistently played down the dangers of a warming climate and has withdrawn the United States from the Paris accord on climate change signed by nearly 200 nations.

Jacob Poushter, Pew's senior researcher and a co-author of the study, said that in most countries terrorism and climate change were seen as the most pressing dangers. The United States was an exception, he said.

''The stark partisan divide between those on the left and the right means there is a large portion in the United States that doesn't see climate change as a threat,'' Mr. Poushter said. ''But there's a large percentage that does, so that lowers the number.''

The survey of 41,953 people in 38 countries was conducted from February through May. Beyond the top line figures, the survey offers other insights about how people around the world view global warming.

Latin America is deeply worried about climate change

While Latin America is certainly vulnerable to the consequences of climate change, its countries rarely rank among the most at risk. That unfortunate distinction tends to go to Chad, Sudan, low-lying island states and other places where poverty and civil strife meet rising seas, floods and drought. So it's not surprising, perhaps, to see so many countries in Africa put climate change at the top of their worry lists.

But 74 percent of people surveyed in seven South American and Latin American countries cite climate as their top global concern, the highest of any region surveyed.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change offers some clues, citing ''significant trends in precipitation and temperature'' across the region. Paula Caballero, global director of the climate change program at the World Resources Institute, a Washington-based think tank, noted the multiple devastating floods this spring in her native Colombia.

''In Latin America the impacts of climate change both in terms of extreme events as well as the intensity and frequency of events has really gained momentum,'' said Ms. Caballero, who formerly served as Colombia's lead United Nations negotiator on climate change.

Even in Venezuela, the only Latin American country surveyed that did not name climate change as its top concern, global warming came in just below worries about the economy. In the midst of its own political and economic crisis last month, Venezuelan leaders ratified the Paris Agreement.

Russians are among the least concerned about warming

The Russian heat wave of 2010 was made three times more likely by climate change, a study later found. But Russians are generally apathetic about rising greenhouse gas emissions, the Pew survey confirmed. The country backed the Paris agreement on climate change but the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, did not denounce President Trump for abandoning the accord, as so many other world leaders did.

Mr. Putin's views on the subject are opaque, though. Before the Paris accords he told world leaders that global warming ''was one of the gravest challenges humanity is facing.''

Russia ranked climate change fifth among its global concerns in the Pew survey, below the Islamic State, the economy, the refugee crisis and the influence of the United States.

What do the Russians worry about even less than climate change? Cyberattacks.

American opinion on climate change is highly partisan

We have long known Americans break heavily along party lines over the causes, solutions and very existence of man-made climate change. The Pew study lays that chasm bare.

Among Americans who consider themselves left-leaning, 86 percent cite rising emissions as a dangerous threat, compared with only 31 percent on the right. That 55 percent divide is larger than the partisan split on ISIS and on the migrant crisis.

Terrorism is the biggest worry for Americans, with 74 percent putting ISIS as the top threat to the country. Close behind are cyberattacks.

Mr. Poushter noted the surveys were conducted in the spring amid national attention on the finding that Russia meddled in the 2016 presidential election by hacking Democrats' emails and distributing online propaganda.

Climate change is ranked third among Americans, with 56 percent of people surveyed believing it is a major threat.

Lower levels of concern about climate change were found in Poland, Russia, India, Israel Jordan, Tunisia, Turkey, Ghana, Nigeria and Venezuela.

Anthony Leiserowitz, director of the Yale Program on Climate Change Communication at Yale University, said the ideological split in America underscores the divisions he has witnessed in his own studies of how Americans perceive climate change.

''Climate change is in many ways a small skirmish in the midst of a much larger political struggle that's been going on in this country since its founding,'' he said. ''What's the relationship between government and a society of free individuals? That's playing out across the board on a lot of other issues, from tax policy to health care.''

Coal importers and exporters have divergent views

Pew did not survey many of the top oil exporters other than Russia, so it's hard to know how people feel in Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates or Kuwait. But among the world's biggest coal exporters the story is a fairly nuanced one.

Citizens of Indonesia, a top coal exporter in 2014, according to the World Coal Association, listed ISIS as their highest concern. Attacks in Jakarta this spring have set people on edge, and the country's military chief has warned that the Islamic State group has so-called sleeper cells all over the country. But climate is still seen as the third biggest threat, after the economy. Australia, also a coal-exporting giant, cited climate change as the second greatest threat after ISIS.

And among the big coal importers? Only 47 percent of people in India surveyed named climate change as a top concern, but that was enough to put the issue second after ISIS. In South Korea, 79 percent of people are worried about the climate.

Mr. Poushter said Pew did not survey China this year because of a law restricting research by foreign organizations. But a similar survey Pew conducted in 2015 found 19 percent of Chinese people polled considered themselves ''very concerned'' about climate change. That is low, particularly compared with the 79 percent of Indians who were very concerned about warming at the time. But it also was the highest level of worry Chinese residents assigned to any global threat.

Follow @NYTClimate on Twitter

Document NYTF000020170802ed820003v



world
In Mosul, Revealing the Last  ISIS  Stronghold

Photographs and Text by IVOR PRICKETT 
1,446 words
1 August 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Days after the Iraqi government officially declared victory over the Islamic State in Mosul in July, the fighting was far from over.

Roughly the size of a block in Manhattan, the last \b ISIS\b0  holdout of the Old City did not seem like the kind of place where anyone could still be alive after weeks of brutal combat. But a few such areas kept up the fight for days. And —orribly, amazingly —ivilians were still being pulled out.

What we saw as we went step by step with the Iraqi forces here made their survival seem even more miraculous.

At a forward base near the front line, Iraqi special forces soldiers brought in a man who had crossed the front line, holding a young boy no more than 2.

Wearing just a bloodied vest and a dirty pair of shorts with no shoes, the man did not even know who the child was. He was immediately suspected of being an ISIS fighter who had merely used the boy as a human shield.

The troops took the man away, and the commander in charge held the boy on his lap. Doubting that the boy’ parents could still be alive, he decided that one of his men —e knew that the soldier and his wife had been unable to have children of their own —hould adopt the boy.

Here on the battlefield, some of the men washed the child and his tattered clothing before the officer arrived to meet his new son.

As Iraqi forces took control of the Old City and searched the area, they seized several of the Islamic State’ undetonated car bombs, the heavily armored improvisations that became the most feared weapons in the militants’rsenal. Soldiers drove one of the captured vehicles back to their base, sandwiched in a military convoy through west Mosul.

The few civilians who had come back to the area stopped in disbelief to watch the vehicle lumber by, still able to evoke shock even in safer hands.

A squad of special forces soldiers near the front line of continued clashes in the Old City began to shout that they had found an injured militant in the basement of a shattered building. A few of the men hauled the emaciated fighter out of the basement into the street. He was barely alive, injured during a battle several days before.

He said that his name was Malik, and that he was a 36-year-old resident of Mosul. He was so weak it was hard to imagine him being a capable fighter at any point recently.

The commander ordered him to be taken to a doctor, and the men carried him away across the mounds of rubble and around the corner, out of sight.

While searching one building’ courtyard, soldiers came across the bodies of up to 10 men, dead for probably more than a week. It was impossible to verify what had happened or even who they were, although the soldiers immediately proclaimed that they had been members of the Islamic State.

At least two of the bodies appeared to have their hands tied behind their backs. Whether they were captives of the Islamic State who died in a shootout or ISIS prisoners who were summarily executed it was impossible to say. But this last stage of the battle, often taking place under a media blackout, has been punctuated by rumors of extrajudicial killings by the security forces.

After days of continued fighting, the sounds of gunfire and warplanes finally stilled over the Old City. The last trickles of survivors seemed to end.

The sand-colored skeletons of the homes here had become a graveyard for the last few ISIS fighters, and for anyone else trapped along with them. But the homes all still had to be searched. The Iraqi special forces began picking through mounds of pulverized rubble, sometimes two stories high, in the Islamic State’ last bastion.

A special forces sniper and his spotter continued to search for targets from a balcony overlooking the Tigris River, but were coming up empty.

The unit’ lieutenant said the sniper had killed 85 militants in the preceding two weeks, many of them as they tried to flee the area by crossing the river from west to east. The remains of some still dotted the riverbanks, but the pervasive stench of rot was a surer indication of what had happened here.

Among the survivors who got out before the battle’ final chapter, at the beginning of July, was a 30-year-old woman named Shayma, along with her children and her mother. They were staying at a camp for displaced people in Hamam al-Alil, a town just south of Mosul.

She had been married to an ISIS fighter. He had joined soon after the militants took control of Mosul and its surroundings in 2014. They needed the money, she said, for the house they were building in the town of Qaiyara.

As Iraqi forces began closing in on Mosul last year, the militants forcibly moved Shayma’ family, and those of other fighters, into western Mosul. She said her husband had been killed in an airstrike nearby during the fighting in March.

Now a widow, and tarnished for having married a known member of the Islamic State, she despaired of finding a way to care for her children and mother.

The operation to clear the Old City of explosives and search for anyone still hiding is continuing. The men doing the job are moving slowly through the narrow back streets, checking every house and basement for ISIS holdouts, though the odds of finding any alive dwindle by the day.

On the outskirts of the city, thousands of men accused of having joined or helped the Islamic State await their fates in sweltering and cramped jails. They stared out at me as we walked the halls.

Earlier, I had met other survivors from the Old City. While the fighting was still going on in mid-July, I encountered about 20 women and children sitting in a destroyed shop in the Maydan district, just a few hundred yards from the remaining battlefield.

They were covered in dust, and many had been injured. Just that morning they had fled while under fire from Islamic State snipers. The Iraqi soldiers said three from the group had been killed.

Most were obviously traumatized. They sat silently, drinking the water and eating the food the soldiers brought to them. Some of the children in the group had lost their parents and had come out with other families.

One woman said she had been married to four different ISIS fighters, and the colonel who commanded the counterterrorism units in the area was questioning her about one of them. She had been carrying a knife, a tablet computer and nearly $2,000 in American money.

The group was eventually taken away to be questioned further. When asked where the women and children would be taken, the soldiers merely said to a camp.

For this group, though, that may well be the special “ehabilitation camp”or the families of ISIS members that was detailed in a Human Rights Watch report. The rights group said the families’etention there amounted to collective punishment, and was a violation of human rights.

The toll of the battle for Mosul on nearly every front —uman rights, lives, property and Iraqi heritage —s only now starting to come into focus. As the last searches in the Old City wrap up, the almost unfathomable task of rebuilding the city and, somehow, coming to grips with all that happened here, stretches out ahead into the unknown.

Ivor Prickett was on assignment for The New York Times in west Mosul, Iraq, to document the last battles against the Islamic State there.Follow him on Twitter@ivorprickett.

PHOTOS: An Iraqi military sniper, above, watched for militants trying to flee to eastern Mosul by crossing the Tigris River. Right, a group of traumatized women and children waited to be taken to a displaced persons camp after escaping the Old City. Because some were accused of being ISIS members’amily, they could end up at a “ehabilitation camp.” Left, soldiers carrying away an injured man, whom they described as a militant, found in the basement of a destroyed building in the Old City. Below, men suspected of having joined or helped the Islamic State awaited their fates in a sweltering jail south of Mosul. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT) (A6-A7)

* Iraqi Prime Minister Arrives in Mosul to Declare Victory Over \b ISIS\b0 

Document INHT000020170802ed810000g



Briefing
Scaramucci, White House, Venezuela: Your Tuesday Evening Briefing

By KAREN ZRAICK and SANDRA STEVENSON 
1,114 words
2 August 2017
00:14
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good evening. Here’ the latest.

1. A new poll shows that global warming is essentially tied with the Islamic State as the most-feared security threat around the world —xcept in the U.S., where cyberattacks and ISIS are considered the greatest dangers.

The Pew study also tracked just how far Americans’iews on climate change skew politically. Among the left-leaning, 86 percent cite rising emissions as a dangerous threat, compared with 31 percent on the right.

On to today’ developments in those two realms. Our photojournalist documented harrowing scenes and battlefield calculations at the front lines of the fight against \b ISIS\b0  in Mosul, like the impromptu adoption of a child whose parents were presumed dead. And the Pacific Northwest is bracing for a scorching heat wave. Above, melting sea ice in the Arctic.

_____

2. There are signs of a bit of Senate realignment —nd the direction is away from President Trump. The Senate health committee’ chairman, Lamar Alexander, above, said that he had urged Mr. Trump to continue paying subsidies to health insurance companies and that the panel would begin bipartisan work after the August recess to shore up the Affordable Care Act.

And 45 Senate Democrats sent a letter to the president and their Republican colleagues, urging a bipartisan approach on a tax overhaul.

Our congressional columnist says recent events hold a lesson for Mr. Trump: If he plays hardball with the Senate, he might lose.

_____

3. Did the White House play a crucial role in creating the false narrative about a Seth Rich conspiracy? A lawsuit charged that the White House urged Fox News to publish an article —ater retracted —about the D.N.C. aide’ murder. Fox said the lawsuit was “ompletely erroneous.”

Bill Shine, a former co-president of Fox News, has spoken with White House officials about a position on the president’ communications team, according to several people briefed on the talks.

And the fallout continued from the firing of Anthony Scaramucci, who was the White House communications director for all of 10 days. On today’ episode of our podcast “The Daily,”ur White House reporter gives us the play-by-play of how it went down, and we rounded up the best writing from the right and left.

_____

4. Defense officials told our national security reporter that the Pentagon and State Department have offered the White House a plan to supply Ukraine with anti-tank missiles and other arms.

The proposal comes as fighting between Ukrainian troops and Russian-backed separatists has increased in recent days, and as Russia prepares to send 100,000 troops to Belarus.

Vice President Mike Pence, visiting Europe, said that President Trump would “ery soon”ign forceful new sanctions against Russia and that Moscow’ “estabilizing activities”nd support for rogue regimes “as to change.”

_____

5. Masked agents of the Venezuelan government barged into the homes of two prominent former mayors overnight, hauling them off to jail in the dark.

They dragged one of them into the street in his blue pajamas as witnesses screamed that he was being kidnapped. (There’ video embedded in our article.)

The two men, both vocal members of the opposition, had been arrested many times before. But as the news spread, many Venezuelans —nd others around the world —orried that it was the start of a new dictatorship in South America.

_____

6. The Department of Homeland Security said it would bypass environmental and land management laws in its efforts to build border walls in the San Diego area. Above, the existing fence.

And prosecutors across the country are facing a new dilemma because of immigration policy that means that a conviction for a minor offense could lead to a “ife sentence”f deportation.

_____

7. Our best-read article this afternoon was another criminal justice piece, this time from the magazine. It’ the story of Noura Jackson, who was convicted of killing her mother in Memphis in 2005, when she was 18. By the time her conviction was overturned, she had spent nine years in prison.

Prosecutors withheld the evidence that would have freed her. The office is being investigated for withholding evidence in other cases, but that sort of prosecutorial error is almost never punished. Ms. Jackson, who maintains her innocence, says she still hopes to find her mother’ real killer. Above, the two of them in the early 2000s.

_____

8. How do animal shelters decide which dogs get euthanized and which get adopted? They do “ggression tests,”hich are basically doggy death panels.

But researchers, including some developers of the tests, are concluding that process is an unreliable predictor of aggression in the home, setting off consternation in shelters.

“uring the most stressful time of a dog’ life, you’e exposing it to deliberate attempts to provoke a reaction,”xplained one professor of veterinary medicine.

_____

9. It’ only a few weeks until it’ back to school time. We took a close look at the summer reading U.S. colleges and universities assigned, and found a lot of recently published, accessibly written books on race, class and gender.

Developing a shopping list for fall? Our “marter Living”riter says yes to a laptop and tablet, and no to a TV, microwave or printer. And our product experts at The Sweethome list their top dorm room picks.

_____

10. Finally, the late-night hosts weren’ ready to say goodbye to Anthony Scaramucci.

“ccording to White House sources, Kelly let The Mooch go because he wanted ‘ore structure, less of “ame of Thrones,”’Stephen Colbert said. “hat’ not a fair comparison —ith ‘ame of Thrones,’ou have to wait a whole week for a new beheading.”

Have a great night.

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.

Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

David Goldman/Associated Press | Tom Brenner/The New York Times | Jacquelyn Martin/Associated Press | Stevo Vasiljevic/Reuters | via Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Gregory Bull/Associated Press | Photograph from Noura Jackson | A J Mast for The New York Times | Justin Gilliland/The New York Times | CBS 

Document NYTFEED020170801ed810080x



Contests
The Learning Network
Summer Reading Contest Winner, Week 5 | On ‘o, Jane Austen Is Not Your Bestie’

By THE LEARNING NETWORK 
720 words
1 August 2017
14:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Thank you to the 900 teenagers who participated in the fifth week of our 10-week Summer Reading Contest, and congratulations to Preanka P., our winner, as well as to our many runners-up and honorable mentions.

Scroll down to take a look at the variety of topics that caught the eyes of our participants, and remember: you can write about any of them, or anything else published on NYTimes.com in 2017, to join the contest yourself.

Winner

Preanka P., from New Jersey, chose the Op-Ed “No, Jane Austen Is Not Your Bestie”y Howard Jacobson, and wrote:

I am exactly the obsessive “aneite”oward Jacobson criticizes in this article. When I see a headline toting Jane Austen’ name, I click on it faster than an Amazon shopper on Black Friday, eager to learn about the author’ life. While Jacobson calls for readers to stop personalizing Austen, I believe we can connect to the author and respect her legacy. Unlike other writers, Austen strayed from the pattern of swashbuckling knights and heroes to write about normal life. Readers dig into her past because her writing subject invites inquiry. We ask, why did she choose naturalism over fantasy? Did the pressure of gender stereotypes catapult her literary career?

Austen’ writing is memorable due to its shrewd word choice and signature wit. When we laugh at her humor, we acknowledge the writer’ humanity. Recognizing this, we seek to understand her life, just as the characters in her novels try to relate to one another.

Nevertheless, I agree with Jacobson’ criticism of those who refer to Jane Austen as “ane.”e’e not calling the author over for a cup of tea. We should honor her memory with her last name, even in casual conversations.

On the 200th anniversary of Austen’ death, we must recognize her enduring impact on readers. Jane Austen is not a historical figure meant to be boxed away in a museum and admired from a distance. Living on as a writer, she still connects with her readers, even after her passing.

Runners-Up

Yasmeen B. Alawadhi on “Thanks to Venmo, We Now All Know How Cheap Our Friends Are”

BrooklynWHS on “My Son, the Jihadist”

GoBlue18Maximilian on “Where Does the Time Go? You Can Find Out, if You Dare”

Brian Ham on “How Y2K Offers a Lesson for Fighting Climate Change”

Angela Pan on “ Search Results Ants Can Build an Eiffel Tower (Sort Of)”

Mackenzie Parker on ”Cholera Spreads as War and Poverty Batter Yemen”

Ellen Ryou on “The Gentler Symptoms of Dying”

Aneta Sieminski on “Simple Way to Help Low-Income Students: Make Everyone Take SAT or ACT”

ELiza White HC2017 on “The Very Hungry Caterpillars That Turned to Cannibalism”

Evan Wyman on “Something Strange in Usain Bolt’ Stride”

Honorable Mentions

Nora Al Khalif on “Afghan Children, Deprived of School, Tell of Their Deepest Fears”

Kelley B. on “Why Are Dogs So Friendly? The Answer May Be in 2 Genes.”

Christina Caruso on “‘‘ Live in a Lie’ Saudi Women Speak Up”

Kristin Cheng on “Racism Is Everywhere, So Why Not Move South?”

Erin Dong on “Another New York Diner Turns Off the Grill, a Victim of Rising Rents”

Chinenye Iroajanma on “Venus Williams, Defying Age and Skeptics, Reaches Wimbledon Final”

Andrew Johnston on “That Devious Plot to ‘ombify’ussia: The Fidget Spinner”

Kevin Jordan on “Iraqi Prime Minister Arrives in Mosul to Declare Victory Over \b ISIS\b0 ”

Irina Lee on “New York Becomes the City That Never Shuts Up”

Lipman on “Laugh and the World Laughs With You. Type ‘a,’ot So Much.”

neenadmv2022 on “Rwanda’ Soccer Sisterhood”

Megan Orlanski on “When Education Is Hijacked by War”

Nicholas Romano on “N.H.L.’ Connor McDavid, M.V.P. at 20, Is Still Pursuing His Idol”

Sophia Sacchetti on ”Britain Cracking Down on Gender Stereotypes in Ads”

Hannah So on “When Just Vanilla Won’ Do, How About a Blueberry Pie Oreo? ”

Benjamin P. Stein on “The Lawyer, the Addict”

Women in period costume with the new 10-pound note featuring Jane Austen, at Winchester Cathedral in England on Tuesday. | Pool photo by Chris J Ratcliffe 

Document NYTFEED020170801ed81002s1



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Syria's Young Saw the Worst, But Dangers Lurk Beyond  ISIS 

By SOMINI SENGUPTA and HWAIDA SAAD 
1,731 words
1 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- The boy did not want to see a beheading, so he held his mother's hand tight and tried to close his eyes. But seeing it was mandatory when the Islamic State ruled his hometown in northern Syria: If you were out on the street, you had to watch.

The boy, now 11 and a refugee in Beirut, reckons he saw 10 beheadings, and once he saw a man accused of a crime being thrown off the top of a building. Videos of executions were shown after the executions -- and children were invited to watch inside mosques. ''Some of my friends, they used to go and watch,'' said the boy, who gave only his first name, Muhammad. ''They liked it.''

Even by the brutal standards of the Syrian civil war, children growing up in areas ruled by the Islamic State have experienced and witnessed astonishing brutality. Schools have been closed for years. Polio has made a comeback. Boys have been recruited to fight.

Now, as foreign militaries and local militias try to flush out the Islamic State from its last redoubts in Syria, children fleeing the violence have to dodge airstrikes, snipers and then thirst and scorpions as they make their way across the desert.

Danger looms even when they reach safety. The militias taking on the Islamic State are also recruiting children to fight, according to aid workers and United Nations officials. Aid workers say children are being lured with money, guns and an inflated sense of importance -- an allegation denied by a spokesman for the Syrian Kurdish fighters and Arab militias that are collectively known as the Syrian Democratic Forces and are backed by the United States.

It is indisputable, though, that millions of Syria's young people have grown up amid trauma. Aid workers are only now beginning to get a fuller picture of it as civilians pour out of areas held by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

One pediatrician, examining toddlers who had recently fled Raqqa, the city where the Islamic State has its Syrian headquarters, was unnerved by how weirdly listless they were in response to her prodding and poking.

''A child under 2 years is the most difficult child to examine,'' said the doctor, Rajia Sharhan, who works with Unicef. ''A child starts to fight with their arms, legs, even cries. This is normal.''

But these children did not resist or kick at all. ''They were just looking at me, like, 'Do what you want,' '' Dr. Sharhan said. ''I think it's because of the trauma they're suffering.''

As the military coalition led by the United States, and backed by Kurdish and Arab militias, encircles Raqqa, there are wildly divergent estimates of how many people are left in the city -- perhaps as few as 20,000. Conditions inside are awful.

There is not enough drinking water: What comes out of the tap makes people sick, and to get water from the Euphrates River is to risk being shot or bombed.

Mahmoud, a Raqqa resident who fled a year ago, said friends told him that food was so scarce that they saved it for their children and pretended to chew at meal times, to fool them.

Bread is about the only food that many of Raqqa's residents can afford, a survey in early July found. The city's electricity was cut long ago, and at the time of the survey, conducted by Reach, a nongovernmental group, there was no fuel left to run generators. The Islamic State had dug so many tunnels that the sewage pipes were damaged, and rats roamed through some neighborhoods, the survey found. The World Health Organization confirmed one case of polio in Raqqa in June.

And then there are the airstrikes. A United Nations panel in early June said coalition airstrikes had killed hundreds of civilians around Raqqa.

More than 200,000 people fled the city between April and July, according to the United Nations, and they poured into areas recently captured by the Arab and Kurdish militias of the Syrian Democratic Forces, or S.D.F.

The journey out of Raqqa takes children through terrain that is still heavily mined. Fleeing fighters have left booby traps and bombs. Temperatures soar well past 100 degrees, and there is little water in the dry, barren countryside.

''They are exhausted, they are stressed, they are dehydrated,'' said Gosia Nowacka, the emergency coordinator for Doctors Without Borders, who works in a camp for displaced people about 40 miles from Raqqa.

Aid workers tending to the displaced say children wake up with nightmares and wet their beds. They tell their mothers to cover themselves from head to toe, as required by the Islamic State. They play war, dividing into teams of ISIS fighters and anti-ISIS militias.

Mahmoud, the former Raqqa resident, said he was alarmed to see small boys acting tougher and older than their age. Even in the makeshift camps, beyond the control of ISIS, they tie black bandannas around their heads when they play, like ISIS fighters. They listen to ISIS propaganda songs. They ask him to get them guns. ''You don't see children living their normal age,'' he said. ''You see grown-up men.''

Schools in Raqqa, as in much of Syria, have been shut for years. Informal math lessons reflect the students' new reality: One gun plus one gun equals two guns, said Sonia Khush, the Syria coordinator for Save the Children.

In a survey carried out across Syria -- not just in ISIS-controlled areas -- Save the Children found that nearly half the adult respondents said they had seen children who had lost the ability to speak or had developed speech impediments since the start of the war.

Wadha was among the lucky ones. She fled Raqqa two months ago with her husband and two children. They had enough money to rent an apartment in a nearby town, Tal Abyad, now under S.D.F. control.

Her daughters are still terrified of the sound of fighter planes. They are afraid to leave the house without covering themselves completely, still mindful of ISIS' edicts. No schools are open yet in the town -- many were damaged in the fighting -- and at night, Wadha said, she stays up to make sure scorpions do not crawl into her children's bed.

Even so, it is better than Raqqa. ''I won't say life is bright and perfect here, but we saw the worst, so everything after that doesn't matter,'' she said.

The one constant danger facing children is recruitment by soldiers. The Islamic State routinely enlisted children to carry out some of its most heinous crimes, including suicide attacks, and boasted of training what it called ''caliphate cubs.''

The other jihadist umbrella group, known as Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham and believed to be linked to Al Qaeda, has also enlisted boys as young as 15, according to the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.

Paulo Ségio Pinheiro, the chairman of the commission, said his office had documented a ''significant increase in child recruitment'' by the S.D.F., too, as part of its Raqqa offensive. Mr. Pinheiro said the Kurdish police had ''arrested men and boys at checkpoints throughout areas under their control,'' on suspicion of supporting ISIS or for not joining their militia.

Other United Nations officials say they have verified reports that people accused of being ISIS sympathizers have been turned over to Syrian military intelligence.

One aid worker for a private agency who has been in the region for the past several months said he had heard of at least five teenage girls and several dozen boys who had been recruited by the S.D.F. ''Children are made to feel they are very important,'' the aid worker said. Like others, he did not want to use his name or the name of his organization, for fear of retribution.

The S.D.F. spokesman, Mustafa Bali, denied the reports of child recruitment, saying that his forces were fighting ''the mentality of child recruitment.''

''So how can we be accused of that?'' he said in an interview. ''I absolutely deny all these allegations.''

Child conscription is against international law, and the largest Syrian Kurdish militia carrying out anti-ISIS operations in the area, the Kurdish People's Protection Units, known as the Y.P.G., has pledged not to recruit children.

Geert Cappelaere, Unicef's regional director, spoke of the ''horrors'' that children faced even after they escaped Raqqa, stopping short of assigning blame.

''They are being detained, abused and stigmatized for perceived affiliations,'' he said in a carefully worded statement in mid-July, ''while tensions are high between and within communities.''

Muhammad, the boy who escaped to Beirut to join his father, ran away from his hometown, Maskanah, after ISIS seized it. The militants forced him to grow his hair long, but in a rebellious moment, he cut it off, and both he and his barber were hauled in for a scolding.

His childhood was transformed in other ways. The Islamic State took over his school and painted it black. Chopped-off heads were displayed in the town square. Neighbors informed on one another.

Muhammad cut his hair again as soon as he reached Beirut. He colored a swish of it platinum blond and swept it upward, with pomade, so that he looked a bit like a unicorn, with the face of a cherub.

Most days, he sells potato chips at a shop. On weekends, he helps his father manage a bakery. For fun, he plays soccer with other Syrian boys -- in bright tropical print shorts, forbidden under ISIS.

He talks in his sleep some nights, his father said. Muhammad tells his father about the beheadings. ''He has seen so many,'' his father said. ''He's used to it.''

Syrians fleeing on the western frontline of Raqqa, an ISIS stronghold, in mid-July. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BULENT KILIC/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES) (A1); Above, Syrians trying to escape the violence in Raqqa in July. Left, children at a camp in Ain Issa, Syria. Children growing up in areas ruled by ISIS have witnessed astonishing brutality. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BULENT KILIC/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES; GORAN TOMASEVIC/REUTERS) (A5) 

Document NYTF000020170801ed810003p



Foreign Desk; SECTA
2 Killed in Attack on Iraqi Embassy in Kabul

By JAWAD SUKHANYAR 
336 words
1 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan -- Attackers entered the grounds of the Iraqi Embassy in Kabul, the Afghan capital, after a suicide bomber blew himself up at an entrance gate shortly before noon Monday, an Afghan official said.

Two Afghans working at the embassy, a man and a woman, were killed, said Najib Danish, a spokesman for the Ministry of Interior.

Three attackers entered the embassy compound after the bombing around 11:10 a.m., he said. The security forces fought with the attackers for five hours before the attackers were killed. Two soldiers and a police officer were injured, Mr. Danish said.

A police officer near the scene of the attack said by phone that there were five loud blasts and that gunfire continued afterward. Embassy staff members were evacuated to safety, Mr. Danish said.

''No Iraqi staff are hurt,'' he said.

The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack through its news agency, Amaq.

The attack was at least the third coordinated assault in the city in recent weeks. Just last week, at least 24 people, including 18 employees of the Ministry of Mines, were killed by a Taliban suicide bomber.

And a month ago, more than 150 people were killed in a truck bombing near the German Embassy that was attributed to the Haqqani wing of the Taliban, though the group denied responsibility. The attack was one of the deadliest in the nearly 16 years since the American-led invasion of Afghanistan.

About 220 people were killed in the first six months of this year in Kabul, the United Nations has said. There were more than 1,000 total casualties over the period, 25 percent more than the same period last year.

Afghan residents fled near the Iraqi Embassy on Monday. ISIS took responsibility for an assault at the compound in which a suicide bombing opened the gate and allowed attackers to enter. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHAH MARAI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170801ed810003f



Briefing
Scaramucci, Kelly, Russia: Your Monday Evening Briefing

By KAREN ZRAICK and SANDRA STEVENSON 
995 words
1 August 2017
00:13
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good evening. Here’ the latest.

1. President Trump fired his famously vulgar communications director, Anthony Scaramucci, at the request of his new chief of staff, John Kelly, above.

The reason there was a new chief of staff, of course, is because the last one, Reince Priebus, was ousted last week after a blistering attack from Mr. Scaramucci.

Notice, above right, a familiar face? That’ Sean Spicer, who resigned after Mr. Scaramucci’ appointment, apparently fulfilling his promise to ease the transition to a new White House communications office.

Michael Barbaro and the team behind “he Daily”ave created a new podcast to keep up with the characters remaking the capital. It’ called “he New Washington.”

_____

2. Mr. Kelly, a retired general, is known as a beacon of discipline. President Trump has praised him for doing “ great job”s head of Homeland Security, where he presided over a substantial increase in the number of undocumented immigrants rounded up for deportation.

We spent a day with Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers, the frontline soldiers in the crackdown. Our reporter described seeing families separated on “he Daily.” Above, a father is arrested.

In other immigration news, Joe Arpaio, the former sheriff of Maricopa County, Ariz., was convicted of criminal contempt for defying a court order to stop rounding up immigrants. He may face jail time.

_____

3. The Kremlin is pushing ahead with plans to force the American Embassy to dismiss hundreds of employees in retaliation for new sanctions.

Most of the 755 employees to be dropped are likely to be Russian nationals working for the embassy in Moscow, above, or U.S. consulates in other Russian cities. Still, it’ Russia’ harshest diplomatic move since Soviet times.

_____

4. The Treasury Department announced new financial sanctions against Venezuela’ president following a much-criticized referendum on rewriting its Constitution.

The country saw its deadliest day of unrest in three months as the vote was held on Sunday. The government said the vote would bring peace, but many avoided the ballot box, and an array of other countries rejected the results.

The vote effectively liquidated the political opposition and gave the left complete control over a country that is deeply divided and in an economic and political tailspin.

_____

5. Even by the brutal standards of the Syrian civil war, children growing up in areas ruled by the Islamic State have experienced and witnessed astonishing brutality. Schools have been closed for years. Polio has made a comeback. Boys have been forced to watch executions and recruited to fight.

Aid workers and people who have escaped say the children have nightmares, play war, recall ISIS propaganda songs and ask for guns. “ou don’ see children living their normal age,”aid a man who fled Raqqa. “ou see grown-up men.”

_____

6. Los Angeles officials are expected to announce a deal to host the 2028 Summer Olympics, while Paris will take the 2024 games.

The projected cost is $5.3 billion, though L.A. officials expect it to come from private sources. The plan depends on stadiums and arenas belonging to major sports teams and universities, or left over from when it hosted the 1984 games.

_____

7. In memoriam: Sam Shepard, above, the avant-garde American playwright and Oscar-nominated actor, 73; and Jeanne Moreau, the sensual, gravel-voiced actress of the French New Wave, 89.

Here’ how to stream five great movies featuring Mr. Shepard, and highlights from our many decades of reviews of his work. Our fashion writer said he was also a style icon: “n his understated masculinity he was a throwback, an endangered species. He seemed vaguely tortured, and he wasn’ about to tell you why.”

_____

8. Couples who live together share a lot of things: beds, bathrooms, food, toiletries. But one thing they might not expect to share? Skin bacteria. Especially on their feet.

A study of 10 couples found that each person significantly influenced the microbial communities on a lover’ skin. That’ the mini-ecosystem of bacteria, fungi, viruses and other microorganisms living on the body.

What types of information can experts tell about you from your microbiome? Probably more than you think. Take our quiz to see.

_____

9. This weekend’ box office tallies were a stark reminder that the tastes of movie critics and the moviegoing public often diverge —harply.

The stylish “tomic Blonde,” above, sputtered, while “he Emoji Movie,” which horrified critics (including our own) was a hit.

The No. 1 movie in North America was again Christopher Nolan’ sophisticated “unkirk,” which benefited from strong turnout at IMAX theaters.

_____

10. Finally, will Cersei’ venom succeed as a long-term strategy? That’ the question at the heart of our latest “ame of Thrones”ecap. Be warned, spoilers abound.

Want exclusive GOT explainers as well as the internet’ best articles on this week’ episode? Sign up for our Season 7 newsletter here.

Have a great night.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.

Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

Doug Mills/The New York Times | Melissa Lyttle for The New York Times | Reuters.. | Meridith Kohut for The New York Times | Bulent Kilic/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Frederic J. Brown/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Chad Batka for The New York Times | James Estrin/The New York Times | Jonathan Prime/Focus Features | HBO, via Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170731ed7v0073m



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Best Sellers: Combined Print & E-Book Fiction: Sunday, July 30th 2017

522 words
30 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

About the Best Sellers:

These lists are an expanded version of those appearing in the July 30, 2017 print edition of the Book Review, reflecting sales for the week ending July 15, 2017. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above it. A dagger (†ndicates that some retailers report receiving bulk orders. For an explanation of our methodology, visit http://www.nytimes.com/best-sellers.

  Weeks


                              est Sellers: Combined Print & E-Book Fiction

This Last On
Week Week List
  
1         1


HOUSE OF SPIES, by Daniel Silva. (Harper) Gabriel Allon, the Israeli art restorer and spy, now the head of Israel’ secret intelligence service, pursues an ISIS mastermind

2 1 6


CAMINO ISLAND, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A search for stolen rare manuscripts leads to a Florida island.

3  17


THE WHISTLER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A whistleblower alerts a Florida investigator to judicial corruption involving the Mob and Indian casinos.

4 3 25


THE WOMAN IN CABIN 10, by Ruth Ware. (Scout) A travel writer on a cruise is certain she has heard a body thrown overboard, but no one believes her.

5 6 17


THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood. (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt) Men and women in a dystopian future. The basis of the Hulu series; originally published in 1985.

6  1


STILL LIFE, by Louise Penny. (Minotaur) Penny's debut novel, published in 2006, introduces Chief Inspector Armand Gamache of the Sûetéu Quéec.

7 5 5


THE IDENTICALS, by Elin Hilderbrand. (Little, Brown) Complications in the lives of identical twins who were raised by their divorced parents, one on Nantucket, one on Martha’ Vineyard.

8  47


A GAME OF THRONES, by George R. R. Martin. (Bantam) In the frozen wastes to the north of Winterfell, sinister and supernatural forces are mustering. Basis of the HBO series.

9 7 3


USE OF FORCE, by Brad Thor. (Atria/Emily Bestler) The counterterrorism operative Scot Harvath is called in when a missing terrorism suspect drowns off the Italian coast.

10 4 3


MURDER GAMES, by James Patterson and Howard Roughan. (Little, Brown ) An expert on serial murder becomes involved in the hunt for a New York City killer who leaves a playing card at the crime scene.

11 12 27


MILK AND HONEY, by Rupi Kaur. (Andrews McMeel) Poetic approaches to surviving adversity and loss.

12  1


THE GUNSLINGER, by Stephen King. (Pocket Books) The first volume of the Dark Tower series, originally published in 1989.

13  1


TWO NIGHTS, by Kathy Reichs. (Random House Publishing Group) Sunday Night, the heroine of a new series from the creator of Temperance Brennan, searches for a girl who may have been kidnapped by a cult.

14 10 11


INTO THE WATER, by Paula Hawkins. (Riverhead) In this psychological thriller by the author of “he Girl on the Train,”rowned women are found in an English river town.

15  1


SECRETS OF THE TULIP SISTERS, by Susan Mallery. (HQN) Two sisters reconnect in their tulip-centered hometown.

Document NYTF000020170731ed7u0002y



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Best Sellers: Hardcover Fiction: Sunday, July 30th 2017

510 words
30 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

About the Best Sellers:

These lists are an expanded version of those appearing in the July 30, 2017 print edition of the Book Review, reflecting sales for the week ending July 15, 2017. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above it. A dagger (†ndicates that some retailers report receiving bulk orders. For an explanation of our methodology, visit http://www.nytimes.com/best-sellers.

  Weeks


                              est Sellers: Hardcover Fiction

This Last On
Week Week List
  
1         1


HOUSE OF SPIES, by Daniel Silva. (Harper) Gabriel Allon, the Israeli art restorer and spy, now the head of Israel’ secret intelligence service, pursues an ISIS mastermind.

2 1 6


CAMINO ISLAND, by John Grisham. (Doubleday) A search for stolen rare manuscripts leads to a Florida island.

3 2 3


MURDER GAMES, by James Patterson and Howard Roughan. (Little, Brown ) An expert on serial murder becomes involved in the hunt for a New York City killer.

4 4 11


INTO THE WATER, by Paula Hawkins. (Riverhead) In this psychological thriller by the author of “he Girl on the Train,”omen are found drowned in a river in an English town.

5 3 3


USE OF FORCE, by Brad Thor. (Atria/Emily Bestler) The counterterrorism operative Scot Harvath is called in when a missing terrorism suspect drowns off the Italian coast.

6* 6 5


THE IDENTICALS, by Elin Hilderbrand. (Little, Brown) Complications in the lives of identical twins who were raised separately by divorced parents on Nantucket and Martha’ Vineyard.

7 5 3


THE DUCHESS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte) A 19th-century British duke's daughter, disinherited by her half brothers, flees to Paris to make a new life.

8 8 34


A GENTLEMAN IN MOSCOW, by Amor Towles. (Viking) A Russian count undergoes 30 years of house arrest.

9 13 3


SEVEN STONES TO STAND OR FALL, by Diana Gabaldon. (Delacorte) A collection of Outlander short fiction.

10  1


TWO NIGHTS, by Kathy Reichs. (Bantam) Sunday Night, the heroine of a new series from the creator of Temperance Brennan, searches for a girl who may have been kidnapped by a cult.

11 9 4


THE SILENT CORNER, by Dean Koontz. (Bantam) An F.B.I. agent investigates an alarming surge in suicides, including her husband's. The first in a new series.

12  1


SECRETS OF THE TULIP SISTERS, by Susan Mallery. (HQN) Sisters reconnect when one returns to their tulip-centered hometown.

13 11 5


TOM CLANCY: POINT OF CONTACT, by Mike Maden. (Putnam) Jack Ryan Jr. helps thwart a global financial crisis. (Tom Clancy died in 2013.)

14*  1


DOWN A DARK ROAD, by Linda Castillo. (Minotaur) Kate Burkholder, an Amish-born (but excommunicated) chief of police, believes that an old friend accused of his wife’ murder may be innocent.

15 15 4


KISS CARLO, by Adriana Trigiani. (Harper/HarperCollins) Extended Italian-American families work, feud and fall in love in the Philadelphia area in 1949.

Document NYTF000020170731ed7u0002z



Times Insider
A Pentagon Correspondent Keeps Sight of the Person Inside the Uniform

By HELENE COOPER 
818 words
30 July 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In the time that I’e been covering the American military, I have fought the urge to vomit during a catapult takeoff from an aircraft carrier in the Persian Gulf, convinced myself that I was dying of blood loss when the Humvee I was in was run over by a tank in Iraq, and battled nerves and stomach heaves from an ejection seat of a B-1 bomber, wondering what the heck I thought I was doing 27,000 feet in the air.

And yet I suspect that in years to come, when I am recounting what it was like to be a Pentagon correspondent, I will remember far more the combination of hurt and defiance in the voice of a transgender American service member when I asked him how it felt to wake up Wednesday morning to a tweet from President Trump that he was no longer welcome in this country’ all-volunteer military.

“o know your own commander in chief doesn’ support you is totally demoralizing,”avy Lt. Cmdr. Blake Dremann told me. Still, he said he would continue to serve until the Navy comes and “ells me to hang up my boots.”

As a Pentagon reporter, I am far more comfortable interviewing top military brass about Afghanistan policy and the fight against the Islamic State. Those interviews are conducted with generals who have multiple stars on their breastplates and who are usually adept at not divulging more than what they have decided they will tell a reporter. There can be a dispassionate nature to those interactions; we sometimes talk about precision-guided airstrikes against “ISIS targets”s if we are not talking about killing human beings before they can kill us.

Pentagon reporters don’ usually do feelings, and we certainly don’ spend a lot of time talking to service members —any of whom are skittish about speaking on the record to reporters anyway —bout their feelings on Defense Department policy. Often they will just spout the standard American military line, because they don’ want to get into trouble with their superiors. But the transgender story is different because at its heart, it is a story about how this country treats the men and women who volunteer to defend America from its foes. It is not my usual story about how many Islamic State fighters we took out yesterday or how many troops the country will send to Afghanistan.

Rather, it is a story about men and women and their gender identity —o personal that basic questions felt invasive. Because hanging over those questions —“re you in the process of transitioning?”—ere issues so fundamental to a person’ humanity that the very asking seemed a violation. I kept imagining what it would have been like covering the Civil Rights Movement and asking black people what it was like to be told they were not equal to white people. “ow did you feel, Ruby Bridges, when those people threw eggs at you as the U.S. Marshals escorted you to that elementary school in New Orleans?”

But that’ one of the things that makes the job of writing about the American military the best job in Washington. It is a complex window into a world that is populated by everyone under the sun: They’e all here, and in the ranks of the enlisted men and women is a mosaic that tells the story of the country they serve.

There was the African-American Army specialist from Georgia who was told that her kinky hair didn’ conform to Army grooming standards. There was the diminutive Army private from the Dominican Republic who couldn’ believe reporters went to cover the Iraq war unarmed. There was the 19-year-old Navy petty officer from Ethiopia who sat with me for hours, garbage bag at his feet, on the quarterdeck of a Navy cruiser in the Pacific, seasick.

All of them, like Commander Dremann, were volunteers. As a reporter often more preoccupied with the military buildup on the Korean Peninsula or the fight against the Shabab in Somalia or which American units will be stationed in Eastern Europe as a bulwark against Russian aggression in Ukraine, it can be so easy to lose sight of the people for the policy. You spend the bulk of your reporting time getting comments from officials or looking for the latest memo about whether the rules of engagement in Somalia have changed.

Then suddenly you’e talking to one of the 1.3 million people who signed up to defend their country, wrestling with how to portray the truth of their feelings while preserving their dignity and livelihoods.

A protest in Times Square against President Trump’ announcement barring transgender people from military service. | Justin Lane/European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170730ed7u000ul



Times Insider
‘ood Example of Profanity Use: Stepping on a Lego Brick’

By LELA MOORE and BRIANNA MILORD 
970 words
29 July 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Here are the top 10 comments of the week on our digital platforms, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment. Some comments were edited for length and clarity.

Making a (Swear Word Here) Point

1. Good example of profanity use: Stepping on a Lego brick.

Bad example of profanity use: Shooting your mouth off during an interview with The New Yorker.

—David Kopf on The New York Times’ Facebook page, responding to an article about the sometimes-necessary impact of cursing.

Trump Bars Transgender People From Military

2. My heart breaks today for our transgender women and men in uniform. Thank you for your courageous service to an ungrateful nation.

—@ShawnSRocks on Twitter, responding to an article about President Donald Trump’ saying that transgender people could no longer serve in the military.

3. You need to be able to trust your unit. Not everyone is accepting unfortunately. It was kinda better with the don’ ask, don’ tell.

—Alison M. Reed on The Times’ Facebook page.

Senate Rejects ‘kinny Repeal’f Health Bill

4. This is a devastating blow to the American people. The ACA has imploded in many states. What are people going to do next year in those states. Has anyone in Washington thought about that?

—Tom in Pennsylvania, reacting to an article about the Senate vote Thursday night to reject a “kinny”epeal of the Affordable Care Act.

5. I am one of your constituents from Anchorage and I thank you for listening to ALL of your Alaska constituents, not just your Republican constituents.

—Alexis Sims-Howard on The Times’ Facebook page, responding to an article about Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, one of three Republicans who voted against the repeal.

After Escaping ISIS, Coping With Shock

6. It is called trauma.

You keep going as long as you can, but when you are finally free, when the unrelenting pressures are gone and the body and mind are no longer fighting for day to day survival, the mind can at last begin to integrate the enormity of the violent experiences and complete degradation they have endured.

These women need rest and comfort.

I hope they can, with time, regain some of the trajectory of their lives before all this happened. It may take a long, long time, even under the best of circumstances, even with the love and support of their families.

Godspeed.

—Ellen in New York, reacting to an article about the trauma endured by women and girls in Iraq’ Yazidi ethnic minority who were held in captivity by the Islamic State.

This comment received more than 600 reader recommendations.

When Foster Care Is a Punishment

7. My siblings and I would have been removed from my mom’ care if the authorities had found out she was leaving us home alone all day every day in the summertime and during school breaks while she worked but I don’ believe we would have fared better in foster care. We were just poor.

My siblings and I were not being abused or neglected. My mom didn’ drink or do drugs and worked very hard to take care of us. Our society loves to castigate poor, single mothers for having children they can’ afford and yet here is our social welfare system punishing them for trying their best to take care of their children.

—MK in New York, reacting to an article about the rising concern over what some call the “riminalizing”f parenting by the Administration for Children’ Services.

This comment received more than 250 reader recommendations.

Saying No to Circumcision

8. We circumcised both of our boys when they were born 17 and 14 years ago, without giving it too much thought. My wife and I are both Jewish, and I’ circumcised as is my entire family. It’ just tradition.

Having been through this primitive and bloody procedure twice (three times if you include my own, but I don’ remember that!), I can’ say for sure I’ subject my sons to the Jewish circumcision ritual again. It seems barbaric and unnecessary.

I disagree completely with the orthodox cantor quoted in the article, who offers no real argument except to say you won’ be in touch with your Jewish heritage if you’e not circumcised. Really? I’ like to see some proof, please.

I’e always felt Jewish, and never considered my sense of Judaism to be contingent on an operation performed on me without my consent at the age of eight days.

—Dan in Chicago, reacting to an article about Jewish families increasingly opting against circumcising baby boys.

Splitting Checks

10. I once got to a dinner late. They drank four bottles of wine before I got there, they all ordered appetizers and entrees. I had a $12 appetizer, a glass of wine and one bite of dessert. When it came to pay the bill they insisted on splitting it equally. I paid $90. I’ still pissed off eight years later.

—Sandra Russo on The Times’ Facebook page, responding to an article about the pitfalls of money sharing and bill-splitting apps like Venmo . The New York Times rounded up other notable reader comments from this story here.

Swearing can increase your ability to withstand pain, according to one study. | Getty Images | Justin Gilliland/The New York Times | Valda Kalnina/European Pressphoto Agency | Cliff Owen/Associated Press | Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times | Alex Potter for The New York Times | Kevin Hagen for The New York Times | Michael Kirby Smith for The New York Times | Josh Haner/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170729ed7t0028l



World; Europe
One Dead in Knife Attack at German Supermarket

By MELISSA EDDY 
579 words
28 July 2017
20:04
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BERLIN — man wielding a large knife fatally stabbed one person and wounded five others on Friday during an attack at a supermarket in Hamburg, Germany, the police said. The assailant was arrested as he tried to flee.

The police said the attacker was a 26-year-old who was born in the United Arab Emirates, but did not release his name. Investigators said they were still trying to determine his citizenship, but Hamburg’ mayor, Olaf Scholz, said it appeared that the attacker was someone who should have been forced to leave Germany. The young man was not deported, Mr. Scholz said, because he did not have the necessary identification and travel documents.

“hat makes me angry is that it appears the attacker is someone who sought protection here in Germany and then turned his hate against us,”r. Scholz said.

The police declined to offer any information to suggest a motive for the attack, but said they had not ruled out the possibility that it had been an act of terrorism.

Germany has been the target of several attacks by Islamist extremists in the last year, and officials have expressed concern about people who have returned to the country after fighting for the Islamic State in Syria or Iraq. Officials with the country’ Federal Criminal Office believe that there could be as many as 274 such people, and they do not have enough evidence to detain all of them.

There are also fears that terrorists may have entered the country during the wave of mass immigration in 2015.

A woman identified as a cashier at the supermarket told the private 24-hour news channel n-tv that the man had shouted “llahu akbar,”hich means God is great in Arabic, after he attacked people inside the store.

The assailant wounded other people on the street after he ran out of the supermarket but was wrestled to the ground by passers-by, who held him until police officers arrived. The German news media showed images of the attacker in the back seat of a police car, his face covered by a cloth stained with blood, which the police said came from injuries he had sustained.

The police identified the man who died only as a 50-year-old German, who was stabbed inside the supermarket. A 50-year-old woman and four men were wounded in the attack. The police said another man was hurt while helping to overpower the assailant.

Last summer, a string of assaults, including one by an unaccompanied minor refugee who attacked passengers on a train with an ax, and another refugee who detonated a backpack of explosives near a bar in southern Germany, rattled the country. Both attackers had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State, as did Anis Amri, the man who drove a truck into a Christmas market on Dec. 19, killing 12 people in the country’ worst terrorist attack in decades.

* German Islamic Extremist Is Convicted of Supporting Terror Group

* German Police Kill Assailant After Ax Attack Aboard a Train

* Suicide Bomber in Ansbach, Germany, Pledged Loyalty to \b ISIS\b0 , Officials Say

* Germany Releases Berlin Attack Suspect as \b ISIS\b0  Claims Involvement

The police in Hamburg, Germany, cordoned the area around a supermarket, where a man killed one person and wounded four others in a knife attack on Friday. | Markus Scholz/DPA, via Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170728ed7s0076d



Asia and Australia Edition
Briefing
U.S. Senate , Jerusalem, Jeff Bezos : Your Friday Briefing

By CHARLES McDERMID 
1,343 words
27 July 2017
22:07
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•“e will continue to treat all of our personnel with respect.”merica’ highest military officer said transgender people would continue to serve  until the White House worked through official channels to implement the ban President Trump unexpectedly announced on Twitter .

In another turn away from Mr. Trump’ pro-L.G.B.T.Q. campaign rhetoric, his Justice Department is arguing in legal filings that a major federal civil rights law does not protect employees from discrimination based on sexual orientation .

And the Senate moves into a “ote-a-rama”— voting marathon —o try to pass a bill that would repeal only a few provisions in the Affordable Care Act. Here’ the latest . The Senate also approved new sanctions against Russia , forcing Mr. Trump to decide whether to accept a tougher line against Moscow.

_____

•he commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet, above, asked in Canberra whether he would comply if President Trump ordered a nuclear strike on China , said yes.

The context, experts emphasized, was the American principle of civilian control over the military, but the effect was chilling, particularly at a time when North Korea’ nuclear threat is increasing  and trust that mutually assured destruction would forestall any nuclear attack  appears to be decreasing.

_____

•he Japanese Ministry of Defense delivers its conclusions today about whether Prime Minister Shinzo Abe ’ government deliberately withheld information about the safety of Japanese troops at a U.N . compound in South Sudan.

Reports are circulating that the defense minister, above center, and a top military officer  are preparing to resign. That would spell more trouble for Mr. Abe, whose approval ratings have plunged to less than 30 percent .

_____

•s the Islamic State is driven out of its strongholds, the human toll it exacted is becoming ever more evident.

Our reporter spoke to a doctor in Iraq who has treated over 1,000 women subjected to repeated rape under ISIS rule, and visited a camp where the scene of barely conscious women and girls underscored the cost of sexual enslavement to the militants .

In Pakistan, the police arrested 25 Punjabi villagers after a man was reported to have publicly raped a teenage girl on the orders of a local council  to avenge the sexual assault of his sister.

_____

•Jeff Bezos , the founder of Amazon , was briefly the world’ wealthiest person , with holdings worth more than $90 billion —ntil his stock price dropped him back behind Bill Gates of Microsoft . But investors’esponse was relatively muted considering Amazon reported profits that were less than a third of what Wall Street had expected .

The online shopping that propelled Mr. Bezos, above, has helped sideline America’ shopping malls , those pleasure palaces of days past.

_____

•ur Australia bureau chief is at the Great Barrier Reef , reporting on scientists’fforts to save it. He says he’ been struck by the stunning scale and variety of life there, and the global interest and passion for all that the reef represents.

Business

•uestions are mounting over a Chinese donor’ transfer of more than 29 percent of HNA Group , worth about $18 billion, to a New York charity. Above, Adam Tan , the chairman of HNA, who disclosed the donation.

•ibor, the scandal-plagued benchmark for interbank loans, could be phased out by British regulators by 2021 .

•SpaceX , the rocket maker founded by Elon Musk , raised up to $350 million and is now valued at around $21 billion, making it one of the world’ most valuable privately held companies .

•pple was the innovative force in personal computers for years. Now, our tech columnist writes , it’ Microsoft .

• record price : The Hong Kong-based LKK Group bought the London skyscraper known as the Walkie Talkie for $1.7 billion  —he most ever paid for a single British property.

•.S. stocks were lower . Here’ a snapshot of global markets .

In the News

•uslims resumed praying at the Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem after Israel removed the last traces of security structures near the entrances at the close of a two-week standoff. [ The New York Times ]

•n South Korea, six former top aides to the ousted president, Park Geun-hye, were sentenced to prison for blacklisting thousands of cultural figures. [ The New York Times ]

•harlie Gard, the chronically ill British infant, will spend his last moments in a hospice before he is taken off life support, according to a ruling by the British High Court. [ The New York Times ]

•hina is closing off a 15,444-square-mile swath of the Yellow Sea for military exercises coinciding with the People’ Liberation Army’ 90th anniversary. [ CNN ]

•ise of the care-bots. China is developing millions of companion robots for its growing population of older people. [ Quartz ]

•ew Zealand was once home to a “ulking, semi-flightless”lack swan, known in Maori legend as a Pouwa. Fossil record shows the Pouwa went extinct around 1450. [ New Scientist ]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•attoos may change the way you sweat .

•t’ probably wiser to spend money  to save time  than spend time to save money.

•ecipe of the day: Keep tonight’ dinner meatless with hot and sour seared tofu .

Noteworthy

•ow fungi —ncluding some you know, like portobello and shiitake mushrooms —hoot their spores has long been a scientific enigma. Ultrahigh-speed video  helped explain how they aim.

•aleed Aly, our contributing opinion writer from Australia, examines Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull ’ creation of a “uper ministry”f Home Affairs and sees more relevance to domestic politics than national security .

•n the Forever Happy Princess, a Chinese cruise ship, you can play mah-jongg, sing karaoke and snorkel in waters as “ure as a baby’ soul.”nfortunately, you’l be sailing through an international power struggle .

•nd The Times bids farewell to our chief book critic, Michiko Kakutani, who has guided readers through literature’ changing landscape for 38 years. Here are highlights of her tenure .

Back Story

Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany was joined by the king and queen of Sweden  this week for the opening of the Bayreuth Festival , a tradition The Times once called “the Woodstock of the opera set .”

The festival was started in 1876 by Richard Wagner, the German composer. It is still managed by his descendants and devoted exclusively to his operas, such as the “ing”ycle and “ristan und Isolde.”hey are performed in the theater he designed and built, and some fans wait decades for tickets .

Bayreuth has something of an operatic history of its own. Wagner, who died in 1883, was a notorious anti-Semite , and in the 1920s and ’0s the festival became associated with the Nazis. The opera “ie Meistersinger von Nünberg”as a favorite of Hitler’.

“ie Meistersinger”as also the opening performance this year, led by Barrie Kosky , the first Jewish director in the festival’ history. Above, a scene from Mr. Kosky’ “ie Meistersinger.”

Next year’ festival will feature another milestone: Yuval Sharon will become the first American to direct a production.

“or me, Bayreuth has always been this very holy place,”Mr. Sharon told us earlier this month . “’e already had five anxiety dreams about it, so that means I’ on the right track.”

_____

We have briefings timed for the Australian , European  and American  mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here  .

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com .

Paul J. Richards/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Rod Mcguirk/Associated Press | Kimimasa Mayama/European Pressphoto Agency | Alex Potter for The New York Times | David Mcnew/Getty Images | David Maurice Smith for The New York Times | Christopher Goodney/Bloomberg | Ahmad Gharabli/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Andrew Boyers/Reuters | Karsten Moran for The New York Times | Enrico Nawrath/Bayreuth Festspiele 

Document NYTFEED020170727ed7r008y9



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
Wow, Trump Can't Terminate

By GAIL COLLINS 
903 words
27 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
27
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Pick your favorite irony:

1) Donald Trump turns out to be terrible at firing people.

2) The White House celebrates its ''American Heroes Week'' by banning transgender volunteers from serving in the military.

3) Thanks to the president's harangues, we are actually starting to feel sympathy for Jeff Sessions.

I can definitely understand if you want to pick No. 2, especially since Trump just finished observing ''Made in America Week'' with an application to hire 70 foreign workers at Mar-a-Lago.

But let's talk for a minute about the way our president gets rid of unwanted members of his administration. It's a monument to passive-aggressive ineptitude. With Sessions, Trump has been broadcasting his displeasure to the world for more than a week without making the obvious follow-through.

And this was the guy who made ''You're fired!'' his calling card. Clearly, he brought a lot of fiction to reality TV. Clay Aiken, a onetime contestant on ''The Celebrity Apprentice,'' recently told an interviewer that Trump actually ''didn't decide who got fired on 'Apprentice,''' and had to be fed his lines by producers.

Not exactly a shock, but watching the president in action over recent weeks, you have to wonder how he'd have functioned if he ran that show without prompting.

On Sunday, ''Celebrity Apprentice'' promises ''fireworks'' when Donald Trump tells other people he has no confidence in Rhoda, the beleaguered fashion model and ferret breeder. It will be the seventh week in which the real estate superstar has said unpleasant things about Rhoda to her friends, family and American viewers. Tension rises as contestants wait to see if their mentor will continue his strategy or send a bodyguard to deliver the bad news to Rhoda in person.

Trump's attempts to drive Sessions out of office without actually confronting him began last week with his famous New York Times interview and then escalated through press conferences and the social media (''VERY weak''). In one tweet Trump referred to Sessions as ''our beleaguered A.G.'' Now ''beleaguered'' means under attack, and this was sort of like taking a jackhammer to the street in front of your house and then complaining to the city about potholes.

On another occasion Trump said he was ''disappointed'' in Sessions. This was during a press conference with Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri in which the president took a few questions after praising Hariri for being ''on the front lines in the fight against ISIS, Al Qaeda and Hezbollah .'' Carping minds noted that Hariri actually has a power-sharing arrangement with Hezbollah , which controls most of the people in his cabinet. But if you wanted a president who was going to split hairs, you should have voted for somebody else.

O.K., I know, I know.

Trump appears completely unaware that he's beginning to look like the worst terminator in history. Introducing Tom Price, the secretary of health and human services, at an event this week, the president jovially said that Price had better get the health care bill passed through Congress, ''otherwise, I'll say: 'Tom, you're fired.' I'll get somebody.''

This was at that Boy Scouts jamboree when Trump did such a great job of impersonating your Uncle Fred Who Gets Drunk at Family Dinners. How many of you think the Boy Scouts have been yearning for the day when the president would come to their big event, tell the teens that their federal government is a ''sewer,'' recount a long and incoherent story about a real estate developer who went off to make whoopee on his yacht, and brag incessantly about having won the election? On the plus side, Trump did not misrepresent the Scout position on Hezbollah .

Trump has been complaining a lot about Sessions's lack of loyalty, which might have confused people who remembered that Sessions was the first senator to endorse his presidential campaign, back in February of 2016. You'd think that standing up to fellow Republicans who regarded Trump as a dangerous lunatic should have merited a little bit of long-run gratitude.

Trump cleared all that up, however, in an interview with The Wall Street Journal where he explained that Sessions's endorsement was ''not like a great loyal thing,'' but merely an insignificant politician trying to feed off his star power and crowd-drawing charisma. (''He was a senator from Alabama. ... He looks at 40,000 people and he probably says, 'What do I have to lose?' And he endorsed me.'')

Now Trump wants Sessions gone so he can replace him with an attorney general who will fire special counsel Robert Mueller. Sessions can't do it because he recused himself from all things Russia-related.

Mueller's probe into the Trump camp's relationship with Russia terrifies the president, especially if it involves an investigation of Trump family finances. So obviously, we are rooting for Sessions to stay right where he is ... and, um, keep persecuting immigrants, ratchet up imprisonments for nonviolent crimes and maybe go back to his old dream of imposing the death penalty on marijuana dealers.

Well, I told you this was about irony.

I invite you to join me on Facebook .

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170727ed7r00047



Op-Ed Columnist
Opinion
Wow, Trump Can’ Terminate

By GAIL COLLINS 
913 words
27 July 2017
09:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Pick your favorite irony:

1) Donald Trump turns out to be terrible at firing people.

2) The White House celebrates its “merican Heroes Week”y banning transgender volunteers from serving in the military.

3) Thanks to the president’ harangues, we are actually starting to feel sympathy for Jeff Sessions.

I can definitely understand if you want to pick No. 2, especially since Trump just finished observing “ade in America Week”ith an application to hire 70 foreign workers at Mar-a-Lago.

But let’ talk for a minute about the way our president gets rid of unwanted members of his administration. It’ a monument to passive-aggressive ineptitude. With Sessions, Trump has been broadcasting his displeasure to the world for more than a week without making the obvious follow-through.

And this was the guy who made “ou’e fired!”is calling card. Clearly, he brought a lot of fiction to reality TV. Clay Aiken, a onetime contestant on “he Celebrity Apprentice,”ecently told an interviewer  that Trump actually “idn’ decide who got fired on ‘pprentice,’”nd had to be fed his lines by producers.

Not exactly a shock, but watching the president in action over recent weeks, you have to wonder how he’ have functioned if he ran that show without prompting.

On Sunday, “elebrity Apprentice”romises “ireworks”hen Donald Trump tells other people he has no confidence in Rhoda, the beleaguered fashion model and ferret breeder. It will be the seventh week in which the real estate superstar has said unpleasant things about Rhoda to her friends, family and American viewers. Tension rises as contestants wait to see if their mentor will continue his strategy or send a bodyguard to deliver the bad news to Rhoda in person.

Trump’ attempts to drive Sessions out of office without actually confronting him began last week with his famous New York Times interview  and then escalated through press conferences and the social media (“ERY weak”. In one tweet Trump referred to Sessions as “ur beleaguered A.G.”ow “eleaguered”eans under attack, and this was sort of like taking a jackhammer to the street in front of your house and then complaining to the city about potholes.

On another occasion Trump said he was “isappointed”n Sessions. This was during a press conference with Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri in which the president took a few questions after praising Hariri for being “n the front lines in the fight against ISIS, Al Qaeda and Hezbollah .”arping minds noted  that Hariri actually has a power-sharing arrangement with Hezbollah , which controls most of the people in his cabinet. But if you wanted a president who was going to split hairs, you should have voted for somebody else.

O.K., I know, I know.

Trump appears completely unaware that he’ beginning to look like the worst terminator in history. Introducing Tom Price, the secretary of health and human services, at an event this week, the president jovially said that Price had better get the health care bill passed through Congress, “therwise, I’l say: ‘om, you’e fired.’’l get somebody.”

This was at that Boy Scouts jamboree when Trump did such a great job of impersonating your Uncle Fred Who Gets Drunk at Family Dinners. How many of you think the Boy Scouts have been yearning for the day when the president would come to their big event, tell the teens that their federal government is a “ewer,”ecount a long and incoherent story about a real estate developer who went off to make whoopee on his yacht, and brag incessantly about having won the election? On the plus side, Trump did not misrepresent the Scout position on Hezbollah .

Trump has been complaining a lot about Sessions’ lack of loyalty, which might have confused people who remembered that Sessions was the first senator to endorse his presidential campaign, back in February of 2016. You’ think that standing up to fellow Republicans who regarded Trump as a dangerous lunatic should have merited a little bit of long-run gratitude.

Trump cleared all that up, however, in an interview  with The Wall Street Journal where he explained that Sessions’ endorsement was “ot like a great loyal thing,”ut merely an insignificant politician trying to feed off his star power and crowd-drawing charisma. (“e was a senator from Alabama. …e looks at 40,000 people and he probably says, ‘hat do I have to lose?’nd he endorsed me.”

Now Trump wants Sessions gone so he can replace him with an attorney general who will fire special counsel Robert Mueller. Sessions can’ do it because he recused himself from all things Russia-related.

Mueller’ probe into the Trump camp’ relationship with Russia terrifies the president, especially if it involves an investigation of Trump family finances. So obviously, we are rooting for Sessions to stay right where he is …nd, um, keep persecuting immigrants, ratchet up imprisonments for nonviolent crimes and maybe go back to his old dream of imposing the death penalty on marijuana dealers.

Well, I told you this was about irony.

I invite you to join me on Facebook .

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook  and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter .

President Trump in Ohio on Tuesday. | Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170727ed7r002js



opinion
Wow, Trump Can’ Terminate; Op-Ed Columnist

By GAIL COLLINS 
904 words
27 July 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Pick your favorite irony:

1) Donald Trump turns out to be terrible at firing people.

2) The White House celebrates its “merican Heroes Week”y banning transgender volunteers from serving in the military.

3) Thanks to the president’ harangues, we are actually starting to feel sympathy for Jeff Sessions.

I can definitely understand if you want to pick No. 2, especially since Trump just finished observing “ade in America Week”ith an application to hire 70 foreign workers at Mar-a-Lago.

But let’ talk for a minute about the way our president gets rid of unwanted members of his administration. It’ a monument to passive-aggressive ineptitude. With Sessions, Trump has been broadcasting his displeasure to the world for more than a week without making the obvious follow-through.

And this was the guy who made “ou’e fired!”is calling card. Clearly, he brought a lot of fiction to reality TV. Clay Aiken, a onetime contestant on “he Celebrity Apprentice,”ecently told an interviewer  that Trump actually “idn’ decide who got fired on ‘pprentice,’”nd had to be fed his lines by producers.

Not exactly a shock, but watching the president in action over recent weeks, you have to wonder how he’ have functioned if he ran that show without prompting.

On Sunday, “elebrity Apprentice”romises “ireworks”hen Donald Trump tells other people he has no confidence in Rhoda, the beleaguered fashion model and ferret breeder. It will be the seventh week in which the real estate superstar has said unpleasant things about Rhoda to her friends, family and American viewers. Tension rises as contestants wait to see if their mentor will continue his strategy or send a bodyguard to deliver the bad news to Rhoda in person.

Trump’ attempts to drive Sessions out of office without actually confronting him began last week with his famous New York Times interview  and then escalated through press conferences and the social media (“ERY weak”. In one tweet Trump referred to Sessions as “ur beleaguered A.G.”ow “eleaguered”eans under attack, and this was sort of like taking a jackhammer to the street in front of your house and then complaining to the city about potholes.

On another occasion Trump said he was “isappointed”n Sessions. This was during a press conference with Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri in which the president took a few questions after praising Hariri for being “n the front lines in the fight against ISIS, Al Qaeda and Hezbollah .”arping minds noted  that Hariri actually has a power-sharing arrangement with Hezbollah , which controls most of the people in his cabinet. But if you wanted a president who was going to split hairs, you should have voted for somebody else.

O.K., I know, I know.

Trump appears completely unaware that he’ beginning to look like the worst terminator in history. Introducing Tom Price, the secretary of health and human services, at an event this week, the president jovially said that Price had better get the health care bill passed through Congress, “therwise, I’l say: ‘om, you’e fired.’’l get somebody.”

This was at that Boy Scouts jamboree when Trump did such a great job of impersonating your Uncle Fred Who Gets Drunk at Family Dinners. How many of you think the Boy Scouts have been yearning for the day when the president would come to their big event, tell the teens that their federal government is a “ewer,”ecount a long and incoherent story about a real estate developer who went off to make whoopee on his yacht, and brag incessantly about having won the election? On the plus side, Trump did not misrepresent the Scout position on Hezbollah .

Trump has been complaining a lot about Sessions’ lack of loyalty, which might have confused people who remembered that Sessions was the first senator to endorse his presidential campaign, back in February of 2016. You’ think that standing up to fellow Republicans who regarded Trump as a dangerous lunatic should have merited a little bit of long-run gratitude.

Trump cleared all that up, however, in an interview  with The Wall Street Journal where he explained that Sessions’ endorsement was “ot like a great loyal thing,”ut merely an insignificant politician trying to feed off his star power and crowd-drawing charisma. (“e was a senator from Alabama. …e looks at 40,000 people and he probably says, ‘hat do I have to lose?’nd he endorsed me.”

Now Trump wants Sessions gone so he can replace him with an attorney general who will fire special counsel Robert Mueller. Sessions can’ do it because he recused himself from all things Russia-related.

Mueller’ probe into the Trump camp’ relationship with Russia terrifies the president, especially if it involves an investigation of Trump family finances. So obviously, we are rooting for Sessions to stay right where he is …nd, um, keep persecuting immigrants, ratchet up imprisonments for nonviolent crimes and maybe go back to his old dream of imposing the death penalty on marijuana dealers.

Well, I told you this was about irony.

I invite you to join me on Facebook .

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook  and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter .

Document INHT000020170727ed7r0000w



Trilobites
Science
Fate of Ancient Canaanites Seen in DNA Analysis: They Survived

By NICHOLAS ST. FLEUR 
917 words
27 July 2017
21:28
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

There is a story in the Hebrew Bible that tells of God’ call for the annihilation of the Canaanites, a people who lived in what are now Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Israel and the Palestinian territories thousands of years ago.

“ou shall not leave alive anything that breathes,”od said in the passage. “ut you shall utterly destroy them.”

But a genetic analysis published on Thursday has found that the ancient population survived that divine call for their extinction, and their descendants live in modern Lebanon.

“e can see the present-day Lebanese can trace most of their ancestry to the Canaanites or a genetically equivalent population,”aid Chris Tyler-Smith, a geneticist with the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute who is an author of the paper. “hey derive just over 90 percent of their ancestry from the Canaanites.”

Dr. Tyler-Smith and an international team of geneticists and archaeologists recovered ancient DNA from bones belonging to five Canaanites retrieved from an excavation site in Sidon, Lebanon, that were 3,650 to 3,750 years old. The team then compared the ancient DNA with the genomes of 99 living people from Lebanon that the group had sequenced. It found that the modern Lebanese people shared about 93 percent of their ancestry with the Bronze Age Sidon samples.

The team published its results in The American Journal of Human Genetics.

“he conclusion is clear,”aid Iosif Lazaridis, a geneticist at Harvard who was not involved in the study. “ased on this study it turns out that people who lived in Lebanon almost 4,000 years ago were quite similar to people who lived there today, to the modern Lebanese.”

Marc Haber, a postdoctoral fellow at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute in England and lead author on the study, said that compared with other Bronze Age civilizations, not much is known about the Canaanites.

“e know about ancient Egyptians and ancient Greeks, but we know very little about the ancient Canaanites because their records didn’ survive,”e said. Their writings may have been kept on papyrus, which did not stand the test of time as clay did. What is known about the Canaanites is that they lived and traded along the eastern coast of the present-day Mediterranean, a region that was known as the Levant.

“hat we see is that since the Bronze Age, this ancestry, or the genetics of the people there, didn’ change much,”r. Haber said. “t changed a little, but it didn’ change much and that is what surprised me.”

At first the team was not sure if it would be able to retrieve DNA from the ancient skeletons, which were recovered from the hot and humid excavation site within the last 19 years. Dr. Haber had chosen more than two dozen bones from the site that looked promising and had them investigated for genetic material. It turned out that only five contained ancient DNA. All of those came from the petrous part of the temporal bone, which is the tough part of the skull behind the ear, from five different individuals.

After extracting that DNA, the team members compared it with a database that contained genetic information from hundreds of human populations. They then further compared their results with the genomes of the modern-day Lebanese population sample, which revealed what happened to the ancient Canaanite population.

“enetics has the power to answer questions that historical records or archaeology are not able to answer,”r. Haber said.

He said researchers thought that migrations, conquests and the intermixing of Eurasian people —ike the Assyrians, Persians or Macedonians —ith the Canaanites 3,800 to 2,200 years ago might have contributed to the slight genetic changes seen in modern Lebanese populations. Still, the Lebanese retain most of their ancestral DNA from the Canaanites.

“t confirms the continuity of occupation and rooted tradition we have seen on-site, which was occupied from the 4th millennium B.C. right to the Crusader period,”Claude Doumet-Serhal, an archaeologist and director of the Sidon Excavation who is a co-author on the paper, said in an email.

She said that the archaeologists had found about 160 burials to date at their excavation site, which is in the heart of modern Sidon. They include graves and burials where a person was placed in a large jar, and they date to between 1900 and 1550 B.C. The genetic results further support the archaeological findings.

“e were delighted by the findings,”r. Doumet-Serhal said. “e are looking at the Canaanite society through 160 burials and at the same time uncovering a common past for all the people of Lebanon, whatever religion they belong to.”

Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the  Science Times newsletter.

* Story of Philistines Could Be Reshaped by Ancient Cemetery

* A Jewel in Syria Where ‘uins Have Been Ruined’y \b ISIS\b0 

Remnants from an ancient Canaanite found in the Sidon excavation site. A genetic analysis found that the Canaanites survived a divine call for their extinction and that their descendants live in Lebanon. | Claude Doumet-Serhal/Sidon Excavation | The Sidon excavation site in Lebanon. Archaeologists retrieved bones from five Canaanites that were 3,650 to 3,750 years old. | Claude Doumet-Serhal/Sidon Excavation | Ancient DNA recovered from bones in the excavation site was sequenced for a new study. | Claude Doumet-Serhal/Sidon Excavation 

Document NYTFEED020170727ed7r008hl



Briefing
Health Care, Donald Trump, Foxconn: Your Thursday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,213 words
27 July 2017
11:34
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•.O.P. seeks a way forward on health care.

The Senate rejected a measure on Wednesday that would have repealed major parts of the Affordable Care Act without providing a replacement, leaving Republicans divided about how best to proceed. Their options include a “kinny”epeal, which would eliminate only a few provisions of the current law.

We have a running tally of how senators have voted on the various proposals. Senator Lisa Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, has emerged as a critical voice: She is unlikely to be swayed by pressure from President Trump, our chief Washington correspondent writes.

Follow our live briefing as the debate continues today.

•rump surprises with transgender ban.

President Trump abruptly announced on Wednesday that  transgender people would not be allowed to serve in the military, reversing a year-old policy reviled by social conservatives.

The president said the U.S. could not afford the “remendous medical costs and disruption,”lthough the White House could not answer questions about how a ban would be carried out.

We spoke with transgender service members about their reaction, and invite readers who are affected by the ban to contact us.

•ragile shelter for Sessions.

President Trump’ aides have tried to discourage him from his continued complaints about Attorney General Jeff Sessions, who has a powerful base of support in the Senate.

By Wednesday afternoon, several officials said they thought that Mr. Trump would let Mr. Sessions stay in office, at least for now.

•alifornia’ ambitious climate agenda.

Over the past decade, the state has passed a sweeping set of laws based on a theory that it’ possible to cut greenhouse gas emissions far beyond what any other state has done and still enjoy robust economic growth.

We looked at how California is trying to pull this off.

•reed from ISIS, but not from the torment.

One of our reporters visited a camp in northern Iraq, where a scene of barely conscious women and girls hints at the cost of years of sexual enslavement under the Islamic State.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

In today’ show, we discuss the upcoming “ote-a-rama”n the Senate.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•he Federal Reserve, as expected, left its benchmark interest rate unchanged on Wednesday. The central bank said it would wind down its post-crisis economic stimulus campaign “elatively soon.”

•pple was the innovative leader in personal computers for years. Now, it’ Microsoft, our tech columnist writes.

Separately, Foxconn, the Taiwanese electronics supplier for Apple and other tech giants, said it would build a factory in Wisconsin, creating at least 3,000 jobs.

•ritain said it would ban the sale of new diesel and gas cars by 2040, joining a growing global push for electric vehicles.

•.S. stocks were up on Wednesday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ir-conditioners can make some people’ noses clog or run for several reasons.

•sk Well: Is sweating good?

•ecipe of the day: Smothered pork chops will feed a crowd.

Noteworthy

•6 hours on Michigan’ Upper Peninsula.

In today’ 360 video, get a taste of waterfalls, pebble beaches and a sculpture park.

• lonely crusade.

Lawyers for dissidents in China increasingly face a terrible choice: acquiescence or imprisonment.

•n ode to shopping malls.

Farewell, pleasure palaces of days past. A filmmaker’ series chronicles a way of life —articularly for children of the ’0s —s it reaches its end.

•he year of the goat.

The farm animal has become the hot new pet, not to mention a ubiquitous presence on Instagram.

•est of late-night TV.

On “he Tonight Show,” transgender comedian discussed the military ban: “ow, I don’ necessarily want to serve in the military, but I want the right to serve.”

•uotation of the day.

“here is more space, and we are going to enjoy it more. Once we learn to adapt to dancing in that kind of area —oh, it’ going to be lit.”

—Maurice Matheson, a subway dancer, on adjusting to the seat-free New York City subway cars that were announced as a way to accommodate more passengers.

Back Story

In a terse ceremony 64 years ago today at the border between North and South Korea, an armistice ended fighting in the Korean War.

The ceremony took 11 minutes, The Times reported. The signatories agreed to a cease-fire, but, the report noted, real peace remained elusive.

Under the deal, tens of thousands of American troops stayed in South Korea, many in the sprawling military base in central Seoul. Those soldiers, who for decades brought American food to the country, came to influence its cuisine.

The impact was most felt after the war, when food was scarce. Shrewd cooks mixed U.S. Army surplus supplies, such as Spam and hot dogs, with traditional ingredients, like kimchi —picy, pickled cabbage.

The product has since become the ultimate comfort food: budae jjigae (pronounced BUH-day CHEE-gay), or “ilitary stew.”

Some say the spicy, hearty soup can help cure anything from a cold to a hangover. Recipes vary, but little preparation is generally required: Add Spam slices, hot dogs, mushrooms, tofu, instant ramen and cheese to a pot of stock, and boil.

Flavor with chili paste, sugar, garlic and, of course, kimchi.

Patrick Boehler contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning. You can browse through past briefings here.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Staff Sgt. Ashlee Bruce of the U.S. Air Force. She is among those wondering whether she will be discharged after President Trump said on Wednesday that the military would no longer “ccept or allow”ransgender people to serve. | Nick Cote for The New York Times | Souhayla, a girl who escaped Islamic State captivity after three years, outside her uncle’ home in Shariya Camp, Iraq. | Alex Potter for The New York Times | The Burlington Center Mall in New Jersey. A recent report predicted that 20 to 25 percent of the more than 1,000 existing enclosed malls in the U.S. will close in the next five years. | Peter Garritano for The New York Times | “ know there are stereotypes: They eat cans and smell bad,” representative of the American Goat Society said. “hat’ not true.” Amy Lombard for The New York Times | Budae jjigae, a soup that has its roots in the aftermath of the Korean War. | Nicole Craine for The New York Times | For the adventurous and casual traveler alike, Michigan’ Upper Peninsula delivers the promise of unfettered tranquility. | By BRITTANY GREESON, JEAN YVES CHAINON and JOSHUA THOMAS 

Document NYTFEED020170727ed7r0035x



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Freed From  ISIS , Not the Torment

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
1,472 words
27 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

SHARIYA CAMP, Iraq -- The 16-year-old lies on her side on a mattress on the floor, unable to hold up her head. Her uncle props her up to drink water, but she can barely swallow. Her voice is so weak, he places his ear directly over her mouth to hear her.

The girl, Souhayla, walked out of the most destroyed section of Mosul this month, freed after three years of captivity and serial rape when her Islamic State captor was killed in an airstrike. Her uncle described her condition as ''shock.'' He had invited reporters to Souhayla's bedside so they could document what the terror group's system of sexual abuse had done to his niece.

''This is what they have done to our people,'' said Khalid Taalo, her uncle.

Since the operation to take back Mosul began last year, approximately 180 women, girls and children from the Yazidi ethnic minority who were captured in 2014 by the Islamic State, or ISIS, have been liberated, according to Iraq's Bureau for the Rescue of Abductees.

Women rescued in the first two years after ISIS overran their ancestral homeland came home with infections, broken limbs and suicidal thoughts. But now, after three years of captivity, women like Souhayla and two others seen last week by reporters, are far more damaged, displaying extraordinary signs of psychological injury.

''Very tired,'' ''unconscious'' and ''in severe shock and psychological upset'' were the descriptions used by Dr. Nagham Nawzat Hasan, a Yazidi gynecologist who has treated over 1,000 of the rape victims.

''We thought the first cases were difficult,'' Dr. Hasan said. ''But those after the liberation of Mosul, they are very difficult.''

The shock expresses itself in women and girls who sleep for days on end, seemingly unable to wake up, said Hussein Qaidi, the director of the abductee rescue bureau. ''Ninety percent of the women coming out are like this,'' he said, for at least part of the time after their return.

Both Souhayla and her family asked that she be identified as well as photographed, in an effort to shed light on their community's suffering. Her uncle posted her image on Facebook immediately after her release with a description of what ISIS had done to her.

For over a year, Mr. Taalo said, he had known his niece's location, as well as the name of the Islamic State fighter holding her. He enlisted the help of a smuggler who at great risk photographed Souhayla through the window of the house where she was being held and sent the images to her family.

But it was too perilous to try a rescue.

Souhayla escaped on July 9, two days after an airstrike collapsed a wall in the building where she was being held, burying another Yazidi girl who had been held alongside her and killing the captor who had abused them, her uncle said.

At that point, she was strong enough to clamber through the rubble and make her way to the first Iraqi checkpoint.

When her family drove to pick her up, she ran to embrace them.

''I ran to her and she ran to me and we started crying and then we started laughing as well,'' said Mr. Taalo, the brother of Souhayla's father, who remains missing after the Islamic State took over their hometown. ''We stayed like that holding each other, and we kept crying and laughing, until we fell to the ground.''

But within hours, she stopped speaking, he said.

By the time they reached the camp where her mother and extended family had found refuge after the Islamic State overran their village, Souhayla slipped into what appeared to be unconsciousness. The doctors who examined her have prescribed antibiotics for a urinary tract infection.

She also shows signs of malnutrition.

Neither explain her extreme symptoms, said her family and one of the doctors who examined her.

''I'm happy to be home,'' she whispered with difficulty into her uncle's ear, in response to a reporter's question, ''but I'm sick.''

The Islamic State had been ruling Mosul for two months in 2014 when the group's leaders set their sights on Sinjar, a 60-mile-long, yellow massif to the north. Its foothills and mountain villages have long been the bedrock of life for the Yazidi, a tiny minority who account for less than 2 percent of Iraq's population of 38 million.

The centuries-old religion of the Yazidi revolves around worship of a single God, who in turn created seven sacred angels. These beliefs led the Islamic State to label the Yazidi as polytheists, a perilous category in the terrorist group's nomenclature.

Relying on a little-known and mostly defunct corpus of Islamic law, the Islamic State argued that the minority's religious standing rendered them eligible for enslavement.

On Aug. 3, 2014, convoys of fighters sped up the escarpment, fanning out across the adjoining valleys. Among the first towns they passed on their way up the mountain was Til Qasab, with its low-slung concrete buildings surrounded by plains of blond grass.

That's where Souhayla, then 13, lived.

A total of 6,470 Yazidis on the mountain were abducted, according to Iraqi officials, including Souhayla. Three years later, 3,410 remain in captivity or unaccounted for, Mr. Qaidi of the abductee rescue bureau said.

For the first two years of her captivity, Souhayla made her way through the Islamic State's system of sexual slavery, raped by a total of seven men, she and her uncle said.

When the push for Mosul began, she was moved progressively deeper into the area hardest hit by the conflict, as security forces squeezed the terrorist group into a sliver of land near the Tigris River. The area was pummeled by artillery, airstrikes and car bombs, and strafed by helicopter-gunship fire.

As the Islamic State began losing its grip on the city, Souhayla's captor cut her hair short, like a boy's. She understood he was planning to try to slip past Iraqi security forces, disguised as a refugee, and take her with him, her uncle said.

Mr. Taalo now spends his days nursing his niece back to health. To sit up, she grasped one of the metal ribs holding up her family's tent and pulled herself into a sitting position, as her uncle pushed from behind. But soon her strength was sapped, and she flopped back down.

He used a washcloth to dab her forehead, as she lay in his lap. Her mouth fell open and her eyes rolled back.

After her escape, almost two weeks passed before she was able to stand for more than a few minutes, her legs unsteady.

Officials say recent escapees are also showing an unusual degree of indoctrination.

Two Yazidi sisters, ages 20 and 26, arrived at the Hamam Ali 1 refugee camp, where they drew the attention of camp officials because they wore face-covering niqabs and refused to take them off, despite the fact that Yazidi women do not cover their faces.

They described the Islamic State fighters who raped them as their ''husbands'' and as ''martyrs,'' said Muntajab Ibraheem, a camp official and director of the Iraqi Salvation Humanitarian Organization.

In their arms were the three toddlers they had given birth to in captivity, the children of their rapists. But they refused to nurse them, said the smuggler sent by their family to fetch them.

He and camp officials filled out paperwork so that the children could be given to the state, he said.

A video recorded on the smuggler's phone shows what happened when the sisters saw their family for the first time after their return. Their relatives rushed to embrace the gaunt women. They cried.

Their mother, distraught, stepped behind the tent, trying to steady herself.

A day after the video was taken, reporters went to see the women, and they could no longer stand. They lay on mattresses inside the plastic walls of their tent.

Despite the loud voices around them and the flow of visitors, despite their mother's wail, they did not budge.

Cars pulled up outside, bringing relatives carrying pallets of orange soda. They left the tent, hands over their mouths, trying to hold back sobs.

Family members said that except for a few brief moments, the women have not awakened since then, over a week ago.

Souhayla, a 16-year-old girl who escaped the Islamic State after three years of captivity, at her uncle's home in Shariya Camp, Iraq. (A1); Souhayla eating dinner, a bandage covering a scar from her effort to slit her wrist while in captivity. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALEX POTTER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A9) 

Document NYTF000020170727ed7r0007c



Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
Bitcoin Exchange Was Nexus of Crime, Indictment Says

By NATHANIEL POPPER 
660 words
27 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A Russian man was charged with overseeing a black market Bitcoin exchange that helped launder billions of dollars and stood at the nexus of several criminal enterprises, according to a federal indictment.

The indictment, which was unsealed in California on Wednesday, gave a long list of illegal activities that the Bitcoin exchange, known as BTC-E, facilitated, including ransomware fraud, identity theft, drug trafficking and public corruption.

The Russian man charged in the case, Alexander Vinnik, 37, was arrested in Greece on Tuesday. Mr. Vinnik had ''directed and supervised'' BTC-E's operations, according to the indictment, and is said to have had co-conspirators.

Criminals who stole or extorted Bitcoin from their victims would transfer the virtual currencies to BTC-E, which would then convert the virtual currency into traditional currency using a host of bank accounts registered under shell companies.

Justice Department officials said that the exchange appeared to have been responsible for laundering more than $4 billion for criminals, with most of the money turned into American dollars and Russian rubles.

The site served 700,000 customers around the world, the officials said.

Users of BTC-E had noted this week that the exchange's website was down, though the site's administrators had said on social media that they were working to get it back up.

The arrest of Mr. Vinnik came shortly after law enforcement authorities in the United States and Europe took down two big online drug markets in which Bitcoin was the primary currency.

Within the Bitcoin community, it has been common knowledge that drug dealers could use BTC-E to turn their Bitcoin proceeds into dollars.

The indictment may offer an explanation for a shock to the digital coin market in 2014. Mr. Vinnik and his partners are accused of stealing funds from the Tokyo-based Bitcoin exchange Mt. Gox, which declared bankruptcy in 2014 after disclosing a hacker intrusion.

Mt. Gox's chief executive, Mark Karpeles, said that year that it had lost more than 800,000 Bitcoins, some of which the company later said it had recovered.

The indictment unsealed on Wednesday said that hundreds of thousands of Bitcoins moved from Mt. Gox into accounts at BTC-E that were directly controlled by Mr. Vinnik.

The stolen Bitcoins were then moved to a different virtual currency exchange, Bitstamp, and sold for traditional currencies, which were deposited in bank accounts that Mr. Vinnik controlled in Latvia and Cyprus.

At least 300,000 Bitcoins followed this path. Those coins would be worth nearly $800 million today.

Soon after news of Mr. Vinnik's arrest became public, WizSec, a Japanese computer security firm that has been tracking the Mt. Gox theft, announced that it had traced the stolen funds to Mr. Vinnik and had provided its findings to law enforcement authorities.

WizSec said on Wednesday that the theft of Mt. Gox's funds began in September 2011 and continued until 2014, with most of the money ending up at BTC-E. The report from WizSec appeared to be the most complete explanation yet of the theft.

BTC-E was founded in 2011, just as Bitcoin began to gain significant value for the first time. The identity of the exchange's operators was kept secret, even as other large Bitcoin exchanges tried to make their businesses more transparent and friendly to regulators.

BTC-E announced on its website that the exchange was complying with regulators by collecting identifying documents from all of its customers. In practice, however, BTC-E did not require anything from customers opening a new account, the indictment said.

BTC-E customers kept accounts under user names like ''CocaineCowbays,'' ''ISIS'' and ''dzkillerhacker,'' according to the indictment.

Alexander Vinnik, who is accused of facilitating a long list of illegal activities, was escorted to court in Greece on Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAKIS MITROLIDIS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170727ed7r0004c



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Mineral Wealth In Afghanistan Tempts Trump

By MARK LANDLER and JAMES RISEN 
1,381 words
26 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Trump, searching for a reason to keep the United States in Afghanistan after 16 years of war, has latched on to a prospect that tantalized previous administrations: Afghanistan's vast mineral wealth, which his advisers and Afghan officials have told him could be profitably extracted by Western companies.

Mr. Trump has discussed the country's mineral deposits with President Ashraf Ghani , who promoted mining as an economic opportunity in one of their first conversations. Mr. Trump, who is deeply skeptical about sending more American troops to Afghanistan, has suggested that this could be one justification for the United States to stay engaged in the country.

To explore the possibilities, the White House is considering sending an envoy to Afghanistan to meet with mining officials. Last week, as the White House fell into an increasingly fractious debate over Afghanistan policy, three of Mr. Trump's senior aides met with a chemical executive, Michael N. Silver, to discuss the potential for extracting rare-earth minerals. Mr. Silver's firm, American Elements, specializes in these minerals, which are used in a range of high-tech products.

Stephen A. Feinberg , a billionaire financier who is informally advising Mr. Trump on Afghanistan, is also looking into ways to exploit the country's minerals, according to a person who has briefed him. Mr. Feinberg owns a large military contracting firm, DynCorp International , which could play a role in guarding mines -- a major concern, given that some of Afghanistan's richest deposits are in areas controlled by the Taliban .

In 2010, American officials estimated that Afghanistan had untapped mineral deposits worth nearly $1 trillion, an estimate that was widely disputed at the time and has certainly fallen since, given the eroding price of commodities. But the $1 trillion figure is circulating again inside the White House, according to officials, who said it had caught the attention of Mr. Trump.

The lure of Afghanistan as a war-torn Klondike is well established: In 2006, the George W. Bush administration conducted aerial surveys of the country to map its mineral resources. Under President Barack Obama , the Pentagon set up a task force to try to build a mining industry in Afghanistan -- a challenge that was stymied by rampant corruption, as well as security problems and the lack of roads, bridges or railroads.

None of these hurdles has been removed in the last eight years, according to former officials, and some have worsened. They warn that the Trump administration is fooling itself if it believes that extracting minerals is a panacea for Afghanistan's myriad ills.

''It would be dangerous to use the potential for resource exploitation as a selling point for military engagement,'' said Laurel Miller, a senior analyst at RAND who served until last month as the State Department's special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan. ''The barriers to entry are really quite considerable, and that kind of argument could fuel suspicion about America's real intentions in Afghanistan.''

But for Mr. Trump, as a businessman, it is arguably the only appealing thing about Afghanistan. Officials said he viewed mining as a ''win-win'' that could boost that country's economy, generate jobs for Americans and give the United States a valuable new beachhead in the market for rare-earth minerals, which has been all but monopolized by China.

China already has a $3 billion contract to develop a copper mine about 25 miles southeast of the Afghan capital, Kabul. Officials said Mr. Trump was determined not to spend American lives and treasure in Afghanistan only to watch China lock up its rare-earth deposits, which are used to make products from wind turbines to computer chips.

Mr. Silver, the chemical executive, may head an effort to maximize the rights for American companies to extract these minerals, according to a senior official.

Mr. Trump's interest also reflects how his military advisers have struggled to present him with other persuasive reasons to send troops to the country, where the United States has been at war since 2001.

The White House's review of Afghanistan policy -- led by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster -- was supposed to be finished by the middle of July. Instead, it bogged down after Mr. Trump expressed displeasure with a proposal from General McMaster for a modest troop increase and a multiyear commitment to the country.

Policy meetings have become increasingly heated, officials said, as Mr. Trump and his chief strategist, Stephen K. Bannon, have squared off against General McMaster. Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson is also said to be unhappy with the current proposals.

Vice President Mike Pence , not General McMaster, will lead a meeting Wednesday of National Security Council principals on Afghanistan. Some officials said that reflected General McMaster's isolation; others said that the general welcomed Mr. Pence's involvement and that the two were closely aligned on the policy.

But Mr. Trump, it is clear, is not. In June, he grudgingly agreed to give Mr. Mattis the authority to send additional troops -- a number believed to be about 4,000 -- as a stopgap measure to stabilize security in Afghanistan. But Mr. Mattis has not yet used his authority, perhaps reflecting his recognition that the commander in chief is uncomfortable with it.

When reporters last week asked Mr. Trump at a meeting at the Pentagon whether he planned to send more troops, he answered, ''We'll see,'' and added, ''ISIS is falling fast,'' suggesting he viewed the counterterrorism threat in Afghanistan as declining.

Worried that Mr. Trump will be locked into policies that did not work for the last two presidents, Mr. Bannon and the president's son-in-law, Jared Kushner , have brought in outside voices, including Mr. Feinberg and Erik D. Prince , a founder of the private security firm Blackwater International. Both have urged using more private contractors and giving the C.I.A. an oversight role in the conflict.

In addition, Mr. Feinberg has reached out to people involved in the Obama administration's effort to build Afghanistan's mining industry. Some warned him that the prospects for a profitable business are worse now than in 2009, given the decline in commodities prices and the deteriorating security in areas where the deposits are believed to lie.

Afghanistan's deposits of copper and iron ore are trading at about a third of their 2010 prices. Most of the undiscovered deposits of rare-earth minerals are believed to be in Helmand Province, large parts of which are controlled by the Taliban .

''There are undoubtedly minerals to be exploited in Afghanistan, which could help provide economic stability to the country in the future,'' said Daniel F. Feldman, a former special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan. ''But given all the obstacles, it could be many years before mining yields dividends for the Afghan people.''

One advantage is that the Trump administration would have a willing partner in the Afghan government. During the Obama administration, President Ghani resisted the rapid development of the mining industry, largely because he worried about the threat of widespread corruption that would come with it.

But as soon as Mr. Trump was elected, Mr. Ghani reversed his position, contacting the Trump team and promoting Afghanistan's mineral wealth. He realized that Mr. Trump would be intrigued by the commercial possibilities, officials said.

Mr. Trump has said little publicly about Afghanistan since being elected. But his thinking about what the United States should reap for its military efforts was made clear in another context soon after his inauguration. Speaking to employees of the C.I.A., the president said the United States had erred in withdrawing troops from Iraq without holding on to its oil.

''The old expression 'To the victor belong the spoils,''' Mr. Trump declared. ''You remember?''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Above, road construction near an iron ore mine near Bamiyan, Afghanistan, in 2012. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, left, and the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, have led a review of Afghanistan policy. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MAURICIO LIMA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A6) 

Document NYTF000020170726ed7q0004a



World; Europe
German Islamic Extremist Is Convicted of Supporting Terror Group

By MELISSA EDDY 
410 words
26 July 2017
18:36
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BERLIN — German court on Wednesday sentenced one of the country’ best-known Islamic extremists to more than five years in prison for raising money and recruiting people for the Islamic insurgency in Syria.

The Düseldorf state court found the man, Sven Lau, 36, guilty of “erving as a contact for those willing to leave the country and fight”ith the Army of Emigrants and Helpers, known by the Arabic acronym Jamwa, which is close to the Islamic State.

“rom July to November 2013, he played a significant role in bringing two men living in Germany to a Jamwa unit in Syria,”rank Schreiber, the presiding judge, said in his ruling. One of the men went on to fight with the group in Syria.

Mr. Lau supplied the group with money he had collected in Germany and military materials, including night-vision goggles. He was given a sentence of five years and six months in prison, which the judge said reflected the severity of the crime, despite Mr. Lau’ lack of a previous criminal record.

Mr. Lau’ lawyer had sought to have his client acquitted, arguing that the prosecution built its case on the testimony of a notorious liar. He said he planned to appeal the ruling.

German intelligence officials estimate that 930 people have left Germany to fight alongside Islamic extremists in Iraq and Syria, and about 145 are known to have been killed.

German courts are clogged with dozens of trials of terrorism suspects, many of whom are returnees from the war in Syria. But Mr. Lau stood out for his role as a ringleader in the country’ domestic scene of extremists, also known as Salafists.

German authorities observed Mr. Lau, a German who converted to Islam as a young man, for years as he sought to attract young people to Islamic life.

He tried to open a school supported by a network called Invitation to Paradise. In 2014, he organized a group of young men to patrol the streets of an ethnically diverse neighborhood in the western city of Wuppertal. The patrol wore orange security vests emblazoned with “Shariah Police,”rovoking outrage in Germany.

* Germany Arrests Islamic Extremist Suspected of Aiding Terrorist Groups

* German Teenager Suspected of Trying to Join \b ISIS\b0  Is Found in Iraq

Sven Lau in court in Düseldorf, Germany, on Wednesday. | Sascha Steinbach/European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170726ed7q005h9



world
Trump Finds Reason for the U.S. to Remain in Afghanistan: Minerals

By MARK LANDLER and JAMES RISEN 
1,421 words
25 July 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —resident Trump, searching for a reason to keep the United States in Afghanistan after 16 years of war, has latched on to a prospect that tantalized previous administrations: Afghanistan’ vast mineral wealth, which his advisers and Afghan officials have told him could be profitably extracted by Western companies.

Mr. Trump has discussed the country’ mineral deposits with President Ashraf Ghani , who promoted mining as an economic opportunity in one of their first conversations. Mr. Trump, who is deeply skeptical about sending more American troops to Afghanistan, has suggested that this could be one justification for the United States to stay engaged in the country.

To explore the possibilities, the White House is considering sending an envoy to Afghanistan to meet with mining officials. Last week, as the White House fell into an increasingly fractious debate over Afghanistan policy, three of Mr. Trump’ senior aides met with a chemical executive, Michael N. Silver, to discuss the potential for extracting rare-earth minerals. Mr. Silver’ firm, American Elements, specializes in these minerals, which are used in a range of high-tech products.

Stephen A. Feinberg , a billionaire financier who is informally advising Mr. Trump on Afghanistan, is also looking into ways to exploit the country’ minerals, according to a person who has briefed him. Mr. Feinberg owns a large military contracting firm, DynCorp International , which could play a role in guarding mines — major concern, given that some of Afghanistan’ richest deposits are in areas controlled by the Taliban .

In 2010, American officials estimated that Afghanistan had untapped mineral deposits worth nearly $1 trillion, an estimate that was widely disputed at the time and has certainly fallen since, given the eroding price of commodities. But the $1 trillion figure is circulating again inside the White House, according to officials, who said it had caught the attention of Mr. Trump.

The lure of Afghanistan as a war-torn Klondike is well established: In 2006, the George W. Bush administration conducted aerial surveys of the country to map its mineral resources. Under President Barack Obama , the Pentagon set up a task force to try to build a mining industry in Afghanistan — challenge that was stymied by rampant corruption, as well as security problems and the lack of roads, bridges or railroads.

None of these hurdles has been removed in the last eight years, according to former officials, and some have worsened. They warn that the Trump administration is fooling itself if it believes that extracting minerals is a panacea for Afghanistan’ myriad ills.

“t would be dangerous to use the potential for resource exploitation as a selling point for military engagement,”aid Laurel Miller, a senior analyst at RAND who served until last month as the State Department’ special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan. “he barriers to entry are really quite considerable, and that kind of argument could fuel suspicion about America’ real intentions in Afghanistan.”

But for Mr. Trump, as a businessman, it is arguably the only appealing thing about Afghanistan. Officials said he viewed mining as a “in-win”hat could boost that country’ economy, generate jobs for Americans and give the United States a valuable new beachhead in the market for rare-earth minerals, which has been all but monopolized by China.

China already has a $3 billion contract to develop a copper mine about 25 miles southeast of the Afghan capital, Kabul. Officials said Mr. Trump was determined not to spend American lives and treasure in Afghanistan only to watch China lock up its rare-earth deposits, which are used to make products from wind turbines  to computer chips.

Mr. Silver, the chemical executive, may head an effort to maximize the rights for American companies to extract these minerals, according to a senior official.

Mr. Trump’ interest also reflects how his military advisers have struggled to present him with other persuasive reasons to send troops to the country, where the United States has been at war since 2001.

The White House’ review of Afghanistan policy —ed by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis  and the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster —as supposed to be finished by the middle of July. Instead, it bogged down after Mr. Trump expressed displeasure with a proposal from General McMaster for a modest troop increase and a multiyear commitment to the country.

Policy meetings have become increasingly heated, officials said, as Mr. Trump and his chief strategist, Stephen K. Bannon, have squared off against General McMaster. Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson is also said to be unhappy with the current proposals.

Vice President Mike Pence , not General McMaster, will lead a meeting Wednesday of National Security Council  principals on Afghanistan. Some officials said that reflected General McMaster’ isolation; others said that the general welcomed Mr. Pence’ involvement and that the two were closely aligned on the policy.

But Mr. Trump, it is clear, is not. In June, he grudgingly agreed to give Mr. Mattis the authority to send additional troops — number believed to be about 4,000 —s a stopgap measure to stabilize security in Afghanistan. But Mr. Mattis has not yet used his authority, perhaps reflecting his recognition that the commander in chief is uncomfortable with it.

When reporters last week asked Mr. Trump at a meeting at the Pentagon whether he planned to send more troops, he answered, “e’l see,”nd added, “ISIS is falling fast,”uggesting he viewed the counterterrorism threat in Afghanistan as declining.

Worried that Mr. Trump will be locked into policies that did not work for the last two presidents, Mr. Bannon and the president’ son-in-law, Jared Kushner , have brought in outside voices, including Mr. Feinberg and Erik D. Prince , a founder of the private security firm Blackwater International. Both have urged using more private contractors and giving the C.I.A. an oversight role in the conflict.

In addition, Mr. Feinberg has reached out to people involved in the Obama administration’ effort to build Afghanistan’ mining industry. Some warned him that the prospects for a profitable business are worse now than in 2009, given the decline in commodities prices and the deteriorating security in areas where the deposits are believed to lie.

Afghanistan’ deposits of copper and iron ore are trading at about a third of their 2010 prices. Most of the undiscovered deposits of rare-earth minerals are believed to be in Helmand Province, large parts of which are controlled by the Taliban .

“here are undoubtedly minerals to be exploited in Afghanistan, which could help provide economic stability to the country in the future,”aid Daniel F. Feldman, a former special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan. “ut given all the obstacles, it could be many years before mining yields dividends for the Afghan people.”

One advantage is that the Trump administration would have a willing partner in the Afghan government. During the Obama administration, President Ghani resisted the rapid development of the mining industry, largely because he worried about the threat of widespread corruption that would come with it.

But as soon as Mr. Trump was elected, Mr. Ghani reversed his position, contacting the Trump team and promoting Afghanistan’ mineral wealth. He realized that Mr. Trump would be intrigued by the commercial possibilities, officials said.

Mr. Trump has said little publicly about Afghanistan since being elected. But his thinking about what the United States should reap for its military efforts was made clear in another context soon after his inauguration. Speaking to employees of the C.I.A., the president said the United States had erred in withdrawing troops from Iraq without holding on to its oil.

“he old expression ‘o the victor belong the spoils,’”r. Trump declared. “ou remember?”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter  and the Morning Briefing newsletter .

PHOTOS: Above, road construction near an iron ore mine near Bamiyan, Afghanistan, in 2012. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis , left, and the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, have led a review of Afghanistan policy. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MAURICIO LIMA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES ; DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES ) (A6)

* Potential for a Mining Boom Splits Factions in Afghanistan 

* Afghan Cabinet Raises Concern About Mining Legislation, to West’ Unease 

* Afghanistan Moves Quickly to Tap Newfound Mineral Reserves 

* Next for Afghanistan, the Curse of Plenty? 

Document INHT000020170726ed7p00001



World; Asia Pacific
Trump Finds Reason for the U.S. to Remain in Afghanistan: Minerals

By MARK LANDLER and JAMES RISEN 
1,434 words
26 July 2017
01:27
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —resident Trump, searching for a reason to keep the United States in Afghanistan after 16 years of war, has latched on to a prospect that tantalized previous administrations: Afghanistan’ vast mineral wealth, which his advisers and Afghan officials have told him could be profitably extracted by Western companies.

Mr. Trump has discussed the country’ mineral deposits with President Ashraf Ghani , who promoted mining as an economic opportunity in one of their first conversations. Mr. Trump, who is deeply skeptical about sending more American troops to Afghanistan, has suggested that this could be one justification for the United States to stay engaged in the country.

To explore the possibilities, the White House is considering sending an envoy to Afghanistan to meet with mining officials. Last week, as the White House fell into an increasingly fractious debate over Afghanistan policy, three of Mr. Trump’ senior aides met with a chemical executive, Michael N. Silver, to discuss the potential for extracting rare-earth minerals. Mr. Silver’ firm, American Elements, specializes in these minerals, which are used in a range of high-tech products.

Stephen A. Feinberg , a billionaire financier who is informally advising Mr. Trump on Afghanistan, is also looking into ways to exploit the country’ minerals, according to a person who has briefed him. Mr. Feinberg owns a large military contracting firm, DynCorp International , which could play a role in guarding mines — major concern, given that some of Afghanistan’ richest deposits are in areas controlled by the Taliban .

In 2010, American officials estimated that Afghanistan had untapped mineral deposits worth nearly $1 trillion, an estimate that was widely disputed at the time and has certainly fallen since, given the eroding price of commodities. But the $1 trillion figure is circulating again inside the White House, according to officials, who said it had caught the attention of Mr. Trump.

The lure of Afghanistan as a war-torn Klondike is well established: In 2006, the George W. Bush administration conducted aerial surveys of the country to map its mineral resources. Under President Barack Obama , the Pentagon set up a task force to try to build a mining industry in Afghanistan — challenge that was stymied by rampant corruption, as well as security problems and the lack of roads, bridges or railroads.

None of these hurdles has been removed in the last eight years, according to former officials, and some have worsened. They warn that the Trump administration is fooling itself if it believes that extracting minerals is a panacea for Afghanistan’ myriad ills.

“t would be dangerous to use the potential for resource exploitation as a selling point for military engagement,”aid Laurel Miller, a senior analyst at RAND who served until last month as the State Department’ special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan. “he barriers to entry are really quite considerable, and that kind of argument could fuel suspicion about America’ real intentions in Afghanistan.”

But for Mr. Trump, as a businessman, it is arguably the only appealing thing about Afghanistan. Officials said he viewed mining as a “in-win”hat could boost that country’ economy, generate jobs for Americans and give the United States a valuable new beachhead in the market for rare-earth minerals, which has been all but monopolized by China.

China already has a $3 billion contract to develop a copper mine about 25 miles southeast of the Afghan capital, Kabul. Officials said Mr. Trump was determined not to spend American lives and treasure in Afghanistan only to watch China lock up its rare-earth deposits, which are used to make products from wind turbines  to computer chips.

Mr. Silver, the chemical executive, may head an effort to maximize the rights for American companies to extract these minerals, according to a senior official.

Mr. Trump’ interest also reflects how his military advisers have struggled to present him with other persuasive reasons to send troops to the country, where the United States has been at war since 2001.

The White House’ review of Afghanistan policy —ed by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster —as supposed to be finished by the middle of July. Instead, it bogged down after Mr. Trump expressed displeasure with a proposal from General McMaster for a modest troop increase and a multiyear commitment to the country.

Policy meetings have become increasingly heated, officials said, as Mr. Trump and his chief strategist, Stephen K. Bannon, have squared off against General McMaster. Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson is also said to be unhappy with the current proposals.

Vice President Mike Pence , not General McMaster, will lead a meeting Wednesday of National Security Council  principals on Afghanistan. Some officials said that reflected General McMaster’ deepening isolation; others said that the general welcomed Mr. Pence’ involvement and that the two were closely aligned on the policy.

But Mr. Trump, it is clear, is not. In June, he grudgingly agreed to give Mr. Mattis the authority to send additional troops — number believed to be about 4,000 —s a stopgap measure to stabilize security in Afghanistan. But Mr. Mattis has not yet used his authority, perhaps reflecting his recognition that the commander-in-chief is uncomfortable with it.

When reporters last week asked Mr. Trump at a meeting at the Pentagon whether he planned to send more troops, he answered, “e’l see,”nd added, “ISIS is falling fast,”uggesting he viewed the counterterrorism threat in Afghanistan as declining.

Worried that Mr. Trump will be locked into policies that did not work for the last two presidents, Mr. Bannon and the president’ son-in-law, Jared Kushner , have brought in outside voices, including Mr. Feinberg and Erik D. Prince , a founder of the private security firm Blackwater International. Both have urged using more private contractors and giving the C.I.A. an oversight role in the conflict.

In addition, Mr. Feinberg has reached out to people involved in the Obama administration’ effort to build Afghanistan’ mining industry. Some warned him that the prospects for a profitable business are worse now than in 2009, given the decline in commodities prices and the deteriorating security in areas where the deposits are believed to lie.

Afghanistan’ deposits of copper and iron ore are trading at about a third of their 2010 prices. Most of the undiscovered deposits of rare-earth minerals are believed to be in Helmand Province, large parts of which are controlled by the Taliban .

“here are undoubtedly minerals to be exploited in Afghanistan, which could help provide economic stability to the country in the future,”aid Daniel F. Feldman, a former special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan. “ut given all the obstacles, it could be many years before mining yields dividends for the Afghan people.”

One advantage is that the Trump administration would have a willing partner in the Afghan government. During the Obama administration, President Ghani resisted the rapid development of the mining industry, largely because he worried about the threat of widespread corruption that would come with it.

But as soon as Mr. Trump was elected, Mr. Ghani reversed his position, contacting the Trump team and promoting Afghanistan’ mineral wealth. He realized that Mr. Trump would be intrigued by the commercial possibilities, officials said.

Mr. Trump has said little publicly about Afghanistan since being elected. But his thinking about what the United States should reap for its military efforts was made clear in another context soon after his inauguration. Speaking to employees of the C.I.A., the president said the United States had erred in withdrawing troops from Iraq without holding on to its oil.

“he old expression ‘o the victor belong the spoils,’”r. Trump declared. “ou remember?”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter  and the Morning Briefing newsletter .

* Potential for a Mining Boom Splits Factions in Afghanistan 

* Afghan Cabinet Raises Concern About Mining Legislation, to West’ Unease 

* Afghanistan Moves Quickly to Tap Newfound Mineral Reserves 

* Next for Afghanistan, the Curse of Plenty? 

Above road construction near an iron ore mine near Bamiyan, Afghanistan, in 2012. The country’ lack of infrastructure has hindered efforts to exploit its natural resources. | Mauricio Lima for The New York Times | Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, left, and the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, have led a review of Afghanistan policy. | Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170725ed7p009ex



Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
The Times's Letter to Fox

495 words
25 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

I am writing on behalf of The New York Times to request an on-air apology and tweet from Fox & Friends in regards to a malicious and inaccurate segment ''NY Times leak allowed ISIS leader to slip away,'' which aired on Saturday, July 22. Neither the staff at Fox & Friends, nor the writers of a related story on Foxnews.com, appeared to make any attempt to confirm relevant facts, nor did they reach out to The New York Times for comment.

A host on Fox & Friends wrongly states that, ''al-Baghdadi was able to sneak away under the cover of darkness after a New York Times story'' and that the U.S. government ''would have had al-Baghdadi based on the intelligence that we had except someone leaked information to the failing New York Times.''

When in fact the raid against Abu Sayyaf occurred on May 16, 2015 and was announced that day in an official statement by Defense Secretary Ash Carter. Below is an excerpt from the May 16 Pentagon news release:

''Last night, at the direction of the Commander in Chief, I ordered U.S. Special Operations Forces to conduct an operation in al-Amr in eastern Syria to capture an ISIL senior leader known as Abu Sayyaf and his wife Umm Sayyaf. Abu Sayyaf was involved in ISIL's military operations and helped direct the terrorist organization's illicit oil, gas, and financial operations as well. Abu Sayyaf was killed during the course of the operation when he engaged U.S. forces.

U.S. forces captured Umm Sayyaf, who we suspect is a member of ISIL, played an important role in ISIL's terrorist activities, and may have been complicit in what appears to have been the enslavement of a young Yezidi woman rescued last night.''

Baghdadi would have known that Umm Sayyaf, Abu Sayyaf's wife, was being held, if not from his own communications network then from the Pentagon's announcement and news reports about that announcement. If the U.S. government wanted to keep the detention and likely interrogation of the wife secret, the Pentagon would not have publicly announced it.

The New York Times story in question was published on June 8, more than three weeks after the raid. Furthermore, The Times described the piece to the Pentagon before publication and they had no objections. No senior American official complained publicly about the story until now, more than two years later.

We understand that the segment and story are based on a misleading assertion by Gen. Thomas speaking at a conference in Aspen. However, that does not alleviate Fox News of the obligation to seek information from all the stakeholders in a story. With this segment, Fox & Friends demonstrated what little regard it has for reporting facts.

Danielle Rhoades Ha

VP, Communications

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020170725ed7p0006e



Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
New York Times Calls Fox Segment 'Malicious' And Asks for an Apology

By JONAH ENGEL BROMWICH 
1,263 words
25 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The New York Times has asked that the television show ''Fox & Friends'' apologize for what a Times spokeswoman described as a ''malicious and inaccurate segment'' that aired last week accusing the paper of publishing a story in 2015 that had hindered the United States military's attempt to kill Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of ISIS.

In response, Fox News published an update to an article on its website late Sunday, adding a comment from The Times stating that its 2015 article was published more than three weeks after the raid, and that the paper had described the piece to the Pentagon before publication and ''they had no objections.'' The network also acknowledged The Times's statement in a brief Fox & Friends segment Monday morning.

Neither the article nor the segment acknowledged the paper's request for an apology nor did they respond directly to the accusations of inaccuracy.

The Fox News story, which was published on Friday and then discussed in a ''Fox & Friends'' segment Saturday morning, said that The Times had released valuable intelligence in an article of June 8, 2015, about an American military raid in which the wife of a top Islamic State operative was captured. It cited comments made by Gen. Tony Thomas, the head of the United States Special Operations Command, during an interview conducted Friday with Catherine Herridge, the network's intelligence correspondent, at the Aspen Security Forum in Colorado.

General Thomas told Ms. Herridge that an important lead on Mr. Baghdadi's whereabouts ''was leaked in a prominent national newspaper about a week later, and that lead went dead.'' He did not name the paper.

But Fox did name The Times, repeatedly, with the chyron ''NYT FOILS U.S. ATTEMPT TO TAKE OUT AL-BAHGDADI;'' one of the show's hosts Pete Hegseth, blamed the ''failing New York Times'' for leaking information.

The story appeared to have prompted a tweet from President Trump Saturday morning.

''The Failing New York Times foiled U.S. attempt to kill the single most wanted terrorist, Al-Baghdadi,'' the president wrote. ''Their sick agenda over National Security.''

On Sunday, Danielle Rhoades Ha, a Times spokeswoman, requested ''an on-air apology and tweet from Fox & Friends.''

''Neither the staff at Fox & Friends, nor the writers of a related story on Foxnews.com, appeared to make any attempt to confirm relevant facts, nor did they reach out to The New York Times for comment,'' she said.

Referring to Saturday's ''Fox & Friends'' segment, she said, ''A host on Fox & Friends wrongly states that, ''al-Baghdadi was able to sneak away under the cover of darkness after a New York Times story'' and that the U.S. government ''would have had al-Baghdadi based on the intelligence that we had except someone leaked information to the failing New York Times.''

On Sunday, The Times also published a fact-check of the Fox News article and the president's tweet.

On Monday, Ms. Rhoades Ha said in an email that the segment that aired earlier that day ''wasn't an apology, nor did it begin to address the larger issues with the Fox & Friends Weekend segment, one of which was sheer hypocrisy.''

She continued, ''The host railed against The New York Times for covering a raid stating that the U.S. government 'would have had al-Baghdadi based on the intelligence that we had except someone leaked' to The New York Times when Fox News had covered the same raid three weeks earlier in a segment in which their correspondent said, 'The newly recovered intelligence may bring U.S. closer to Baghdadi's kill or capture.'''

''According to the curious logic of the Fox & Friends host, Fox News itself was unpatriotic,'' she added.

The updated segment on ''Fox & Friends'' on Monday morning consisted of airing General Thomas's comments again, and adding about 15 seconds dedicated to The Times's response. It did not respond directly to the paper's complaints.

Fox News did not respond directly Monday morning to questions about whether any further correction or clarification was planned, sending links to the ''Fox & Friends'' segment as well as the relevant portion of the show's transcript.

Later in the day, the network sent a statement that said that ''neither Fox News' report nor the subsequent on-air coverage was inaccurate.'' The statement said the network found it ''beyond disappointing'' that The Times ''decided to blame Fox News for comments made publicly by General Thomas.''

The Times's full letter to Fox News is below:

I am writing on behalf of The New York Times to request an on-air apology and tweet from Fox & Friends in regards to a malicious and inaccurate segment ''NY Times leak allowed ISIS leader to slip away,'' which aired on Saturday, July 22. Neither the staff at Fox & Friends, nor the writers of a related story on Foxnews.com, appeared to make any attempt to confirm relevant facts, nor did they reach out to The New York Times for comment.

A host on Fox & Friends wrongly states that, ''al-Baghdadi was able to sneak away under the cover of darkness after a New York Times story'' and that the U.S. government ''would have had al-Baghdadi based on the intelligence that we had except someone leaked information to the failing New York Times.''

When in fact the raid against Abu Sayyaf occurred on May 16, 2015 and was announced that day in an official statement by Defense Secretary Ash Carter. Below is an excerpt from the May 16 Pentagon news release:

''Last night, at the direction of the Commander in Chief, I ordered U.S. Special Operations Forces to conduct an operation in al-Amr in eastern Syria to capture an ISIL senior leader known as Abu Sayyaf and his wife Umm Sayyaf. Abu Sayyaf was involved in ISIL's military operations and helped direct the terrorist organization's illicit oil, gas, and financial operations as well. Abu Sayyaf was killed during the course of the operation when he engaged U.S. forces.

U.S. forces captured Umm Sayyaf, who we suspect is a member of ISIL, played an important role in ISIL's terrorist activities, and may have been complicit in what appears to have been the enslavement of a young Yezidi woman rescued last night.''

Baghdadi would have known that Umm Sayyaf, Abu Sayyaf's wife, was being held, if not from his own communications network then from the Pentagon's announcement and news reports about that announcement. If the U.S. government wanted to keep the detention and likely interrogation of the wife secret, the Pentagon would not have publicly announced it.

The New York Times story in question was published on June 8, more than three weeks after the raid. Furthermore, The Times described the piece to the Pentagon before publication and they had no objections. No senior American official complained publicly about the story until now, more than two years later.

We understand that the segment and story are based on a misleading assertion by Gen. Thomas speaking at a conference in Aspen. However, that does not alleviate Fox News of the obligation to seek information from all the stakeholders in a story. With this segment, Fox & Friends demonstrated what little regard it has for reporting facts.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Gen. Tony Thomas on ''Fox & Friends'' in a YouTube image. 

Document NYTF000020170725ed7p0006f



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
OpEd; SECT
Europe's dilemma over the children of  ISIS 

By CHARLOTTE McDONALD-GIBSON 
1,380 words
24 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The International New York Times
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BRUSSELS -- The 9-year-old boy didn't like school. He didn't like the other children, because he knew what they really were: evil unbelievers who deserved to die. So he did what he was trained to do -- he attacked them. He was removed from the building on his first day back.

The boy had spent two years away from his European homeland in a place where counting was taught by the strokes of a whip across a torture victim's back; where watching public beheadings was part of the school curriculum; where his only role was to be molded into a future jihadi, or a ''cub of the Caliphate.'' His years in the Islamic State's stronghold in Raqqa, Syria, had turned him into brutalized, radicalized and deeply confused young boy.

He is one of around 5,000 European men, women and children believed to have traveled to Islamic State territory since 2012 to fight with the Islamists or to live under their self-styled caliphate. Now, as they return, most governments are focused on short-term security, ignoring the immense needs of the damaged children.

The boy came home in early 2016 with his mother -- a convert to Islam who is now on trial -- and found himself in a world he had been trained to hate, where he trusted nothing and no one.

''He felt surrounded by evil people,'' said Daniel Koehler, a fellow at George Washington University's Program on Extremism and a family counselor based in Berlin. ''These children are put under constant stress, being told you will burn, you will be tortured if you do not do this -- if you do not kill this infidel, you will end up in hell, your mother will end up in hell. It is a constant psychological torture.''

The boy's story was recounted to me by Mr. Koehler, who was asked to devise a reintegration strategy after that disastrous attempt to get him back into school. Mr. Koehler would not disclose the Western European country where the boy lives.

''It is a very hardened attitude against these individuals,'' he said. ''Most people would rather see them dead or prosecuted and put behind bars forever. It is an issue that most of the population are completely unaware of -- that there are children and that they have no guilt whatsoever.''

Omar Ramadan, the head of the European Union's Radicalization Awareness Network Center of Excellence, puts the number of European children in Islamic State territory at hundreds, though it is impossible to say for sure. While governments have some data on children who left with their parents, the Islamic State bans contraception, and a woman's duty is to create the next generation of warriors. When a baby is born under the Islamic State, it enters the world with no nationality. The Islamic State issues birth certificates, but no country recognizes them.

From the age of 4, children start school where they are exposed to a brutal curriculum. ''A common counting book would have oranges and apples and then military tanks and guns on the same pages,'' said Nikita Malik, a senior research fellow at the Henry Jackson Society, a London-based think tank where she has studied Islamic State education materials. ''The level of their graduation -- particularly with boys -- depended on their ability to normalize themselves to violence. So to look at a hanging, a public execution, a whipping -- the child would be told to count the number of whippings.''

School for girls ends at age 9, when they are considered old enough to marry. At the same age, boys start military training, although they are used even earlier in propaganda videos. One video clip shows a boy of around 4 firing a gun at a prisoner strung up in a children's play pit.

Jan Kizilhan, a Kurdish-German psychologist, has seen firsthand the damage the Islamic State's indoctrination can inflict. He treats child soldiers in Iraq and boys from the Yazidi minority who were taken as refugees to Germany after being conscripted by the Islamic State. These children have witnessed rape, torture, murder -- in some cases forced to take part in the atrocities themselves.

''Aggression is one of the main problems,'' he said, in addition to ''nightmares, sleeping problems, concentration, maybe they have some neurological problems,'' he says. ''I.S. trained them to the lowest empathy.''

Dr. Kizilhan is convinced that it takes a minimum of two years of daily intervention by social workers, psychotherapists, teachers and other professionals to give these children a chance at a normal life. ''Those children need security,'' he said, ''they need stability, and they need orientation.''

But it is not the security of the returned children that worries most governments -- it is the security of the state. French and Belgian citizens who spent time with the Islamic State have carried out terrorist attacks in both countries, and the focus for authorities is monitoring ex-fighters for signs that they could sow terror at home, or trying to prevent them returning in the first place. The children caught in the crossfire are simply not a priority.

Governments make no effort to evacuate their citizens from the conflict zone. As Jessika Soors put it: ''Who would carry the responsibility when a wolf in sheep's clothing returns?'' Ms. Soors heads the counter-extremism team in the Belgian municipality of Vilvoorde, where at least eight children were born in Islamic State territory to local residents. ''Politically it would be difficult to sell to public opinion that as a state you are helping return foreign fighters,'' she said.

But those who want to come back will find a way, and policies pandering to fear and prejudice ignore the benefits of an early intervention in the lives of radicalized children, and simply force them into ever more dangerous situations.

Right now, those fleeing the Islamic State risk death or capture, then have to travel through militia-held territory to Turkey. Only when they enter a consulate or embassy of their home country will they receive any assistance. There, the nationality of any child born in Syria or Iraq needs to be confirmed, often through DNA testing. Many children will have mothers and fathers with different nationalities, raising potential custody issues. Once the child is home, one or both parents could be jailed, leaving questions about who should become that child's guardian. Then the child must re-enter the education system.

These many complexities -- and the potential for a surge in returnees as the Islamic State loses control of Raqqa and Mosul, Iraq -- demand a nuanced approach and a Europe-wide strategy for dealing with the children. There must be training for teachers and social workers, and clear guidelines on issues like restarting school and who is best placed to care for a child. The policies need to be focused on protection of the child rather than the demonization of the family.

In the past few years, children in execution videos have been the subject of voyeuristic headlines and sensationalist television reports. British tabloids nicknamed one 4-year-old British boy ''Jihadi Junior.'' European security officials are focused on the possibility that radicalized children could be the next generation of terrorists. A French official has described the youngsters as ''ticking time bombs.''

But there's nothing more dangerous than further stigmatizing these children. For the 9-year-old who attacked his classmates, it was the secure and loving arms of his grandfather, tight around him as they sat in playgrounds, that allowed him to see other children as playmates, not enemies. After a year of careful supervision, he went back to school, and began the process of being a kid again.

Children like him are the innocent victims of war, recognized as such by international law. But when it comes to the war against Islamic State, many people seem to have forgotten this most basic of truths.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Charlotte McDonald-Gibson (@cmcdonaldgibson) is the author of ''Cast Away: True Stories of Survival From Europe's Refugee Crisis.''

MICHELLE THOMPSON 

Document NYTF000020170724ed7o0004d



FACT CHECK
National Desk; SECTA
How the President Wrongly Blamed The Times for a Terrorist's Survival

By MICHAEL R. GORDON 
1,648 words
24 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Trump wrongly tweeted on Saturday that The New York Times had ''foiled'' an attempt by the United States military to kill Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State.

''The Failing New York Times foiled U.S. attempt to kill the single most wanted terrorist, Al-Baghdadi,'' the president wrote. ''Their sick agenda over National Security.''

Mr. Trump's statement appeared to be based on a report by Fox News; he is known to be an avid viewer, and a version of the story was broadcast about 25 minutes before he posted. The report said that The Times had disclosed intelligence in an article on June 8, 2015, about an American military raid in Syria that led to the death of one of Mr. Baghdadi's key lieutenants, Abu Sayyaf, and the capture of his wife, who played an important role in the group.

That Fox News report cited comments by Gen. Tony Thomas, the head of the United States Special Operations Command, in an interview conducted Friday by the network's intelligence correspondent, Catherine Herridge, at the Aspen Security Forum in Colorado.

General Thomas said that a valuable lead on Mr. Baghdadi's whereabouts ''was leaked in a prominent national newspaper about a week later and that lead went dead.'' He did not name The Times.

But a review of the record shows that information made public in a Pentagon news release more than three weeks before the Times article, and extensively covered at the time by numerous news media outlets, would have tipped off Mr. Baghdadi that the United States was questioning an important Islamic State operative who knew of his recent whereabouts and some of his methods of communication. Further, the information in the Times article on June 8 came from United States government officials who were aware that the details would be published.

A White House spokesman had no comment on Mr. Trump's tweet. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said on Friday that he believed Mr. Baghdadi, whose possible death has been the subject of repeated rumors, was still alive.

Here are the facts.

What happened in 2015 that led to the controversy?

Delta Force commandos conducted a raid in Syria on May 16, 2015, on the residence of Abu Sayyaf, the Islamic State's top financial officer and a close associate of Mr. Baghdadi. The commando raid was the first in Syria against the militant group, also known as ISIS or ISIL, and a trove of information was harvested from cellphones, laptops and other materials. Abu Sayyaf was killed, and his wife, Umm Sayyaf, was captured and flown out of the country for questioning.

That day, the Pentagon announced that the raid had taken place and that Umm Sayyaf had been detained.

''Last night, at the direction of the commander-in-chief, I ordered U.S. Special Operations Forces to conduct an operation in al-Amr in eastern Syria to capture an ISIL senior leader known as Abu Sayyaf and his wife, Umm Sayyaf,'' Ashton B. Carter, the defense secretary at the time, said in a statement.

''Abu Sayyaf was involved in ISIL's military operations and helped direct the terrorist organization's illicit oil, gas and financial operations as well,'' Mr. Carter added. ''Abu Sayyaf was killed during the course of the operation when he engaged U.S. forces. U.S. forces captured Umm Sayyaf, who we suspect is a member of ISIL, played an important role in ISIL's terrorist activities, and may have been complicit in what appears to have been the enslavement of a young Yazidi woman rescued last night.''

Until the raid, the American military had little knowledge about how the Islamic State leadership worked, and officials were eager to highlight the intelligence breakthrough.

The raid was covered extensively by the Western news media when it was announced, and accounts citing the Pentagon appeared the next morning on the front pages of dozens of newspapers, including The Times.

In the article cited by Fox News and published more than three weeks after the raid, The Times reported new details, including that as much as seven terabytes of data had been seized, which, with information from Umm Sayyaf, provided new insights into how Mr. Baghdadi operated and tried to avoid detection.

For example, the article noted that regional emirs in his organization were required to hand over cellphones before being driven to meetings with Mr. Baghdadi so their movements could not be tracked. Wives of the Islamic State leaders, the article noted, also played an important role in passing information to minimize the risk that the group's communications would be intercepted.

What did General Thomas say?

[Video: SOCOM: Policing the World Watch on YouTube.]

At his appearance on Friday at the security conference, General Thomas was asked whether American forces had ever been close to capturing or killing Mr. Baghdadi.

''There were points in time when we were particularly close to him,'' he responded. ''Unfortunately, there were some leaks about what we were up to about that time. When we went after Abu Sayyaf, the oil minister who was very close to him, one of his personal confidants, he didn't live, but his wife did. And she gave us a treasure trove of information about where she had just been with Baghdadi in Raqqa, days, if not within days, prior. And so that was a very good lead. Unfortunately, it was leaked in a prominent national newspaper about a week later and that lead went dead.''

The account by General Thomas -- who at the time of the raid was the head of the secretive Joint Special Operations Command, whose commandos target Islamic State leaders in Syria and Iraq -- was imprecise in two aspects.

The Pentagon itself provided the confirmation on May 16, 2015, that Abu Sayyaf's wife had been captured.

And the Times account was published not a week later, but 23 days after the Pentagon statement.

That gap matters because Mr. Baghdadi is almost certain to have taken precautionary steps, such as changing his pattern of behavior, shifting his location and adopting new procedures for communicating with other Islamic State commanders, in the days after the May 16 raid and the capture of a close associate -- that is, well before the publication of the Times article on June 8.

The Pentagon raised no objections with The Times before the article was published, and no senior American official had complained publicly about it until now. Some officials expressed hope at the time that some of the details in the article would sow fear in the ranks of the Islamic State by demonstrating that the United States could penetrate the group's secrecy.

What does the military say?

It is clear that Mr. Baghdadi would have known almost immediately from his own sources or from the Pentagon announcement and news media coverage of it that Umm Sayyaf was being held by the United States and was undergoing interrogation.

That raises a number of questions about why General Thomas pinned blame on what he viewed as a leak to a newspaper. If the military wanted to exploit the information from Umm Sayyaf about Mr. Baghdadi's movements, why did the Pentagon rush to announce her capture on the day of the raid?

If the military gleaned intelligence from Umm Sayyaf about Mr. Baghdadi's likely whereabouts, why did it not act in the three weeks after the May 16 raid? Did she initially refuse to cooperate? If so, that would have meant that the information she eventually provided would have been less timely.

Asked for comment, Kenneth McGraw, a spokesman for the Special Operations Command, declined to say which information in the Times article, if any, was a source of concern.

General Thomas ''did not name a specific publication or a specific article in his remarks,'' Mr. McGraw wrote in an email. ''It would be inappropriate for me to make any further comment.''

Citing the need to protect classified information, Mr. McGraw also declined to say whether the Islamic State leader could have been expected to adopt new precautions soon after Umm Sayyaf's capture or why the military did not go after him soon after the May 16 raid if information about his movements and patterns of behavior was likely to be perishable.

''Any intelligence used in the decision-making process would still be classified and not releasable,'' Mr. McGraw wrote. ''Any intelligence about Baghdadi's behavior or new precautions he may have taken would still be classified and not releasable.''

Mr. McGraw also noted that the decision to immediately issue a news release confirming the capture of Umm Sayyaf was made by the Defense Department, not the Special Operations Command.

Former Obama administration officials said there were a number of reasons the Pentagon announced the raid and the detention of Umm Sayyaf. The White House, they said, had to notify Congress under the War Powers Resolution about the operation, which was the first Special Operations raid against the Islamic State in Syria. Further, the mission was mounted from Iraq, so the Iraqis also needed to be informed.

As a matter of policy, they said, the United States also needed to tell the International Red Cross that it had a detainee.

Mr. Carter, they said, also believed the American people should be informed about the first attempt to go after a member of Mr. Baghdadi's inner circle. Nor did the Pentagon want to be accusing of capturing an important figure and covering it up.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

President Trump on Saturday at a ceremony in Norfolk, Va., for a new aircraft carrier. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HILARY SWIFT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170724ed7o00042



National Desk; SECTA
U.S. Army Sergeant Is Charged With Trying to Aid  ISIS 

By NOAH WEILAND 
611 words
24 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
13
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- An Army sergeant stationed in Hawaii was charged with trying to provide equipment, training and classified military information to the Islamic State, after undercover F.B.I. agents documented his offers of support to the militant group in a series of meetings in June and July, according to an indictment.

Sgt. First Class Ikaika Erik Kang, 34, was arrested on July 8 and charged in an indictment filed in the United States District Court of Hawaii on Friday. If convicted, he faces a maximum of 20 years in prison and a fine of $250,000 for each of four counts against him.

According to the indictment, which was announced on Saturday by the Justice Department and the F.B.I., Sergeant Kang tried to offer ''material support or resources'' in meetings with the agents, whom he believed to be associates of the Islamic State.

In one encounter on June 23, Sergeant Kang offered classified military documents, according to the indictment. In another meeting, on July 8, he volunteered equipment to the undercover sources, including a drone camera, a chest ''rig'' that holds ammunition and other kinds of ''military-style clothing.'' A news release from the Justice Department said the case was investigated by the F.B.I. and the United States Army's Criminal Investigation Division.

According to an F.B.I. affidavit filed in federal court on July 10 and obtained by The Associated Press, the sergeant, an air traffic controller at Wheeler Army Airfield in Hawaii, described fantasies about killing fellow military members and pledging loyalty to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State. His commanding officers called in the F.B.I. when they feared he had become radicalized.

Sergeant Kang made copies of secret military documents in 2015, hoping to give them to the Islamic State, the affidavit said. When he met with the undercover F.B.I. agents, they made training videos that he thought would be taken to the Middle East to supply the terrorist group. The same day that the training videos were produced, Sergeant Kang and one of the undercover agents went shopping for the drone that he expected to give to the Islamic State.

Sergeant Kang's reported radicalism -- which drifted into expressions of support for Hitler and the assailant in a mass shooting at a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla., according to the affidavit -- appeared to be a late development for someone who had an established career in the Army.

He joined the Army in 2001, served in South Korea in 2002 and 2003, and then in Iraq and Afghanistan between 2010 and 2014. It was not until his later deployments that he began to show signs of extremism. His military clearance was taken away in 2012 after he made comments invoking the Islamic State, and was reinstated when he completed military requirements to renew his clearance, according to the affidavit.

Birney Bervar, Sergeant Kang's lawyer, said by telephone on Sunday that he wished the Army had offered psychiatric resources to the sergeant. ''The Army probably should have done some type of medical or mental evaluation before launching an undercover criminal evaluation,'' he said.

In an interview with a Hawaiian television station, Sergeant Kang's father, Clifford Kang, said his son's behavior could be traced to post-traumatic stress disorder.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

A man identified as Ikaika Erik Kang kissing what appears to be an ISIS flag. (PHOTOGRAPH BY U.S. DISTRICT COURT, VIA REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020170724ed7o00043



Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The Living and the Dead

By JAMES VERINI; Opening video sequence by Gabriel Chaim. 
12,733 words
23 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
36
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

I. Eastern Mosul

In a film, on the news, you watch a war. While in a war, you mostly hear it. Weapons are fired day and night, but only sometimes do you see them fired. As much as images, then, each battle takes on its own sounds.

The battle of Mosul began officially on Oct. 17, 2016. Sonically, it didn't come into its own until some weeks later. In the opening skirmishes, as Iraqi troops encountered Islamic State fighters on farmland and in villages outside the city, rounds whistled unobstructed through the air and thudded in the sod, a vague overture. When the troops breached the easternmost districts of the city proper -- in early November -- then you could begin to really listen to the conflict.

On an evening later that month, I was embedded with a company of Iraqi Special Operations Forces in a neighborhood near Mosul's eastern edge from which they had expelled the jihadists. The troops had set up a temporary command post and barracks in a group of commandeered homes surrounding a plaza that included a mosque and a park, or what had been a park -- now it was a mud patch where Humvees, armored bulldozers and a fuel tanker were parked. Most of the modest rowhouses in this neighborhood -- Zahra, a middle-­lass enclave of shopkeepers and pharmacists and taxi drivers -- had made it out of the fighting intact; others were crumpled but salvageable; others were mere rubble. The sunset was threaded through with black smoke from the car fires ISIS had lit to try to obscure its positions from aerial surveillance. The futility of this tactic could be heard and felt every few minutes, as a jet dove in to drop a bomb, or a heavy artillery shell found its target, with an atmosphere-­onsuming shriek and a thunderous, belly-­eizing impact. And yet ISIS set the cars ablaze every day.

After dark, a polyphony of firefights broke out around our position. The reliable chatter of rifles, the more insistent clangor of machine guns, the congested peals of rocket-­ropelled grenades went back and forth. The airstrikes and artillery continued. At midnight, I climbed to a roof, ducked below the parapet -- ISIS snipers had night-­ision equipment, it was believed, though they were good enough not to need it -- and peered over. Mosul is situated in a riverine basin, so that a high enough spot can give you a view over the city's ancient marble walls, the domes and minarets of its medieval mosques, the balconies of its cinder block apartment houses. The car fires had created around the city a necklace of Boschian throbbing orange-­ed.

A sinister chorale crept into the gunfire -- ISIS fighters baying from mosque loudspeakers. ''Allahu akbar! Allahu akbar!'' Others shouted the phrase in the streets. From more loudspeakers came an ISIS anthem. I asked a soldier how the same song could come from different places in unison. He pulled from his fatigues a pocket radio and tuned it to 92.5 FM.

''ISIS's radio station,'' he said.

At the time, Zahra and a few areas around it represented a minute but expanding peninsula of military occupation jutting into the city, whose 251 neighborhoods were otherwise entirely controlled by ISIS. The plan was to push the jihadists west toward the Tigris River, which bisects Mosul, then encircle them on the west side. No one knew how many fighters were waiting. Some soldiers estimated a thousand, some five times that. Some believed that the battle would take two months, others a year. However many fighters there were, ISIS knew they were not enough to face off in the streets with the Iraqi forces pouring into Mosul: roughly 10,000 troops, with an additional 90,000 militiamen, police officers and Kurdish soldiers massed on the city's perimeter. Flying above Mosul were the jets, bombers, helicopters and unmanned aerial vehicles of an American-­ed international coalition, and around it was a constellation of heavy artillery firebases.

So ISIS, in its efforts to hold Mosul -- or, really, to kill as many people and destroy as much of the city as it could while losing it, as the jihadists knew they inevitably must -- relied on tactics known in Western military parlance as ''harassing fire.'' It was a phrase that amused Iraqi soldiers whose English was sufficient to understand its insufficiency and who had to actually endure this harassment. ISIS's harassers included world-class snipers, crack mortar teams, the suicidal drivers of vehicle-­orne improvised explosive devices, or V.B.I.E.D.s -- mobile car bombs -- and, to direct these efforts, something new to warfare, a fleet of commercial-­arket drones. ISIS managed to smuggle untold numbers of the small, cheap machines, the kind of thing you can buy on Amazon, into Mosul.

On his phone, a sergeant major showed me a video taken by one of the enemy drones, which the jihadists used to target strikes as well as record them. When a strike was successful, they would quickly edit the video and put it online, part of the steady diet of near-real-time footage that each side supplied the internet. The troops watched ISIS's videos as avidly as everyone else -- another of this battle's weird techno-­rinkles. This particular clip, uploaded a few days earlier, showed a car bomber speeding up a street not far from where we were now, toward a group of parked Humvees. ''Those are ours,'' said the sergeant major, Karim. The car bomber slammed into a Humvee. A ghostly gray expanded in the middle of the screen. ''I was injured,'' Karim said, lifting up his shirt to reveal a scar. ''No, wait. This is from something else.''

--

It was hard to keep track. The Iraqi special forces had been fighting ISIS for more than two years. They had fought them near Baghdad, in Ramadi, then Falluja, Tikrit and Baiji, pushing the jihadists north nearly 250 miles to Mosul, the caliphate's greatest urban stronghold. Many of Karim's comrades had fought Al Qaeda and ISIS's other precursors before that. The tip of the spear into Mosul, the special forces had been going without a break for weeks now, taking heavy casualties. Karim had been wounded five times since Ramadi. In Falluja, a rocket skivered a Humvee in which he was the gunner. It was the scar from that attack that he wanted to show me, a discolored sunken patch below his rib cage. Looking down at it, he said, ''It was a big hole before.''

I began traveling to northern Iraq last summer as the battle of Mosul loomed, to meet the people making it out of the city and those preparing to go in. When the combat began, I started spending time on the front lines, continuing to do so for six months, mostly in the company of the special forces.

ISIS captured Mosul in June 2014, when the organization was at the height of its power, its territory in Iraq and Syria encompassing thousands of square miles. With roughly 1.3 million residents, Mosul was the second or third ­ost ­opulous city in Iraq -- many times the size of the caliphate's capital, Raqqa, Syria -- and the most diverse and historically rich. By last fall, however, ISIS's territory had shrunk considerably. The recapture of Mosul from the Islamic State would not mean the organization's end, but it would be the most unmistakable death knell yet for the caliphate as a place.

The firefights that began that night in Zahra persisted into the dawn, mingling with the bird song. The men prepared to assault an adjoining neighborhood. The commanding officer, a major, found a house whose roof afforded a good vantage of the route in. On the floor of its still-dark main room were what at first appeared to be long bolts of fabric. Only when the major stepped around them did I see that this was the family who lived here, huddled under layers of blankets. They slept together in the center of the house in the event a wall was blown out during the night.

--

On the street, a tank and an armored bulldozer waited ahead of two columns of Humvees. Locals emerged from their houses, tentatively, then enthusiastically. Parents sent their children to make tea for the soldiers. They brought them bread, sweets, whatever they could spare. The soldiers shared cigarettes, still a precious commodity in Mosul's newly retaken parts.

A special-­orces general gave the order to move. The columns reduced to a single line to cross a boulevard strewn with wrecked cars, downed shop awnings, the trunks of light poles, and then filed into a labyrinth of increasingly narrow streets. The fighting was close. A boy stepped from a doorway, and a soldier yelled at him from a Humvee window, ''Go back inside!''

We came to a stop before a soccer field. On its far side was a mosque, its minaret about seven stories high -- an obvious sniper perch. The general stepped from his Humvee and glanced up indifferently. Encouraged by the sounds of the soldiers, a father opened the front gate of his house. His wife and daughter peeked out. The general walked to them, wearing neither flak jacket nor helmet, carrying not even a sidearm. He shook the father's hand, patted the girl's head, accepted a kiss from the wife.

As if on cue, a shard of pavement popped up near the general's feet, followed by a faint snap. Then something ricocheted off his Humvee with another snap. The family disappeared behind the gate. Soldiers leapt from the street. The general looked at the minaret with scarcely more interest than before, then walked with his back to the mosque, unhurried, and finally sidestepped behind a Humvee with a contemplative grin.

The sniper kept firing. He put a round into the turret of the Humvee in which I was sitting, above my head, then one into the windscreen of the Humvee behind mine, a third into the side mirror of the one next to mine. The minaret was about 400 yards away, and this marksman apparently intended to showcase his expertise, picking apart the vehicles while he waited for one of us to stumble into his sights. A special-­orces gunner peppered the minaret with .50-­aliber rounds, another with grenades from an automatic launcher. The facade crumbled and smoked. It was a Friday, the day of prayer and rest in Islam, the most inconsiderate day to be shooting up a mosque, and ISIS, maybe taking this engagement as sacrilege, loosed a wave of mortar fire.

--

I took cover in a house, where I found the major on the roof, smoking and drinking a Red Bull beneath a clothesline. A car bomb detonated, shaking the block. ''They are good fighters,'' the major said of the enemy. Like most Iraqi soldiers, he was willing to give credit to the jihadists. Whatever else they might be -- lunatics, half-wits, junkies, fake Muslims, pawns of foreign powers, there were as many theories as soldiers -- they were not cowards. ''They want to die,'' it was said every day, and this was neither an insult nor a cliché ''I respect them,'' the major confided. ''People need to die. They have the loyalty for that. I know their loyalty is in the wrong place, but most of their fighters, we've found, they have that loyalty. It's difficult, in an army, to find a fighter who's ready to blow himself up, to fight until he's dead.''

As he spoke, an ISIS propagandist got onto a nearby loudspeaker.

''Fight the infidels!'' he bellowed. ''Fight them because they are American agents! They are Israeli agents!''

During the battles for Ramadi and Falluja, the biggest campaigns before Mosul, most residents fled or were evacuated before the fighting. Many Moslawis stayed, making for a more complicated operation. Some did so because ISIS was killing people who tried to escape, some because they refused to forfeit homes or leave family, some because they worked for ISIS in some capacity -- but many because the government asked them to. It dropped handbills from helicopters requesting that residents not flee. It did this in part because Iraq, which has had 3.4 million people displaced by the war, could not absorb another wholesale exodus. But the generals were also betting they could use the civilians to their advantage. If the security forces treated Moslawis well, the people could be a source of assistance, intelligence, good publicity.

And initially, the wager paid off. The soldiers gave civilians food and medical care, helped them salvage their homes and bury their dead, brought them bottled water and shared their mobile generators (water and electricity service had been cut off). Many soldiers I knew genuinely felt for Moslawis. As one put it to me: ''I know you have ISIS in America. But in America, they do a bombing. Here they're killing my people every day.'' The Moslawis in turn opened their homes to the soldiers, cooked for them, identified collaborators and booby-­raps. The interactions were often very touching to watch, especially because most of the soldiers were from elsewhere and were Shiites, while most Moslawis were Sunnis. Mosul's was an oddly civil battle, in the best sense of the term. This despite the soldiers' knowledge that many of the locals had abided ISIS, and very possibly had done more. You could call it a suspension of disbelief, but the deeper impulse may have been a certain national preference for forgiveness. ''You can't take vengeance for everything bad someone's ever done to you in Iraq,'' one scholar told me. ''If you did, everyone would be dead.''

The generals' strategy also meant that in order to protect civilians, the operation had to move slowly. The troops methodically inched their way westward, causing as little damage as possible. Tanks and mortars were rare. Every airstrike was cleared through the high command and coalition.

In November, in the Tahrir neighborhood, north of Zahra, I spent a night with a special-­orces assault team in a commandeered house behind an avenue that was then the front line. The house was small, and the soldiers slept side by side, head to foot. The closest ISIS position was maybe a hundred feet away, but the night was quiet, and the men awoke in good spirits. They gathered around a gas burner on the floor to warm themselves and fry a pan of eggs, which they scooped up with pieces torn from circular loaves of flatbread. One man lovingly prepared a hookah, while another put on a trilby hat and scarf. I asked if he had found them in the house.

''I wouldn't take another person's clothing,'' he said, sounding almost insulted. He carried the accessories in his rucksack. This was his morning leisure wear.

''I screwed your sister last night,'' the hookah preparer said.

''No, excuse me, I screwed your sister last night.''

With a firefight raging on the avenue, the team moved from house to house, looking for positions. In Ramadi or Falluja, it would have laid siege to the block. Not here. Most of the homes were still occupied by owners or families taking refuge. Some cowered in back rooms; others sat unperturbed in dens and kitchens. In one home, the team found a retired English teacher and his wife. ''Tell them about the mosque,'' she said to her husband. ''Tell them everything.''

''In the mosque around the corner, ISIS stored weapons,'' he said.

They gave the team a stepladder to get them over the back wall and into an empty house facing the avenue. The soldiers quietly ascended to the roof. Ducking below the parapet, they put a hole in its base with a sledgehammer and chisel. A sniper laid on his stomach and checked his scope.

Next they came to a house where five families had been holed up for days. The children -- there must have been two dozen of them -- sat in tidy rows in a hallway. In the next house was a family and its neighbors. A man recounted being questioned by ISIS's feared religious patrolmen. ''They said, 'Why have you shaved?' I told them I hadn't shaved; I just can't grow a beard. They didn't believe me. They said: 'Are you playing with us? Who gave you permission to shave?' I told them, 'I swear I haven't shaved.' '' Another man said: ''I couldn't even buy underwear for my wife. ISIS didn't like the pictures advertising the underwear. They said these pictures came from the devil. You couldn't buy anything -- even perfume. They didn't like the perfume pictures either.''

The soldiers came to the last home on the block. If they could set up in the structure behind it, on an intersection, they would have good firing lines in three directions. The front door had a deadbolt and back plate. For 15 minutes, they took turns pounding at the bolt with a sledgehammer. Hearing the ruckus, more men came in to take turns, until the entranceway was full with panting soldiers. A burly young man stepped in and, with a tremendous whack, sent the bolt flying. ''Is there anything else I can do for you?'' he said, taking his exit.

Inside, they found the remnants of a hasty exit. The television had been removed from its wall mount and a display case with the family silverware turned to the wall. The refrigerator was empty save for four ramekins of pudding, as though the family had eaten a final meal but decamped before dessert.

It took a half-­our for the soldiers to break through another gate and climb into the house they wanted to get to, only to find no windows onto the avenue. It was useless. As we went downstairs, an explosion rocked the earth, sending plaster to the floor and a squall of debris up the street. It had come from the special forces' part of Tahrir and was too big to have been a mortar. Outside, the distinctive billow of a car bomb rose into the sky, with its long stem and squat plume, eerily like a nuclear mushroom cloud. The blast killed a popular gunner. Another man had been felled by a sniper in front of me. There were numerous other casualties. The total ground taken by the company at the end of the day amounted to a few square blocks.

--

At the main position, soldiers had set up a small infirmary -- a pile of drugs and a stretcher -- where locals came for help. Some intrepid residents had reopened a market nearby. ISIS was shelling it insistently. Adults and children perforated with shrapnel and fragment were rushed in. Others came with dormant prescriptions and headaches. A girl arrived having swallowed her chewing gum, the look of terror in her eyes worse than what I'd seen in children who had been shot.

An old man with a flowing white beard hobbled in carrying a death certificate, his wife's. She and their four children were killed in a shelling. Soldiers had helped him bury the bodies. He heard the government was compensating survivors. A sergeant major took the man inside to a portable printer. As he made copies of the certificate, he explained they would have to be sent to a ministry in Baghdad for approval. The man didn't understand. ''Will the government compensate me?'' he asked.

''Yes, but father, believe me, the stamp you need is in Baghdad,'' the sergeant major said.

''Please, I need it stamped.''

''Father, do you think we're ISIS?'' another soldier said. ''That we're going to kill you? We must send the certificate to Baghdad.''

''Please, I need your help. I'm very tired. I'm an old man.''

''I swear, there's nothing more I can do for you,'' the sergeant major said.

All special-­orces soldiers, indeed all Iraqi forces, from the most experienced to the greenest, wore flak jackets and helmets only when ordered to by commanders, commanders only when ordered to by generals and generals never. When I asked why, I was told some variation of ''it can't protect you.'' This was not an indictment of the gear, it took a while to realize, but an expression of a rich fatalism, an alloy of courage and resignation and faith. It was another way of saying, ''If God wants me to die today, so be it,'' a sentiment you heard in so many words all the time from the soldiers and everyone else.

The attitude extended to suicide. A soldier told me about an ambush he was caught in: 35 casualties, a dozen vehicles totaled. They were pinned down overnight. He wasn't scared of dying, he said, but ''was scared of them taking me alive. So I spared a bullet. I call it -- we call it, all of us -- the mercy bullet. When you are surrounded, you kill yourself.''

By January, the troops had pushed ISIS to the Tigris. The jihadists were confined to a few last redoubts in the east. I rode to one, a neighborhood called Arabi, with a general who had the shape and tenor of an active fire hydrant. His convoy drove down a highway at the foot of a hillside. On the hilltop was a church whose large cupola had been knocked off its foundation and onto its side, somehow remaining in one piece, its vault exposed to the sky. Crowds of families walked up the highway in the opposite direction, away from Arabi. This exasperated the general. Didn't they know he was emancipating them? He waved down a family.

''Why are you leaving?'' he demanded.

''Everyone else left,'' the father said.

''Everyone! Where are you all going?''

''Hadba.''

''Well, just stay there, I suppose.''

The convoy entered Arabi, an upper-­lass district of recently built, free-­tanding homes. On a sidewalk, in three piles, was what had once been an ISIS fighter, possibly a suicide bomber. The most recognizable section included his head, shoulders and arms. His right hand was still clenched, as though around a detonator.

The general arrived at an intersection where his soldiers had gathered to celebrate. Arabi had just been officially taken, or so they had been told, though no one had told the general this, and gunfire still rang out nearby. Civilians emerged from their homes. As the general walked up the street, they embraced him and took pictures with him. A woman, her cheeks wet with tears, kissed him.

''God bless you, God protect you,'' she told him. ''We're so tired. But now we can eat comfortably.''

''We will raise the Iraqi flag now,'' her son said.

''When I first saw the soldiers, I started kissing them,'' his mother went on, more excited with every word. ''Kissed all of them! I can't contain my happiness.''

''She did!'' her son said. ''She even kissed their feet. I can't blame her.''

The convoy pulled out of Arabi and back onto the highway, a group of officers on foot alongside it, none of them wearing protective equipment. They hadn't been moving long when a shell came in with that familiar, quick thrum. There was a blast, a hail of fragment and debris, a gust of smoke, then silence. Momentarily the air cleared. Cut down on the ground before me, quicker than seemed possible, were four perfectly dead officers.

Immediately it was obvious what had happened: an ISIS informant in Arabi had seen the general, tracked him and alerted a mortar team. Perhaps the general had unknowingly spoken with the artillerist. Perhaps they'd hugged.

The general and his staff jumped from their vehicles and ran to the injured survivors. Another shell crashed nearby. Two ambulances sped in and loaded on three corpses. The last was laid on the hood of the general's Humvee. We followed the ambulances back up the highway, past Arabi, to a command post. The corpses were already in body bags in the courtyard. Soldiers bent over them, weeping and yelling. The general stood alone on the far side of the yard.

''Bring a flag!'' wailed a kneeling man.

''Put it around the edges,'' the general instructed from across the yard when the Iraqi flag was finally brought. The folding displeased him. He marched over and neatly tucked the corners between the body bag and the stretcher.

''Screw these Mosul people!'' a soldier said.

II. Khazir Camp

Despite the efforts to get them to stay, every day civilians fled the front-line neighborhoods of eastern Mosul, which was declared liberated in late January. They fled in families, groups of families, whole city blocks' worth of families. They dragged bursting suitcases and waved broomsticks and lengths of plastic piping tied with white cloths to signal to the soldiers their docility. The old and the sick were in wheelchairs, wheelbarrows, slung on backs. The dead were wrapped in blankets and pushed along in handcarts and wagons. The families congregated at a holding facility on Mosul's eastern edge, a half-built home whose gate had been shelled away. In front idled a row of open-top freight trucks. Once their trailers were full with human cargo, they would drive to one of the 68 camps for displaced people that have been erected in Iraq since June 2014.

Entering the home's courtyard one day, I met a stout, disheveled man wearing a fraying sweater. His face was unevenly shaved, and his penetrating eyes were laughing and frantic behind dirty glasses. They seemed to ask, Can you imagine this hell?

--

He went by Abu Omar. He was with his two daughters and was eager for information. Where would they be taken? When could they return? Journalists got these questions all the time: When Moslawis saw a foreign face, they assumed it belonged to an authority, and when they learned you were American, their expectations made you feel grandly useless. Americans could and did do anything, you were assured. Among other assumptions, they took it for granted that the United States was controlling this war, from both sides. ''This was all planned 20 years ago,'' Abu Omar told me of the battle. ''America planned it.''

I found Abu Omar, 48, and his daughters again in a camp known as Khazir, an hour's drive east of Mosul, and took to visiting them there regularly. It was in an improbably bucolic setting, on a hillside next to a river in Iraqi Kurdistan. Inside the camp, however, the atmosphere was humid with suspicion. Kurdish soldiers and agents, many of whom had fought ISIS, presided over Khazir. ''They tell us, 'You're all ISIS,' '' Abu Omar told me on one visit.

His tent was situated between a storm fence and the toilet that serviced his block -- four holes in the floor for dozens of families. For washing and cooking there was a water tank with a few unenthusiastic spigots. The winter rains had begun, and there was mud everywhere. Rats roamed at night. ''We thought the government would take care of us after we lived under ISIS for so long,'' Abu Omar said. ''But it's the same crap here. It's like a jail.''

There hadn't been regular water service in Mosul before he left, he said, and he hadn't prayed in months. ''To pray, you must be clean. Islam is clean.'' But the real problem was that ISIS had soured him on the whole idea. ''God forgive me for saying it, but now I don't even like to hear the call to prayer. I hate it because of them. God forgive me. On Fridays, their preaching was all instigating people to kill, to deceive one another, to pillage. This is not our religion.'' Suddenly his eyes brightened with that frantic laugh, and he exclaimed: ''Will you take me to America? Why don't you take us to America? Take me out of Iraq.''

Abu Omar came from a working-­lass Mosul family. After being conscripted into Saddam Hussein's army in the mid-1980s, he was sent to fight in Iran. Mosul wasn't bombed in that war to the extent that Baghdad and Basra were, but it suffered in its own way: A majority of the officers' corps came from the city, many of them from Mosul's oldest families. Long before Hussein took power, the city had a formidable martial reputation.

It began as a settlement around 900 B.C. on the Tigris's west bank, across from the more famous Nineveh, whose ruins Mosul now encompasses. In the ninth and eighth centuries B.C., Nineveh was one of the most populous cities in the world, archaeologists believe, in the largest empire of its day -- the Assyrian -- maintained by an army so fierce that God made it his ''rod of anger'' to punish the wayward Israelites, according to Isaiah. To the Hebrew prophets, Nineveh was a cruel paradox of a place, the flower of iniquity and the instrument of righteousness. The Assyrians commemorated their massacres in carved reliefs whose antic violence is still unsettling to consider, not least because it prefigures ISIS's agitprop by 3,000 years. God would eventually lay waste the Assyrians too, of course. ''Even today,'' the historian John Robertson writes, the biblical picture ''shapes our views of Iraq as a place cursed by history.''

After the Assyrians passed from power, Mosul found itself wedged between the Roman and Parthian Empires, then Byzantium and Persia, then Turkey and Iran. Home to all the Abrahamic religions, Mosul was also sanctuary to their precursors and persecuted offshoots: Zoroastrians, Yazidis, Christian schismatics, Jews, Sufi Muslims and various mystics and heretics unwelcome elsewhere. Governed at different times by Sunni and Shiite caliphs, Mosul was on the fault line of Islam, though even religiously conservative Moslawis are proud of their city's history of diversity. Abu Omar told me, ''I am a Muslim, but my neighbors were Christian, and I never saw any harm from them.''

They're also proud of Mosul's history of resistance to the Ottoman Empire and to Baghdad. The British diplomat Gertrude Bell wrote in 1911, ''Mosul has always been against the government, whatever form it should happen to assume.'' Mosul was one major Iraqi city never to erect a statue of Hussein, according to longtime residents. Bell's colleague Mark Sykes, an author of the Sykes-­icot Agreement, which carved up the Levant to the specifications of the British and French Empires, was less charitable. He found Moslawis ''ready to riot and slay for the sake of fanaticism as long as there is no danger.''

After Iran, Abu Omar was sent to Kuwait. He didn't agree with that war but didn't dare disobey. He was terrified of Hussein, it went without saying, but that was nothing compared with the terror to follow. When the Americans deposed the Iraqi president, he said, ''we felt happy. But if we had known things would turn this way, of course we would have wished to stay under him.''

In 2005, Abu Omar's wife was kidnapped. Her body was found in a street in another neighborhood. He believes she was killed by militants, though accidentally. Before finding a job as a security guard at a cellular tower, he did not have regular work, and unable to feed his children, he put them in an orphanage.

''They've only known war and destruction,'' he said. His daughter Amina, now 12, was anemic, and, he added -- lowering his voice, though not so low that anyone could miss what he said -- ''Aya has a mental disorder.'' Aya, a sweet-­atured girl who at 13 looked both older and younger than her age, did not seem to outward appearances to suffer from anything worse than painful shyness; she looked down at her folded knees as her father said this. As for the 18-year-old Omar, his father went on, while he might look big -- he was a mass of undeveloped bulk -- he had ''the brain of a child.'' Omar, who had been in the corner of the tent praying, smiled mildly. This obviously was not the first time Abu Omar had insulted his son in front of a stranger.

Omar arrived in the camp two weeks after the rest of his family. He was detained by the special forces after they retook Zahra, Abu Omar told me -- pro forma for young Sunni men. ''The ones who had some connection with ISIS, they beat them very badly and took them away,'' Abu Omar explained. ''Those who had nothing to do with them were kept for a few days, then brought here.''

''They blindfolded all of the guys with me, but they didn't blindfold me,'' Omar said boastfully. It was unclear whether he wanted to impress his father or me or both of us. ''I was the supervisor of all the other prisoners.''

''Because he was not involved with ISIS,'' his father repeated.

Still, Abu Omar and Omar both readily admitted that they had at first welcomed ISIS. To understand this, they said, I had to understand the city's recent history. In the early years of American occupation, Mosul was safe, one of the few major cities spared looting and the early sectarian violence that tore apart Baghdad. But inevitably a militant underground coalesced. It began with former soldiers and officials -- men not unlike Abu Omar -- who had lost their jobs and pensions when the United States disbanded the military and tried to purge members of Hussein's Baath Party from office. They were joined by coreligionists and criminal rings, the lot of them colluding and competing over smuggling routes and extortion rackets. Ideology and criminality commingled.

--

In 2006, Abu Musab al-­arqawi, Al Qaeda in Iraq's founder, who envisioned a modern-day caliphate in the country, was killed in an American airstrike. His followers were squeezed northward by the Sunni Awakening and the ''surge'' of American forces. Regrouping in Mosul, with a consortium of other jihadists they began referring to themselves as the Islamic State of Iraq. The city was its base and main revenue center. It co-­pted and assassinated officials at all levels of the local government, courts and police force. But for all its depredations, the insurgency wasn't as despised as the national government. By 2010, most of the Iraqi soldiers patrolling the city were Shiite and not from Mosul, and they treated Sunni men as though they were all militants, jailing them and beating them. When Abu Omar crossed the city, he had to wait at checkpoints for hours. Soldiers insulted Omar routinely. They ''turned Mosul into a hell,'' Abu Omar told me.

By the time ISIS activated its operatives in Mosul, in the first days of June 2014, and dispatched columns from Syria toward the city, it was theirs for the taking. Whether through anguish or pragmatism, or both, many Moslawis had come to see ISIS, barbarous as it was, as the only alternative to the government in Baghdad. ''Religious ideology might have been the last point of identification for many Moslawis who joined ISIS,'' Rasha al Aqeedi, a researcher from Mosul, told me.

When ISIS arrived, ''they came in as revolutionaries,'' Abu Omar said. ''Once they took control, there were no more checkpoints, no traffic jams, no arrests of young people, no beatings,'' Omar added. ''There was freedom.'' The jihadists cleaned up the city, lowered rents, collected donations for the poor. They promulgated a new city constitution, whose 16 clauses encouraged Moslawis to live peaceably, forbade the ownership of weapons and promised justice for all.

Abu Omar's house was opposite the mosque from which the sniper shot at the special-­orces soldiers in November. He and Omar had gone to that mosque, al-Nuaimi, every Friday for years. In all of Mosul's mosques, ISIS installed loyalist imams -- some of them foreigners, some Moslawis who sided with the group. At al-Nuaimi, the imam who took over, one of the locals, called himself Abu Bakr, like ISIS's caliph, Abu Bakr al-­aghdadi. Preaching with a rifle slung on his shoulder, he exhorted the young men who flocked to him to attack their parents if they objected to jihad. As the Iraqi troops approached Mosul, he hollered from the minbar: ''Kill the Iraqi Army! Kill whoever wears the uniform!'' Omar went every week. ''I didn't miss a sermon,'' he told me.

--

The imam often had a videographer in tow. Like ­aghdadi, he believed he was instrumental in history -- more to the point, in the end of history. ISIS erected billboards at checkpoints outside Mosul, like states' welcome signs, reading, ''The Islamic State: A Caliphate in Accordance With the Prophetic Method.'' The climax of the prophecy was Armageddon. ISIS was here to usher it in.

''Do you know what they do?'' Abu Omar said. ''They tell you: 'Son, you are doing jihad for God. You will be martyred and go to heaven. There are mermaids in heaven. You will eat lunch with the Prophet.' ''

Omar frowned. To him and his friends, there had been nothing jocular about the imam. Abu Bakr was powerful, brash, unafraid to question authority. He was everything their parents -- beaten down by years of hardship, humiliated, afraid of everything, it seemed -- were not. The imam told Omar he was a warrior in waiting who would deliver this world from unbelief. ''I believed him,'' Omar told me. ''It made sense to me.''

While Omar talked, his father kept interrupting to temper his son's confessions. Finally, Abu Omar confessed, ''If it wasn't for me, Omar might have joined them.''

I asked Omar if this was true. ''Yes, if it wasn't for my father, I would have been in ISIS for sure. They could have brainwashed me.''

Over his adult life, Abu Omar had fallen out with all of his siblings save one, a brother who goes by Abu Fahad. Abu Fahad, 50, fled Mosul shortly after Abu Omar, and when he and his family arrived at the Khazir camp, they moved into his brother's tent. Abu Omar told him it was too crowded, and Abu Fahad left in a huff. They hadn't spoken since. Though they were living in the same camp, they were too proud to effect a reunion.

''He knows where to find me,'' Abu Omar grumbled. But there was something else pushing them apart: According to Abu Omar, Abu Fahad's older son had joined ISIS.

Abu Fahad had the same high forehead and penetrating eyes as his brother, but his didn't laugh. Exile was a more stinging indignity to him. Trimmer and better groomed than Abu Omar, he was also cleverer, having been an army medic and then the chief nurse at a Mosul hospital. His younger son, Hamudi, was two years younger than Omar but much more mature. While Aya could barely bring herself to speak in my presence, Abu Fahad's daughter Maha wanted to discuss history and politics, religion and movies. And yet here they were, reduced to exactly the same circumstances as Abu Omar and his family.

The same year that Abu Omar's wife was killed, Abu Fahad's wife was shot while they were driving in Mosul, he believes by Kurdish and American soldiers. His children were in the car. As Maha and Hamudi listened, Abu Fahad recounted to me the crash of the bullets coming through the windshield, his harried pressing on the brake pedal. He was dragged from the vehicle and beaten unconscious by the soldiers. Coming to, he found his wife's body beneath a blanket. His eldest daughter, who had watched her mother's head explode, he found in the back seat, trying to eat shards of window glass.

''She went insane,'' Abu Fahad said. She never entirely recovered.

By this point in the story, Maha was crying, while Hamudi stared fixedly at the ground.

''Let's change the subject, please,'' Abu Fahad said.

When ISIS arrived in Mosul, ''we were one of the families who welcomed them,'' he told me. ''They claimed they'd save us from the infidels and that they would return us to real Islam.'' Like most Iraqis I've come to know who supported ISIS initially, Abu Fahad was not a zealot. He wasn't even particularly devout. He had, however, watched his country invaded and plunged into horror; his city degraded from a ''heaven,'' as he described the Mosul of his youth, to a battleground; his wife killed; himself humiliated by soldiers of the army he once nursed to health; his children denied a future. To a man in such circumstances, talk of a religious utopia, of any utopia, of any improvement of life beyond the malediction it had become, however fantastical the promises, however deranged, held a desperate appeal. ''They said they would not stop until they reached Rome,'' he told me with a rueful grin. ''I thought, let's start with Baghdad, then we can talk about Rome.''

Sounding like a resident of Washington recollecting a smooth presidential transition, he said: ''They took over the city so capably. By the next morning at 10, they were driving around Mosul as though they'd always been there.'' For a time, life went on normally. Abu Fahad stayed on at the hospital -- ISIS made a point of keeping the hospitals open, along with providing other vital public services. Many public employees kept their jobs under ISIS. Others took jobs with the group -- as traffic officers, court clerks, garbage collectors and so forth. To an outsider, this is unimaginable, but to Moslawis, ISIS was now the government, whether they liked it or not. They had to survive.

I asked Abu Fahad about his older son, Loy. He did not know that Abu Omar had told me Loy was in ISIS. Abu Fahad conceded, ''He was very religious.'' He'd been driven to extreme devotion by his mother's death. ''And to tell you the truth, he did support their ideology.'' But Abu Fahad emphasized, ''He didn't support their actions.''

When I visited Abu Omar at the camp, he was always eager for news from the front, though he usually knew more than I did. Local Mosul radio and TV stations were already back to work, and he kept a radio on all day. The camp was very cold at night, but he sold a space heater to buy a TV. He had not watched one in months. At first, he explained, ISIS had allowed Moslawis to keep their satellite dishes and modems. But soon enough, those were confiscated. That had been the general trend. They might have come as revolutionaries, Abu Omar said, but they were leaving as murderous tyrants, to say nothing of thieves.

There were the public sadisms of which the world learned. Then there were the lesser-­nown outrages. ISIS pilfered nearly $425 million from Mosul's Central Bank, according to a United Nations Habitat report, even as it imposed a mandatory tax for ''charity'' on Moslawis and extorted private businesses. Construction and public-­orks projects came to a standstill; factories closed, and as they did, ISIS dismantled them and shipped off their equipment for sale abroad. By 2016, the report found, as much as three-­uarters of the city's industrial enterprises and a comparable share of its government infrastructure were destroyed. And that was before the coalition's bombing campaign began in earnest.

When ISIS shut down the mobile-­hone networks, Abu Omar lost his job. When the government in Baghdad ceased paying employees in Mosul, Abu Fahad went broke. ISIS took over grain silos, flour factories, bakeries, farms. They smuggled out millions of barrels of oil and gas, driving up prices, and seized properties of Moslawis, renting or looting them. ''It's all a lie,'' a provincial government official I spoke with remembers thinking. ''We thought the Americans were their target. But they weren't. We were their target. Our money was their target.''

--

When the roads into Mosul were blocked by security forces, the shops went empty. Power and water service were reduced to a few hours a day. ISIS razed historical structures, including mosques, and demolished and burned artifacts and irreplaceable books. It took over the schools, imposing its own bellicose curriculum. At Mosul University, it shut down every department except medicine and engineering. When a student I know who had been a history major asked why, he was told: ''We have a new history. We have the right history.''

When we discussed ISIS, Abu Omar, like just about every Moslawi, dismissed as naïe the notion that the organization might have arisen from the caldron of Iraqi history alone or that it functioned independently. It was a global conspiracy, he was certain: The government in Baghdad was of course involved, despite being Shiite-­ominated and ISIS's being by definition Sunni; so, too, was Saudi Arabia (the money), Turkey (the border), Iran (sheer Persian perfidy) and Israel (Jews control everything). But the conversation invariably came back to the United States.

One day when we were discussing the imam Abu Bakr, I asked Omar what he liked so much about his sermons. Omar smiled sheepishly.

''I don't want to say,'' he replied. ''You are our guest here, and I should respect you.''

I told him I wouldn't be offended.

''All Americans are pigs. Filthier than pigs,'' Omar said. ''Americans -- no, he wasn't calling them Americans, he was calling them Jews -- he said the Jews want to destroy Islam.''

Abu Omar said that, much as he disliked the imam, he had to concede the accuracy of this point. ''The real founders of ISIS are America and Israel,'' he said.

''How's that?'' I asked.

''Do you really think America, with all its technology and strategy, with all its strength, that it couldn't defeat ISIS in a day if it wished?''

I told him that I thought ISIS was a very effective insurgency and that any military would struggle against it.

''Not the American military,'' he said. ''How was it ISIS was even able to enter Iraq? How was it they were able to expand as they did? An American satellite can reveal what's inside your stomach. They couldn't see this? When the Americans withdrew from Iraq, they said, 'As soon as we leave, the country will return to chaos.' ''

His secret history of ISIS stretched back to the 2003 invasion, then to the Persian Gulf war, then to the collapse of the Ottoman Empire and arrived at the Sykes-­icot Agreement, signed in 1916. The centennial had not escaped his notice.

''So you think ISIS was conceived a century ago?'' I asked.

''No, I am saying this has all been planned. I cannot explain to you how, exactly, because it's a very deep scheme. Bigger than me, bigger than you, bigger than all of us. Very deep politics. But it was all planned.'' Sighing, he concluded, ''I don't know, but I know the main reason for Iraq's destruction is America.''

--

These ideas are ubiquitous among everyday Iraqis, whose various and conflicting notions about the Islamic State's underwriters oddly mirror ISIS's own claims (''Fight them because they are American agents! They are Israeli agents!''). They are particularly baroque among the troops. I was informed by many soldiers that the Obama administration was not just not doing enough to fight ISIS but was actively backing it. ''Obama doesn't help us,'' a special-­orces sergeant major told me. (The Iraqi Special Operations Forces had been trained and funded by the United States, including the Obama administration, to hunt terrorists. It used American equipment and in the battle of Mosul enjoyed on-­emand American air and artillery support.) ''He doesn't like us.'' A comrade agreed, ''Obama supports ISIS.'' Other soldiers informed me that they had seen American aircraft dropping supplies to ISIS. And almost every soldier I spoke with after the American presidential election claimed to eagerly await Donald Trump. Some hoped he would attack ISIS, others Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Iran, all of them.

''Obama smashed Iraq,'' Abu Omar said. ''And Trump? Trump will not leave any humans alive in the universe.'' He held the two men in almost equal disdain. ''I only like Trump because he might screw Iran.''

Iraqis looked forward to an American president who fit their idea of one, which as far as I could make out meant a belligerent, imperious white man. Trump's statements about Muslims didn't bother them. They were going to be mistreated by any American leader, they figured. At least Trump was open about it.

III. Western Mosul

The combat on the west side of Mosul commenced in early March with a bad omen -- a flock of them. ISIS engineers had figured out how to rig grenades and mortar rounds to the undersides of their drones with a catching mechanism that connected to the drone's headlamps. When the pilot turned on the lights, the munition armed and released. As troops made their way into the outskirts, enemy quadcopters swarmed over them, dropping the small bombs. The coalition devised a way to sabotage the drones electronically, and by the middle of the month, the troops had breached the southernmost neighborhoods.

It had taken them three months to capture the east side, which was damaged, of course, but not overwhelmingly. Within a few weeks of operations in the west, it was clear that the damage here would be vastly worse. Already whole neighborhoods were leveled. ISIS had always been less popular in the east, Mosul's more diverse half. The west was where Sunni discontent had run the highest, where Al Qaeda had been the strongest and where ISIS, it knew all along, would make its last stand. ''Any creature, when you corner it, gets more aggressive,'' a special-­orces major told me. ''They know they're going to die.''

The destruction was all the more upsetting because the west was not just home to a majority of Moslawis but to the city's past. Aside from the ruins of Nineveh, the east had been built up mostly since the Baathist era. The west, however, contained mosques, shrines, churches and monasteries dating back to at least the eighth century A.D., museums and libraries and the Old City, with the historical centerpiece of Al Nuri Grand Mosque. The mosque was supposedly the work of Nur al-Din, who repelled the Christians of the Second Crusade. It was Nur al-Din who reportedly inspired Abu Musab al-­arqawi to conceive of the Islamic State, and it was at the Grand Mosque that his successor, Abu Bakr al-­aghdadi, proclaimed himself its caliph. The mosque's famous leaning minaret could be seen from around the west side, overlooking every skirmish, pulling jihadist and the soldier alike toward it like true north on a compass. Not until the minaret fell -- and the combatants knew it would have to fall, by one hand or the other -- would the battle be done.

To meet ISIS's redoubled aggression, pressure from the air was increased. American ­paches and Iraqi Hind helicopters now menaced the jihadists constantly, the roar of their guns and cannons, which poured down thousands of rounds a minute, seeming to tear the sky asunder. ISIS in turn stepped up its attacks on civilians.

One morning, soldiers were overseeing food distribution in the newly retaken Mosul Jidideh, a pleasant area of narrow tree-­ined streets, plazas and old homes in the center of the west side. A crowd of a few hundred gathered. On a side street opposite the food trucks, a mother who fled the fighting with her children had moved into an abandoned house. Outside it, she and her two sons had set up a small grocery.

Predictably, ISIS learned of the distribution almost as soon as it started. A shell came in, hitting the grocery. The crowd bolted. Out of the smoke-­illed street, civilians carried a soldier, a hole in his leg gushing blood. He was lifted into a Humvee and rushed off. A man, conscious but the color of death, his chest a confusion of entry wounds, was laid on the curb. Beside him was set down a boy whose injury was unapparent but whose face suggested something dreadful.

A flatbed truck raced up. The less-­ounded climbed in. As the boy was handed up, his insides spilled from a gash in his abdomen. By the time the man was lifted, he was dead.

He was the eldest son of the family in the abandoned house. Solitary tomatoes and torn bags of chips surrounded the shell crater. His mother stood in the doorway of the house, screaming, her daughters in the kitchen behind her sobbing. The doorstep had pooled with her son's blood. Her younger son stumbled in, ranting and pulling at his hair. He cursed the army. First his father, a bystander, was killed, now his brother. His mother begged him to lower his voice.

''Let them hear it!'' he said. ''Let them hear it!''

He crumpled on the doorstep, hyperventilating, his feet in the blood.

It was a terrible cycle. The more Moslawis were killed, the more they blamed not ISIS but the soldiers for bringing this war upon them. And the more soldiers were killed, the more they came to suspect ordinary Moslawis were colluding with ISIS in the fight (''Screw these Mosul people!''). The inevitable breakdown of the strategy of encouraging civilians to stay, it came to a head in mid-­arch, when a coalition airstrike resulted in the deaths of more than 100 civilians in Mosul Jidideh. A Pentagon investigation found that the strike hit an ISIS explosives cache, but by the time the report was released, the damage had been done.

There was no doubt that some soldiers, maybe many, did not heed the orders to protect civilians. In early March, as the troops surrounded the Old City, I spent an afternoon with a unit of infantrymen who had just taken a stately old rail station, in the process shooting it to bits. Now they were trying to dislodge a nearby contingent of enemy fighters. Not as well funded as the special forces, they had to improvise much of their equipment. They had fortified their personnel carrier with sandbags, fastening them to the vehicle's sides with chicken wire. Their prize possession was a multilaunch system consisting of a trio of immense handmade tubes welded onto the back of a Humvee.

The men parked the Humvee with its hood facing vaguely toward ISIS. A tail fuse was lit. From a tube launched a rusty projectile the length of a man and the width of an elm trunk. It hurtled in a high arc, spinning like a poorly thrown football, and landed a few blocks away with a dismal rumble. Four of these bombs were launched, each time an officer yelling, ''Blasting in the name of the Prophet!'' It was unclear whether he was serious or glib, but it was clear that if there were civilians near the detonations, there was little chance they were alive. I asked the officer how the aiming was done.

''I don't want to talk to you,'' he said. ''I don't want you shouting about this and saying bad things.''

Several days after the incident in Mosul Jidideh, I was with soldiers sitting in their Humvee, listening to a local call-in radio show. ''What I'm hearing about what's happening there makes me very sad,'' a caller said to the host. ''May God be with you and protect you. I hope ISIS all dies and burns in hell. But it doesn't make sense to destroy an entire neighborhood because of one ISIS dog. It doesn't make sense. It's not acceptable. Ten thousand people are dying because of this. They're making a second Aleppo in Mosul.''

''You're right, it has become another Aleppo,'' the host said. ''Houses are destroyed. The city is destroyed. This is very bad politics. It's a very bad plan if they want to restore Mosul.''

The favor of protection was not extended to those believed to be ISIS members. If you spent enough time in Mosul, you eventually saw suspected jihadists beaten, tortured, even murdered. Often, though, the interactions between troops and captives were not so violent as they were absurd. I was sharing a hookah with a special-­orces sergeant outside his position in Mosul Jidideh one morning in April when a middle-­ged man approached. A teenager dragged his feet alongside him. The man wanted to turn over the boy, his son, because he had taken a job as a street cleaner with ISIS. The job had lasted 10 days, a year earlier.

The sergeant, whose name was Salam, wasn't overly interested. Nor was the son, Idris, whose expression suggested that this was only the latest in a yearslong litany of paternal complaint. ''Yesterday the minister announced that those who worked for ISIS but did not bloody their hands will be forgiven,'' the father told Salam. ''I swear, he has not done anything bad. If he had, I wouldn't have turned him in. I would have helped him escape.''

Salam asked Idris if what his father said was true. Idris said it was. He had been a student but dropped out when ISIS took over his school and went to work at his uncle's tea shop. The religious patrolmen shut it down because of the hookahs.

''Did you take the job because you needed the money?'' Salam asked.

''Yes,'' Idris said. ''To buy a motorcycle.''

I was the only person who laughed at this. ''He's a young man,'' the father said. Salam nodded. A young man, a motorcycle, obviously. But, his father went on, he didn't want Idris riding a motorcycle, and while he liked that his son was motivated to work, he certainly didn't want him working for ISIS. Salam nodded again. And if that weren't enough, Idris had informed his boss in ISIS of his father's contempt for the group.

''He told them I didn't like them,'' the father said. ''That's why they jailed me and beat me.''

An audience of locals had gathered, and it murmured disapprovingly at this. But when Idris and his father agreed that whatever else their faults, ISIS had taken sanitation very seriously, the audience murmured in agreement.

''Don't lie to me,'' Salam said to Idris. ''Did you join ISIS because you fought with your father?''

Idris shrugged. ''Yeah.''

''This is what happened in Mosul -- every kid who fought with his dad joined ISIS,'' Salam said. ''Well, if he didn't do anything bad, he can just go.''

Another soldier named Ibrahim intervened. ''So you were only a garbage man?'' he said to Idris. ''You could have at least been a fighter.'' He stepped behind Idris and belligerently caressed his neck with one hand. With the other he dangled over Idris's shoulder an adjustable wrench. It was small but he turned it in his palm and retracted and clamped the jaw in such a way to suggest it held torturous possibilities. The boy's eyes went wide.

''Ibrahim, have you become an investigator?'' Salam said.

''How do we know if his file is clean?'' Ibrahim said. ''What if later we find there's more to it?''

''If we take in everyone who's worked with ISIS at some point,'' Salam said, ''we'll have to take in all Mosul.''

Regretting his decision, Idris's father repeated that he was certain his son had done nothing wrong. It was too late. Idris was taken inside and patted down. In a bedroom in the back of the house, his ankles and wrists were tied, and he was pressed to the floor.

An intelligence officer arrived with Idris's father, who looked dejected and yet still annoyed with Idris. ''So you're saying your son hasn't done anything and that you're turning him in just for being a garbage man? This makes no sense.'' And to Idris: ''Let me give you some advice. Just be honest with us. Tell us everything. If you don't tell us the whole story now, and we find other sources who tell us more, you know what will happen? You'll just be killed and tossed in the street with the rest of ISIS.''

--

Over the course of the afternoon, locals filed in to size up the captive. Idris looked up at them blankly and they down at him unimpressed. Ibrahim and a younger, gentler soldier walked in and out, addressing Idris with threats and placations. It turned into a vaudevillian good-cop-bad-cop routine. The gentle soldier brought Idris a Styrofoam container of rice and tomato sauce and untied his wrists. Idris refused to eat.

''Animal! If he tells you eat, you eat! Drink, you drink!'' Ibrahim yelled. ''If one of us tells you to throw yourself into a fire, you do it.''

''Listen, we're not telling you to jump in a fire,'' the gentle soldier said. ''We're just telling you to eat.''

''This animal here, we tell him to eat, and he won't. Son of a donkey! Animal! Son of a sheep!''

Another soldier came in and said: ''Imagine if you get married one day and have kids, and your son goes and does something like you've done. How would you feel?''

Idris ate. After lunch, Ibrahim took a nap on the bed across from him. When he awoke, Idris said he wanted to pray. ''Of course, now you want to pray! If I were you and had decided to join ISIS, I would have at least worked in a supermarket, something that would have fed me. Not a garbage man. They're garbage, and you were their garbage man. Garbage and garbage. How did you come up with that? What's the matter, your head isn't clear? Let me clear it for you.''

Ibrahim slapped Idris.

''Is it clear now?''

''I swear I've done nothing,'' Idris whimpered.

''Don't worry,'' the gentle soldier said, ''it will be all right.''

After 12 hours, he was untied and taken into the sitting room. The soldiers had tired of baiting him. Everyone ate dinner and watched the Formula One film ''Rush.''

Idris was lucky. Sometimes captives were held for trial, but many commanders subscribed to a policy of summary execution. A major I met had trained as an attorney; when the war was over, he wanted to practice human rights law. He killed men he believed to be ISIS members on sight. When I asked how he squared the two, he explained that ISIS had forfeited their human rights.

''It's true we have human rights here and that sometimes terrorists get trials, but ISIS doesn't deserve anything like that,'' he said. ''They kill innocents at every opportunity.''

I offered no rejoinder to the major, who was later killed.

''For me, I love helping people -- I have a good heart,'' another major, whom I came to know well and like a lot, told me. ''But I feel no mercy for a jihadi. I hate their existence.''

The previous day, a local family who was fleeing had taken a man to him. The man had tried to hide among them as they left, they explained. He was an ISIS fighter from the neighborhood. They knew him, but they weren't going to protect him.

''So what did you do?'' I asked.

''We took him off and shot him,'' the major said.

In fact, the corpse was in a yard across the street from where we talked. He took me there. Lying on his back, his legs bent high like a frog's, was a very short man with a sleek beard in a white shirt and black combat fatigues. His face was blackened with necrosis, and flies gathered in the hole where the occipital bone of his skull once was.

''I was looking right at him, and he was not scared,'' the major said. ''Everyone has this thing inside of them, a threshold of fear. I could not find his.''

By May, most of the west had been retaken and the Old City surrounded. The soldiers were ready for this battle, for this war, to be over. You could see it in their postures, in their faces, in the way they held their weapons. By the end, the battle of Mosul would claim the lives of nearly 1,000 members of the special forces and thousands of civilians, according to unofficial estimates.

I asked a soldier what he would do after the battle. ''Go to Hawija, I guess, or Tal Afar,'' he said, referring to ISIS's last strongholds in Iraq. ''When you sign the contract, you sign up to die.'' There was a weariness in his voice that stretched beyond those places, however, beyond the inevitable official victory over ISIS. Like everyone else, he knew the insurgency wouldn't disappear. It would go underground, as Al Qaeda had done, and wait for another political or sectarian crisis. The wait probably wouldn't be long. Just as the palimpsest of past wars could be seen below this one, so the signs of wars to come could be read around Iraq now. Shiite militias were trying to take control of what had been Sunni lands, including around Mosul. Sunni tribal militias were expanding in response. The Kurdish pesh merga were preparing to defend the territory they occupied while fighting ISIS.

The conversation came around to President Trump, who was trying to ban Iraqis from entering the United States. ''Before he came into office, I knew he didn't like Muslims,'' another man said. ''But I thought he'd take care of the nasty Muslims. Instead, he came for us.''

At dawn, I stood in a group of about 40 soldiers on a sloped street that looked down onto the Old City, over a vista of collapsed buildings and punctured domes, across the Tigris and beyond to the mountains of Iraqi Kurdistan. It was a clear, warm day -- summer was at hand -- and the leaning minaret of the Grand Mosque was directly ahead, set against the peaks. Black smoke rose from ISIS's car fires, and the gunfire was already steady.

The streets were barren: The combat had been so bitter, the bombing so extensive, that more than 750,000 people would eventually flee the western part of the city, according to the Iraqi government. Every day you could see miles-­ong columns of families heading south.

Leading the soldiers was a major I saw carried into a medical station months earlier with a bullet in his thigh. He had recuperated and returned to service. He marched his men onto a long commercial avenue, a picture of ruin. The shops and office buildings looked as though they had simply given up, spilling themselves onto the street. Not a soul was in sight. The pavement in every direction was deeply cratered. The soldiers climbed over rubble piles. It felt as though we were moving through the remains of some bygone civilization. They came to a small clearing with a chicken coop. Somehow, the animals were still alive.

''Jihadist chickens,'' a soldier said.

A rooster followed the men as they moved on, hopping with them through a crater and cuckooing inquiringly. They moved toward an intersection. A sniper started shooting. Across the avenue, a group of civilians had emerged from the rubble and were trying to flee. In this lifeless landscape, they looked as out of place as the birds. They climbed down into an immense crater. The last in the group was an old man. He stopped in the crater's nadir and gazed up helplessly. The group moved on until a young man looked behind him. He rushed to the crater, climbed down, folded the old man over his shoulder and carried him out. The major watched with relief.

His men took up a position in a house. The sniper shot steadily. He had a direct line on the house. As we stood inside, he put rounds into the facade. A request for air support was radioed in.

''Screw that sniper, screw Baghdadi, screw ISIS,'' a soldier said.

''I'm fine with liberating Iraq,'' another said. ''But I'm worried they'll send us to Syria with the Americans.''

A helicopter flew overhead, and the reassuring din of its guns filled the sky. The men relaxed.

We had been back on the sloped street for a short time when the air trembled and the distinctive mushroom cloud of a car bomb rose high above the roofs. What sounded like a firefight ensued. Rushing to the scene, we found that the bomb had ignited a command post with an ammunition cache. The cook-off lasted for almost 20 minutes, sending thousands of rounds flying into the nearby houses.

When we could finally approach, we saw, on top of a wall, the car's chassis. The houses' fronts were pitted and splattered in motor oil. On the pavement were pieces of the suicide driver.

Several Humvees were in flames. A man lay near them, dead, decomposing in the heat. Two young men came around a corner and walked apprehensively toward the scene. At the same time, two military medics, still in their scrubs, approached from the other direction. One carried a pistol in a shoulder holster.

''Get back!'' a medic yelled at the men.

The two civilians kept coming. The unarmed medic reached over to his friend's holster, wrenched the pistol from it, racked the chamber and aimed.

''Get back!'' he yelled again, and the young men retreated.

When the medics had gone, they re-­merged. One walked toward the flames. He was crying. Even from a distance, through the smoke, he could tell that the man lying by the fire was their father.

''I can't,'' he moaned, turning back toward his brother. His brother took him by the arm, and slowly they walked to the body. They laid a blanket on the ground and attempted to lift their father onto it. Trying to take an arm, a brother came away instead with a long strip of skin.

They finally wrapped up their father. A soldier joined them and took up a corner of the grim package. Together, they carried it home.

With the displaced pouring out of western Mosul, the Kurdish authorities at the Khazir camp began allowing Moslawis from the east side to go home. Among the returnees were Abu Omar and Abu Fahad and their families, or what was left of them.

On a morning a few weeks before they left the camp, Abu Omar asked Omar to fetch some water. Omar flew into a rage. Taking hold of a rock, he smashed his father in the head. As Amina screamed, and men rushed over to hold Omar back, Aya ran to the office where Kurdish agents worked. There she blurted out everything the family had tried to keep from their neighbors in the camp, and from me: Omar had, in fact, been in ISIS.

When I arrived, Abu Omar's head was wrapped in a bandage. The gash had required stitches. Omar had been taken away. Abu Omar somberly apologized for hiding the truth from me. He was just trying to protect his son, he explained.

Aya was not somber. For once she wanted to talk. For years Omar had been violent, she said. It began at the orphanage. When the children returned home, Abu Omar took to beating his son and treating him like a half-wit. Abu Omar tried to silence her, but Aya kept talking. In the years before ISIS arrived, Omar had grown bigger and stronger, his anger uncontrollable. He began beating his father and sisters. When ISIS took Mosul, Omar grew enthralled with the group, thanks to the imam Abu Bakr and their cousin Loy, Abu Fahad's son. One day Omar came home in a uniform, carrying a rifle. He disappeared for weeks at a time. He traveled to Syria, Aya believed. He threatened his father and sisters with death. ''I'll behead you right here in our home,'' he would tell them. Aya and her father argued about how long Omar had been in ISIS. He claimed it was only two months. Aya insisted it was seven. ''Why are you revealing your brother like this?'' he said to her in a lowered voice, thinking I would not catch it.

''Do you know what you should do with a son like Omar?'' Aya went on. ''Kill him. Just kill him.''

When I went to see Abu Fahad in the camp afterward, I found him alone. Hamudi, Abu Fahad told me, had likewise been taken away by Kurdish intelligence agents. He had also joined the jihadists. Abu Fahad didn't know how long Hamudi was with them or what exactly he'd done, but it was obvious who had helped Hamudi, a more thoughtful and cautious young man than Omar, overcome his doubts about the group: his older brother, Loy. Abu Fahad apologized, too. I told him I understood.

Loy had been with the Islamic State since long before it took Mosul. He had probably been with Al Qaeda before that. Loy was now fighting in western Mosul, against the Iraqi troops, Abu Fahad knew. They talked often by phone. Loy was certain he would die there.

''When we spoke last, he said, 'Dad, you have to forget about me,' '' Abu Fahad told me. ''Maybe if the American troops capture him, he'll have a chance. But not if the Iraqi troops do.''

On July 9, the Iraqi government declared victory in Mosul. The west side of the city lay in ruins. The comparisons to Aleppo, which had once seemed exaggerated, were now obvious. A Pentagon spokesman called Mosul ''the most significant urban combat since World War II.'' In late June, ISIS had blown up Al Nuri Grand Mosque. The centuries-­ld minaret tumbled to the ground.

A few days after it came down, Abu Fahad was sent a video of Loy. He had been captured by the Iraqi federal police. In the video, Loy is shirtless, bloodied, filthy, his head shaved and beard chopped. His hands are tied behind his back, and he is sitting in the dirt, being questioned. Abu Fahad learned from a neighbor that shortly after the video was taken, his son was executed.

When I last saw Abu Fahad, he showed me a photo Loy had sent him by text message. It was of Abu Fahad's 3-year-old granddaughter, Loy's daughter, Zainab. She had spent most of her short life in the Islamic State. There was a good chance she would die in it. If she didn't, she would grow up without her father, probably without her mother, probably in the midst of another war. She was so beautiful I couldn't bear to look at her. I handed the phone back to him.

James Verini is a frequent contributor to The Times Magazine. He last wrote about the Kurdish pesh merga's role in the fight to recapture Mosul from the Islamic State.

A line for aid in western Mosul in April. (MM36-MM37); A scorched classroom at Mosul University. (MM39); A girl who lost a leg in a rocket attack undergoing treatment at a hospital in western Mosul. (MM40); Abu Omar and his daughters, Amina (foreground) and Aya. (MM42); The skeletal remains of a feared ISIS fighter, whom locals called the Emir, east of Mosul. (MM43); The Khazir camp for displaced civilians who have fled Mosul and other areas. (MM44); Abu Omar's brother Abu Fahad. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PETER VAN AGTMAEL/MAGNUM, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM45) 

Document NYTF000020170723ed7n0006x



Foreign Desk; SECT
German Teenager Suspected of Trying to Join  ISIS  Is Found in Iraq

By MELISSA EDDY 
495 words
23 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

FRANKFURT, Germany -- A German teenager missing for more than a year, who was believed to have converted to Islam and run away to join the Islamic State, has been found in Iraq, a state prosecutor said on Saturday.

The girl, identified only as Linda W., 16, in keeping with German privacy laws, is being cared for by employees of the German consulate in Iraq and appears to be in good physical condition, said Lorenz Haase, the prosecutor from Dresden, the capital of the eastern state of Saxony, where the girl is from.

''But even if she is physically O.K., we don't know how she is doing psychologically, especially because we don't know what she may have done in the past year,'' Mr. Haase said.

His office plans to reopen an investigation that was begun after she was reported to have run away from her home in the town of Pulsnitz last summer, Mr. Haase said. The inquiry, based on suspicion that she was supporting a terrorist organization or plotting an attack against a foreign state, was closed after they failed to identify her whereabouts, he said.

''We don't know what she did in the year that she was away, who she met with, whether she took part in any fighting or other criminal acts,'' Mr. Haase said. It was not clear whether she would return to Germany, as the Iraqi authorities may want to put her on trial there, he said.

The Associated Press, citing Iraqi intelligence sources, reported that the teenager had been working with the Islamic State police department and was apprehended this month in the basement of a home in Mosul's Old City.

The Iraqi officials, speaking to The A.P. on the condition of anonymity because the information was not public, said that Linda W. was one of 26 foreigners arrested in Mosul since the retreat of the extremists there, and that she had been taken to Baghdad.

The German news media has reported that Linda W. was one of several foreign women found in Mosul after Iraqi forces liberated it in July after nine months of a bloody campaign.

The mayor of the teenager's hometown, Barbara Lüe, told the German news agency DPA on Saturday that the girl's school had been aware of her conversion to Islam in the months before she fled, and the principal had talked to her parents about it.

''It was very surprising, though, that the girl has been radicalized in such a way,'' Ms. Lüe said, adding that she was relieved that the girl had been found.

More than 930 people have left Germany to fight alongside the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, German intelligence officials say. They believe that young women and girls make up 20 percent of those who have left, with many recruited over social media.

Document NYTF000020170723ed7n0006a



U.S.; Politics
Trump Says He Has ‘omplete Power’o Pardon

By PETER BAKER 
1,295 words
22 July 2017
14:37
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —resident Trump on Saturday asserted the “omplete power to pardon”elatives, aides and possibly even himself in response to investigations into Russia’ meddling in last year’ election even as he came to the defense of Attorney General Jeff Sessions just days after expressing regret about appointing him.

In a series of early morning messages on Twitter, Mr. Trump suggested that he had no need to use the pardon power at this point but left the option open. While presidents have the authority to pardon others for federal crimes, legal scholars debate whether a president can pardon himself. Mr. Trump’ use of the word “omplete”eemed to suggest he did not see a limit to that authority.

“hile all agree the U.S. President has the complete power to pardon, why think of that when only crime so far is LEAKS against us,”e wrote on Twitter. “AKE NEWS.”

The Washington Postreported in recent days that Mr. Trump and advisers have discussed pardons as a special counsel intensifies his investigation into whether associates of Mr. Trump and his campaign conspired with Russia to intervene in the 2016 presidential campaign.

The president also responded to another article by The Post reporting that Mr. Sessions may have discussed campaign activities and policy with the Russian ambassador, Sergey I. Kislyak, last year in contrast to his public statements. Mr. Trump excoriated the newspaper and expressed no concern about his attorney general’ conduct. The Post cited intercepted communications between Mr. Kislyak and his home office in Moscow.

“ new INTELLIGENCE LEAK from the Amazon Washington Post, this time against A.G. Jeff Sessions,”r. Trump wrote. “hese illegal leaks, like Comey’, must stop!”

The president was equating the report in The Post, which is owned by Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon, to a decision by James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director he fired, to leak contents of a memo he wrote describing a conversation he had with Mr. Trump. Mr. Comey has said the memo was unclassified and therefore not illegal to disclose.

The tweet about The Post story was followed shortly afterward by another assailing The New York Times. “he Failing New York Times foiled U.S. attempt to kill the single most wanted terrorist, Al-Baghdadi,”he wrote. “heir sick agenda over National Security.”

It was not entirely clear what prompted Mr. Trump’ assertion. He may have been referring to a Fox News report about comments by a top general at a security conference on Friday. Gen. Tony Thomas, head of the military’ Special Operations Command, said at the Aspen Security Forum that American forces were “articularly close”o Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State, after a 2015 raid recovered information about Islamic State.

“hat was a very good lead,”eneral Thomas said, according to the Fox report. “nfortunately, it was leaked in a prominent national newspaper about a week later and that lead went dead.”

Fox reported that the general appeared to be referring to a Times report in June 2015 that said American intelligence agencies had “xtracted valuable information”rom the raid. The story reported that American forces recovered “aptops, cellphones and other materials”rom the raid, including four to seven terabytes of data. The story also said Mr. Baghdadi and other Islamic State leaders used their wives to pass information to one another to avoid electronic surveillance.

The Pentagon raised no objections with the Times before publishing the story in 2015 and no senior American official ever complained publicly about it until now.

The Russian military said last month that it might have killed Mr. Baghdadi in an airstrike in Syria, but Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said on Friday that he believed Mr. Baghdadi was still alive. A White House spokesman did not immediately respond to a request for clarification about the president’ tweet.

Mr. Trump’ tweets came shortly before he was scheduled to fly to Virginia, where he was to preside over the commissioning of the Gerald R. Ford, the newest aircraft carrier.

The Post reported that Mr. Kislyak told superiors in Moscow that he discussed campaign-related matters, including policy issues important to Moscow, with Mr. Sessions during the campaign, contrary to Mr. Sessions’ public assertions. Mr. Sessions, who was advising Mr. Trump on foreign policy at the time, met at least twice with Mr. Kislyak and failed to disclose those contacts during confirmation hearings. After news reports on them, he said the meetings were not related to the campaign.

Sarah Isgur Flores, a Justice Department spokeswoman, said in a statement to The Post and other news organizations that she could not comment “n the reliability of what anonymous sources describe in a wholly uncorroborated intelligence intercept.”he added that Mr. Sessions “ever met with or had any conversations with any Russians or any foreign officials concerning any type of interference with any campaign or election.”he did not deny that Mr. Sessions discussed campaign or policy issues more generally with Mr. Kislyak.

The revelation of Mr. Sessions’ meetings with Mr. Kislyak in March prompted the attorney general to recuse himself from overseeing the Justice Department investigation into Russian meddling in last year’ election and any possible collusion with associates of Mr. Trump. The president has been upset about that recusal ever since and told The Times in an interview over the past week that he would never have appointed Mr. Sessions had he known he would step aside.

In the interview, Mr. Trump faulted Mr. Sessions for his misleading testimony. “eff Sessions gave some bad answers,”he president said. “e gave some answers that were simple questions and should have been simple answers, but they weren’.”

But in his tweets on Saturday morning, he offered no concern that Mr. Sessions may still not have been fully forthcoming.

Instead, as he often does, he tried to turn attention back to his opponent from last year. “o many people are asking why isn’ the A.G. or Special Council looking at the many Hillary Clinton or Comey crimes,”he wrote, referring to the special counsel now leading the inquiry, Robert S. Mueller III. “3,000 e-mails deleted?”

He added: “hat about all of the Clinton ties to Russia, including Podesta Company, Uranium deal, Russian Reset, big dollar speeches etc.”

Mrs. Clinton was investigated last year by the F.B.I. for using a private server to route official email. More than 30,000 messages that she and her team deemed personal and unrelated to her service as secretary of state were deleted. As F.B.I. director, Mr. Comey said Mrs. Clinton acted irresponsibly but that he would not seek criminal charges against her.

The president referenced his eldest son, Donald Trump Jr., who met with several Russian figures during last year’ campaign after being promised incriminating information about Mrs. Clinton.

“y son Donald openly gave his e-mails to the media & authorities whereas Crooked Hillary Clinton deleted (& acid washed) her 33,000 emails!”e wrote.

The younger Mr. Trump released emails setting up the Russia meeting only after being informed that The Times had obtained them and was about to publish them itself.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Peter Baker on Twitter @peterbakernyt.

* Trump’ Fury Erodes His Relationship With Sessions, an Early Ally

* \b ISIS\b0  Leader Is Still Alive, Pentagon Chief Says

President Trump speaking with survivors of the U.S.S. Arizona, a battleship bombed at Pearl Harbor in 1941, at the White House on Friday. | Pool photo by Chris Kleponis 

Document NYTFEED020170722ed7m0028l



World; Middle East
Hezbollah and Syrian Army Attack Islamists on Lebanon Border

By DECLAN WALSH 
740 words
22 July 2017
01:59
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

CAIRO —he Lebanese militant group Hezbollah  and the Syrian Army launched a major operation on Friday that aimed to dislodge a pocket of Islamist fighters from their stronghold on the border between Lebanon  and Syria .

Fighters and soldiers advanced on two fronts, near the Lebanese town of Arsal and the Syrian town of Fleita, into a mountainous area where an array of Islamist groups have taken shelter in recent years among camps for Syrian refugees.

Explosions rang out in eastern Lebanon as Hezbollah  shelled a distant ridgeline while Syrian warplanes struck on the other side of the border. Early reports said both sides had casualties.

The offensive had been anticipated for weeks and comes at a time of mounting frustration over how the Syrian crisis has spilled over into Lebanon, a country of four million people that has become home to more than one million Syrian refugees since the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad  erupted in 2011.

Arsal has long been a security concern. Tens of thousands of Syrian refugees live in camps near the town that are also home to Sunni militants from the Islamic State, the Nusra Front and other jihadist groups fighting in Syria’ six-year-old civil war. In 2014, jihadists briefly seized control of Arsal in fierce fighting; nine Lebanese soldiers captured during the clashes are still missing.

In June, Lebanese Army units tried to move into Arsal to rout the militants but were attacked by suicide bombers. Subsequent attempts to persuade the Islamists to leave peacefully failed. Lebanon’ prime minister, Saad Hariri, this week warned against blaming Syrian refugees for the trouble. Hezbollah , the powerful Shiite group backed by Iran, a staunch ally of Mr. Assad, said it was time to clear out the camps for good.

On Friday, Hezbollah -controlled news media outlets reported early progress. Hezbollah ’ Al-Manar television station showed artillery shelling Juroud Arsal, a barren, mountainous area east of Arsal. There were reports of Syrian airstrikes on Islamist positions on the other side of the border, near Fleita.

Citing security sources, Reuters said Hezbollah had killed 23 Islamists and captured an operations center along the border. Hezbollah said six of its fighters had been killed. The figures could not be independently verified.

Reached by text message, Abdul Halim Shams, a Syrian refugee from Homs, said that explosions rang out across Arsal all day, reviving memories of the war the refugees had fled. “t was so terrifying,”e said. “t reminded me of the old days in Syria.”

The Lebanese Army is not directly part of the Arsal operation, but it deployed forces to the area this week, and on Friday they took up defensive positions around the town. The United Nations refugee agency said that a small number of Syrian refugees leaving near Arsal had fled to the safety of the town’ center by evening.

This month the Hezbollah leader, Hassan Nasrallah, said it was “igh time”o end the threat from militants in Arsal. But his group’ muscular role in Syria has drawn sharp criticism from political rivals in Lebanon, including Mr. Hariri’ Future Movement party.

The White House announced on Friday that Mr. Hariri would meet with President Trump on Tuesday to discuss terrorism, economic issues and the refugee crisis.

Also in Washington, Gen. Tony Thomas, the commander of the military’ Special Operations Command , provided the first public confirmation by an American official that the Trump administration had ended a secret C.I.A. program to arm Syrian rebels.

The program remains classified, and news reports  this week about it being shut cited only anonymous American officials. But on Friday, General Thomas, at the Aspen Security Forum in Aspen, Colo., was asked if the effort had been cut to curry favor with Russia. His answer confirmed its existence, and its end.

“t least from what I know about that program and the decision to end it, it was absolutely not a sop to the Russians,”e said. He added that ending the program was a “ough, tough decision.”

The C.I.A. declined to comment.

Nada Homsi contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon, and Matthew Rosenberg from Washington.

* Border Fighting Intensifies Between \b ISIS\b0  and Lebanon  

* Hezbollah Deploys Weapon, a Press Tour, on the Syrian Front 

* Though Adversaries on the Surface, U.S. and Hezbollah Share a Goal  

Document NYTFEED020170721ed7l00a3x



U.S.; Politics
 ISIS  Leader Is Still Alive, Pentagon Chief Says

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and HELENE COOPER 
800 words
21 July 2017
23:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —efense Secretary Jim Mattis said on Friday that he believed the leader of the Islamic State, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, was still alive and that the American-led coalition in Iraq and Syria was still trying to find and target him.

“ think Baghdadi is alive,”r. Mattis told reporters at the Pentagon. “’l believe otherwise when we know we have killed him. We are going after him.”

The Russian military said last month that it had struck a meeting of Islamic State leaders on May 28 near Raqqa, Syria, and possibly killed Mr. Baghdadi.

The Russian claim was given credence earlier this month by a British-based monitoring organization, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which said it had obtained information from senior Islamic State commanders confirming that Mr. Baghdadi had been killed in Deir al-Zour Province. Raqqa Province neighbors Deir al-Zour in northeastern Syria.

The death of Mr. Baghdadi, who delivered a fiery sermon in Mosul, Iraq, after the militants captured the city in June 2014, would be a psychological blow to the Islamic State, which is still using small groups of fighters to mount guerrilla attacks against Iraqi forces who have retaken the city.

Pentagon officials have said that Mr. Baghdadi, who takes stringent precautions to avoid detection, does not appear to be directing the Islamic State’ forces on a day-to-day basis. Mr. Mattis said he assumed that Mr. Baghdadi still “ad a role to play”n the organization, but provided no details on what that role was.

Mr. Mattis’ remarks to reporters off-camera came two days after President Trump convened his national security council to discuss the administration’ still-unfinished strategy for Afghanistan. The unveiling of that strategy is behind schedule.

Senator John McCain, who chairs the Senate Armed Services Committee, has repeatedly criticized the White House for not articulating a plan to reverse the Taliban’ gains in Afghanistan.

“t is now mid-July, when the administration promised to deliver that strategy to Congress, and we are still waiting,”r. McCain said on Thursday in a statement, one day after his office announced that the Arizona Republican had brain cancer.

Mr. Mattis would not say whether there were still differences among senior Trump administration officials about whether to send more troops to advise and support Afghan forces. But he acknowledged that he had not used the authority that President Trump gave him in June to deploy nearly 4,000 additional American troops to Afghanistan, saying that he wanted to wait until the larger strategy, and the rationale, for the mission were settled.

“ou fight wars for a reason,”e said. “ou come up with a political reason for it.”

One contentious issue in the Trump administration’ review concerns how to deal with Pakistan, where the Taliban and the Haqqani network have maintained a sanctuary. The State Department said this week in a report on terrorism that the Pakistani government had “ailed to take significant action”o prevent those groups from threatening American and Afghan forces in neighboring Afghanistan.

The Pentagon is withholding $50 million in military reimbursements to Pakistan that it had yet to deliver for fiscal year 2016, signaling displeasure with Islamabad’ failed efforts against the Haqqani network.

This is not the first time the Defense Department has withheld Pakistan military reimbursement, and Mr. Mattis said it did not mean the Trump administration had settled on a new, tougher stance toward the Pakistanis. “his is an assessment of the current state of play,”e said.

Separately, Mr. Mattis dispelled rumors that Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, Mr. Trump’ national security adviser, would be leaving that post for an Afghanistan-related assignment.

He also defended Mr. Trump’ second July 7 meeting with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia at the Group of 20 economic conference in Hamburg, Germany. That encounter, which some witnesses have said lasted almost an hour, relied solely on a Kremlin-provided interpreter and was initially not disclosed by the White House, has brought sharp criticism of the president. Mr. Trump has said that the discussion lasted far less than an hour.

Mr. Mattis said that there was nothing wrong with the president’ seeking out Mr. Putin that evening, and that such dinners were a venue for adversaries to chat.

“f you watch me at dinners, you will catch me talking to some ne’r-do-wells,”r. Mattis said.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Defense Secretary Jim Mattis during a meeting with Defense Minister Roberta Pinotti of Italy on Tuesday at the Pentagon. | Manuel Balce Ceneta/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170721ed7l00911



The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
‘he Daily’ Haunted by  ISIS 

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
555 words
21 July 2017
12:04
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device : On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

After Mosul, Iraq, was liberated, two Times reporters encountered a group of Yazidi women —embers of a Kurdish religious minority targeted by the Islamic State —ho had been enslaved by the militant group for years.

Days after the city’ fall, the women still believed that the Islamic State had taken over the world.

On today’ episode:

Rukmini Callimachi, who covers the Islamic State and terrorism for The Times, and Andy Mills, a producer for “he Daily”ho is in Iraq with her, describe the Yazidi women they encountered there.

Background reading:

Ms. Callimachi has been reporting from Mosul for weeks, as Iraqi forces pushed Islamic State militants from the city.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

On your iPhone or iPad:

Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “he Daily.”

Once you’e on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “ubscribe”utton to have new episodes sent to your phone free.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

On your Android phone or tablet:

You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, managing producer; Lynsea Garrison, producer; Rachel Quester, producer; Andy Mills, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director; Pedro Rosado, studio manager.

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

Souhayla Taalo, one of the many Yazidi woman who were kidnapped by the Islamic State, outside the home of an uncle who wants her story to be told. | Alex Potter for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170721ed7l002mh



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Report Shows Reach of  ISIS  In Philippines

By JON EMONT and FELIPE VILLAMOR; Jon Emont reported from Jakarta and Felipe Villamor from Manila. 
942 words
21 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

JAKARTA, Indonesia -- The central command of the Islamic State in Syria has funneled tens of thousands of dollars to militants in the Philippines over the last year, most likely aiding their spectacular seizure of the southern Philippine city of Marawi, a report released Friday said.

The report from the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict, a research institute based in Jakarta, describes how Mahmud Ahmad, a high-level Islamic State figure from Malaysia, who is based near Marawi, worked through the group's chain of command to Syria to get money and international recruits to help local militants seize territory in the Philippines for the caliphate.

The report provides insight into a question that has bewildered policy makers since militants affiliated with the Islamic State swept into Marawi two months ago: How were they able to seize an important city in the southern Philippines, and what if any role did the Islamic State's central command play in the seizure?

The city has remained largely under the control of the militants for nearly two months despite a government military campaign to retake it with ground forces and aerial bombardments.

Underscoring the severity of the situation, President Rodrigo Duterte said that almost half of the initial force of 600 militants was still fighting in Marawi, a sharply higher estimate than the military's recent assertions that only around 60 were left there.

Mr. Duterte gave the figure Thursday in urging the Philippine Congress to extend martial law through the end of the year, and he noted that the insurgents were still in control of central Marawi and that their leadership remained intact.

After the militants seized Marawi in late May, they raised the Islamic State flag and declared the establishment of a new province of the organization, also known as ISIS or ISIL. Some senior politicians in the Philippines have dismissed the Maute Group, the major Islamist militant group behind the seizure of Marawi, as ''ISIS wannabes,'' characterizing it as a drug mafia with little in common with the ideologically driven Islamic State fighters.

But the institute's report suggests that Islamic State commanders in Syria took the Maute Group's strategic ambitions seriously.

The Islamic State's ability to financially support its Philippine offshoots appears limited mainly to periodic Western Union transfers of tens of thousands of dollars, the report found, suggesting that direct support from Syria was a relatively minor factor in the Maute Group's ability to seize Marawi.

The report argues that local recruiting and fund-raising among pious Muslims who resented the Philippines' central government have probably played a more significant role in the insurgents' successes.

The institute's research is based on field visits this year to Mindanao, the island where Marawi sits, interviews with people close to Indonesian militants in the Philippines, and militants' messages obtained from Telegram, the highly encrypted messaging service used by the Islamic State. Last week the Indonesian government announced it would ban some features of Telegram, because of how useful the app has been for terrorists.

Intercepted chats show that the Islamic State has a sophisticated command structure in Southeast Asia, allowing for complex coordination among its supporters across the region.

In one instance from last year, two Indonesian militants were connected via a Malaysian contact to another militant based in Thailand who helped them support a prison break in that country. The goal was to free a group of Uighurs, members of a Muslim ethnic group from western China, who had been detained there.

Though the prison break was initially successful, the Uighurs were eventually recaptured by the Thai police. Still, the report notes, ''The story illustrates how well-connected the ISIS network has become, with an Indonesian connecting as easily with contacts in Turkey, the Philippines and Thailand as with his own friends in prison.''

International coordination of Islamic State leaders with Southeast Asian militants may amplify the terrorism threat to neighboring Indonesia, the report said.

The last 18 months have produced a steady trickle of low-casualty Islamic State-inspired terrorist attacks in Indonesia, but until now the actions have tended to be poorly planned and executed. For example, two Indonesian suicide bombers struck in the Kampung Melayu neighborhood in East Jakarta in May, but only three victims were killed.

A major concern for the Indonesian government is that some of the 20-odd Indonesian fighters who have joined up with Islamic State groups in Mindanao will acquire the equipment and expertise to commit serious terrorist attacks at home.

The report calls for Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines to improve their security services' coordination and intelligence sharing, so that the names of key suspects are passed along.

Still, the first step is ousting the Islamic State from Marawi.

When Marawi was seized in late May, Mr. Duterte pledged that the militants would be defeated quickly. But on Thursday he said that during recent operations to clear the city, the military recovered 275 million pesos, or $15 million, from one of the militants' homes, a clear indication that they stocked up arms and money for the fight.

At least four villages, which make up the city's commercial district and are home to roughly 800 structures, are in rebel hands, he added.

He also said the militants' leadership ''largely remains intact,'' contrary to earlier military reports. Clashes continued into Friday as the military struggled to make advances.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020170721ed7l0005z



National Desk; SECTA
When Syria Came to Fresno: A Strain on Welcoming Arms

By MIRIAM JORDAN 
1,695 words
21 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

FRESNO, Calif. -- The police responded to a call about a loud party on East San Ramon Avenue, but it wasn't just any party: A sheep was reportedly being slaughtered in a backyard.

''Muslim refugees were unaware that slaughtering sheep is not allowed in the city,'' the police wrote afterward in their report, which also stated that those involved ''were advised to clean up the blood and mess'' and warned that in the future ''they could be cited.''

The animal, actually a goat, was killed by a Syrian refugee who later skinned, roasted and shared it with his Syrian neighbors in the apartment complex where they all live.

Refugees are typically placed in towns and cities such as Buffalo, N.Y.; Boise, Idaho; and Fayetteville, Ark., where resettlement agencies ease their transition to life in a new country. But they are free to move about the country like anybody else, and they sometimes land in places like Fresno that are not exactly prepared for their arrival.

Since late 2016, more than 200 Syrian refugees originally settled elsewhere in the United States have made a fresh start in Fresno, the largest city in California's agricultural belt. They have been drawn there mainly by cheap housing.

But behind the low rent is a city struggling with high poverty and unemployment, making it more difficult for the refugees to secure jobs. And Fresno has no federally funded agency to help them find work, learn basics like bus routes and understand United States culture and rules, like with the practice of animal slaughter.

Syrian children turned up unexpectedly at Ahwahnee Middle School, needing vaccinations, trauma counseling, English-language instruction and academic support as a result of interrupted schooling. ''It was a shock at first,'' said Jose Guzman, the principal. ''We never had to teach students who speak Arabic.''

He hired an Arabic-speaking teaching assistant, while some of his staff communicated with students with the aid of Google Translate.

Without notice, there also was no time to build political and community support for the new arrivals. So while they elicited gestures of kindness from some, they aroused suspicion from others. Some mosques, churches and a synagogue came to the refugees' aid. A local car broker donated a 1999 Toyota Avalon to one of the Syrians, Abdulrazzaq Alghraibi, a father of four who now works on the de-winging line at a poultry plant.

But Muslim refugees represent a polarizing issue. Although all refugees undergo extensive screening before being approved for resettlement, some Fresnans have echoed President Trump's concerns that the vetting isn't good enough.

Among them is Trevor Carey, a conservative talk-show host on PowerTalk 96.7 FM.

''In my years in the valley, I've met some great Syrian people,'' he said on the air during a segment about Muslim refugees. ''Come on, our safety is at stake here. This area they are coming from is embedded with ISIS.''

That sentiment was shared by Michael Martin, a 28-year-old who works in air-conditioning maintenance. He praised Fresno's diversity, citing its Armenian and Hmong communities. As for the Syrians, ''I think it's a little bit scary because of what is going on'' in their home country, he said over lunch at the Chicken Pie Shop, a popular local diner.

His father, Joe, was not against their presence. ''Anything is fine as long as they act like us,'' he said.

There is a tradition of refugees continuing to migrate once they reach the United States. In the 1990s, about a dozen evangelical Christian families from the former Soviet Union who originally settled in Oregon and Washington followed a leader to Delta Junction, Alaska, and established a community there.

Many Hmong, an ethnic group from Laos that helped the United States during the Vietnam War, left their first American homes and converged on the Twin Cities, in Minnesota, where leaders like Leng ''Vang'' Wong, a former interpreter for the C.I.A., had settled.

At the moment, no refugees can enter the United States for four months unless they already have a close relative here, according to a Supreme Court order that allowed part of Mr. Trump's travel ban to proceed. But in the past two years, more than 20,000 Syrians have been admitted after fleeing civil war and the Islamic State's ruthless grip on parts of the country.

As the Syrian flow intensified, Turlock, a town about 80 miles north of Fresno that has been receiving Christian minorities from Iraq and Iran for more than a decade, was identified as a site with ''decent housing, jobs and a welcoming mayor,'' said Karen Ferguson, executive director of the International Rescue Committee of Northern California.

About 250 Syrians, overwhelmingly Muslim, were sent there. But the agency could not immediately house all of them, stranding some families in hotels for several weeks or longer.

Last fall, a few members of Fresno's 15,000-strong Muslim community -- Pakistanis, Yemenis, Iranians and Palestinians, among others -- offered to help. Soon, they were welcoming four Syrian families to apartments that they had found for them.

Word traveled fast to Turlock and elsewhere that rent in Fresno was a relative bargain -- about $450 a month for a two-bedroom unit in some places -- and that there were people ready to supply furniture, food, clothing and more.

''Helping one or two families, that's easy,'' said Reza Nekumanesh, director of the Islamic Cultural Center of Fresno. ''But soon, one family after another was arriving -- from San Diego, out of state.''

''They didn't realize rent is low here for a reason,'' he said.

Abdullah Zakaria, who ran cafes in Syria, fled to Jordan with his family in 2013 after a bomb struck his house in Homs and burned his eldest child, Tasneem, now 7, whose back still bears scars. They could not find work in Turlock, so they moved to Fresno. Mr. Zakaria and his wife, Aida, are trying to start a business selling kibbehs, shawarmas and sfihas to Fresno State University students and others.

''Fresno is bigger city,'' Mr. Zakaria said. ''I want to open restaurant.''

In a blue-collar neighborhood once dubbed ''Sin City,'' more than a dozen Syrian families with up to nine members apiece are crammed into two-bedroom units in two apartment blocks on East San Ramon Avenue, where the goat roast occurred in February.

Some have found jobs, including at a carwash and a poultry plant. Nasser Alobeid, who worked as a security guard in Syria, is still jobless, and he and his wife, Neveen Alassad, get by with a $1,100 monthly welfare check, food stamps and help from the local community.

''Nasser doesn't speak English,'' Ms. Alassad, a mother of five, said in broken English while Syrian children poured into a concrete courtyard to play.

Having left a resettlement agency's fold, the refugees no longer had access to interpreters, employment training and English classes. Many couldn't afford the security deposit to rent an apartment.

Help came from across the religious spectrum. The Islamic Cultural Center began paying deposits and utility bills. Wesley United Methodist Church distributed vouchers for its thrift store. Jim Call, a member of the Mormon community, collected donations to buy dining sets and TVs. Congregants from Temple Beth Israel also stepped up.

Fresno's new Syrians also are relying on people like Nabih Dagher, whose Dunia International Market sells halal meat, pita bread and other Middle Eastern staples. On a recent afternoon, Mr. Dagher flipped through a notebook in which each page was filled with the name of a Syrian family and the sum owed him from each visit, $56.50 to $449.64.

''I give each family $20, $50 groceries free,'' said Mr. Dagher, a Syrian Christian who has been in the United States for 15 years. ''After that, I said you have to pay.''

In March, the Fresno Board of Supervisors approved a $375,000 grant over four and a half years to Fresno Interdenominational Refugee Ministries, or FIRM, a local nonprofit. The money is paying for four part-time Arabic speakers but doesn't cover the full cost of serving the newcomers, whose needs are ''insane,'' said Zachary Darrah, FIRM's executive director.

Mr. Darrah, a Baptist pastor, has also made it his mission to sell Fresno on the Syrians. Last month he led a service in an upscale retirement community, where he noted that the Syrians arriving in Fresno are ''moderate or secular Muslims.''

''Everyone is our neighbor, even Muslims,'' he told the worshipers. ''Our God said it doesn't matter.''

Some nodded; others shook their heads. ''As a Christian, I believe in what the Lord says'' about welcoming strangers, said one worshiper, Doris Rahm. But she added, ''I have concerns if they are not vetted properly.''

At another gathering, Mr. Darrah said, ''A guy told me he had a great idea, find some land far from Fresno and send the Syrians there because they're a danger to the community.'' Mr. Darrah said he then told the man that Fresno during World War II had an internment camp for Japanese-Americans, a blemish on its past.

But there have been no reports of anti-Muslim violence or vandalism. And Syrians keep arriving. Among them is Anas Hammad, a baker and father of two, who was originally settled in Michigan.

Mr. Alghraibi, the new owner of the old Toyota, has invited friends living in Tennessee who had been his neighbors in a refugee camp in Turkey.

''I've gotten calls from Indiana, Florida, Texas,'' said Mr. Darrah. ''We can't stop families from coming here. ''

An apartment complex in the San Ramon neighborhood of Fresno, Calif., where many Syrian refugees with large families live in cramped two-bedroom apartments.; Abdullah Zakaria, above, with his daughters at their apartment in Fresno. Zachary Darrah, a Baptist pastor, after a recent church service. He has preached acceptance of refugees. ''Everyone is our neighbor, even Muslims,'' he says. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JASON HENRY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170721ed7l0004s



Business Day
Laptop Ban on Planes Is Lifted, U.S. Officials Confirm

By MICAH MAIDENBERG 
596 words
20 July 2017
19:10
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The laptop ban is over.

Passengers flying into the United States from airports in 10 Muslim-majority countries affected by the ban may now take their laptops and other large electronic devices into the cabin with them, the Department of Homeland Security confirmed on Thursday.

Security officials imposed the ban in March, warning then that the Islamic State was developing bombs that could be hidden in portable electronic devices. But the airlines and airports affected by the ban have all complied with the initial phase of the new Homeland Security standards, allowing the prohibition to be lifted, the department said.

The ban on portable devices created a headache for carriers flying into the United States from the affected airports. Many airline passengers expect to use laptops and tablets as a matter of course, for both entertainment and to get work done. Analysts feared it would reduce the number of people visiting the United States from the 10 countries, which stretched from North Africa to the Mideast and into Turkey.

The commercial aviation industry expressed alarm after security officials said in May that they were considering expanding the ban to all flights to the United States from Europe, a huge market for both leisure and business travelers.

Instead of carrying out that broader ban, John F. Kelly, the Homeland Security secretary, announced last month that there would be new security standards for carriers flying into the United States. The first phase of those new rules required airports with carriers flying to American destinations to quickly demonstrate that they had the ability to screen passengers for trace amounts of explosives.

More than 280 airports —ncluding the 10 targeted by original laptop ban —omplied with that rule, officials said Thursday.

“he quick and decisive action taken by airlines, nations, and stakeholders are a testament to our shared commitment to raising the bar on global aviation security,”avid Lapan, a spokesman for the Department of Homeland Security, said.

The ban originally applied to airports in Amman, Jordan; Cairo; Istanbul; Jidda and Riyadh in Saudi Arabia; Kuwait City; Casablanca, Morocco; Doha, Qatar; and Dubai and Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates.

It affected specific airlines that use the airports in those countries as hubs, including Qatar Airways, which dominates the airport in Doha, and Emirates Airlines, which is based in Dubai.

Over the last few weeks, both the Transportation Security Administration and airlines have periodically announced that airports on the ban list met the new the security rules, allowing passengers to carry on the electronic devices again. Customers of these airlines used social media to express relief as the news broke

Yay!! Less boredom in the 11 hours flight —adeel Ali Alzoubi (@Hadeelali7) July 9, 2017

Haha. It is definitely a good news. —wastik Pokhrel (@swastikpokhrel) July 9, 2017

In addition to adding explosive-detection equipment, airlines must, by this fall, demonstrate that they have the ability to conduct tougher security checks, including interviewing passengers as part of the screening, The Times has previously reported.

Officials at Homeland Security have said they want to improve the overall level of aviation security around the globe.

“e are raising aviation security as opposed to just going after one single threat,”r. Kelly, the Homeland Security secretary, said recently at an event in Colorado.

* Devices Banned on Flights From 10 Countries Over \b ISIS\b0  Fears

* Airlines Face New Security Rules in Summer Scramble

Passengers waiting to board an Emirates Airlines flight in Dubai. | Kamran Jebreili/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170720ed7k005h9



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
OpEd; SECT
Nannies and maids for jihad

By NAVA NURANIYAH 
1,488 words
19 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The International New York Times
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

JAKARTA, Indonesia -- Ayu is a 34-year-old Indonesian maid, and the head of a pro-Islamic State network in Hong Kong. She recruits, raises funds and spreads propaganda for the group. She is just one of several dozen Indonesian domestic workers in East Asia known to endorse jihad.

Ayu -- I'm using a pseudonym, because she fears trouble from the police -- became pregnant young, ran away from abusive in-laws and left her baby behind to go work in Hong Kong in 2003. She consumed alcohol and drugs to numb depression. In late 2011, after losing her job as a maid for the third time, she went to Macau, sleeping on the streets for months, until she overdosed.

A Muslim only nominally until then, she now sought spiritual refuge. Surfing Islamic websites, she became absorbed by news of the war in Syria. She began to befriend international jihadis on social media. She returned to Hong Kong and enrolled in an Islamic course run by a puritan, though non-extremist, Salafist institute -- but left it in mid-2014 when her teacher reported her to the police because she had voiced support for the Islamic State.

She started translating propaganda material for the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, from English into Indonesian and spreading it on Twitter and the messaging app Telegram. After marrying an Indonesian jihadi she'd met on Facebook, she was introduced to the inner circles of Indonesian pro-ISIS groups.

Some 500,000 migrants from Indonesia work in Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore, most of them, like Ayu, women employed as maids, nannies or caretakers for the elderly. Based on official reports by the Indonesian police and interviews and social media monitoring conducted by the Jakarta-based Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict (IPAC), where I am a researcher, about 45 Indonesian domestic workers in Hong Kong alone have been identified as active supporters of the Islamic State. There may be twice as many.

These numbers may seem small, but the radicalization of Indonesian maids and nannies working in East Asia is alarming. It takes very few dedicated people to do considerable harm, and these supporters of jihad are more resourceful than others: Their incomes are much higher than those of most Indonesians, they speak better English and they have more contacts internationally.

Two Indonesian women who had been migrant workers were foiled last December as they were preparing suicide bombings at the presidential palace in Jakarta and a tourist site in Bali. Others have traveled to Syria to marry ISIS fighters, provided funds to the group, recruited new members or connected local jihadis with fighters in Syria and Iraq.

Far less activity of the kind has been recorded among the roughly one million Indonesian domestic helpers working in the Persian Gulf. Only about a dozen radical maids in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates are active on social media, for example. None is reported to have joined jihadis in Syria.

As migrants from a Muslim-majority country working in non-Muslim territories, Indonesian maids and nannies in Hong Kong or Singapore radicalize for different reasons than either Indonesian helpers in the Middle East or converts to jihad in the West.

Based on IPAC's monitoring of social media since mid-2015, as well as our interviews with several dozen Indonesian migrant workers and Muslim leaders in Hong Kong, these workers seem to have started out as nominal or non-devout Muslims and then undergone a rapid religious transformation while living abroad.

For some, the difficulties of a migrant's life -- principally dislocation and isolation -- inspired a spiritual rebirth. They experienced a double form of alienation, from both home and religion. Some said that they had felt humiliated, for example, cooking pork for non-Muslim employers. ''Could you imagine having to touch pork while wearing a niqab?'' one of them told me, referring to the full-face veil.

Migrant workers in East Asia have more freedom to congregate during their days off and to own and use mobile phones than their counterparts in the Middle East. On Sundays, public parks and overpasses in Hong Kong are packed with small groups of Indonesian workers, who sing, play cards, practice martial arts or join Islamic study circles known as pengajian.

Of the more than 200 Indonesian associations in Hong Kong listed by the Indonesian consulate in 2016, more than half were pengajian. Yet these groups almost never promote radical ideology; in most radicalization cases that IPAC has studied, the workers' first exposure to Islamist extremism occurred through social media. Some women joined mainstream pengajian in the early stages of their religious awakening, but later became dissatisfied with them and, like Ayu, turned to the internet or social media for what seemed to them to be a purer form of Islam.

Jihadi sites like voa-islam.com and kiblat.net appear at the top of result lists when one searches for ''Islamic news'' on Google in Indonesian. Their narratives -- prophesizing an Islamic Armageddon in Syria and the like -- are then spread by social media. Encrypted chat apps, particularly Telegram, serve as support groups for new recruits.

''I was online 24 hours every day, the Wi-Fi was so good,'' Firda, an Indonesian maid who worked in Singapore, told me in April. ''At first I used it to watch movies, but after a while I felt empty. I had a decent job and money, my boss was nice to me, but I felt dry spiritually.''

''I started listening to Salafi podcasts while cleaning the house,'' Firda (also a pseudonym) said. ''On Facebook, I followed people whose profiles seemed very Islamic because I needed friends who could guide me intensely, not just like in a monthly study group.'' She met her boyfriend online, who introduced her to pro-ISIS sites like millahibrahim.wordpress.com. The government of Singapore deported Firda to Indonesia a few months ago for planning to join the Islamic State in Syria.

For some domestic workers, joining the Islamic State is a form of emancipation -- from pasts they sometimes regret, from the hardships of exile, from subservience to men. Ika Puspitasari, a former domestic helper in Hong Kong, was arrested in central Java in December 2016 for plotting a suicide attack in Bali: She told the police that after helping finance her husband's terrorist plans for a time, she had wanted to play a more active role.

It is these desires, and the helplessness they often stem from, that deradicalization efforts must address. The Indonesian government currently conducts training for migrant workers before they go abroad, but it focuses on languages and practical skills. The preparation should also incorporate modules about religious extremism, and describe recruitment by radical groups as a form of exploitation because jihadis often extract money from migrant workers.

More important, social networks for Indonesian workers abroad must be strengthened so that migrants have a community to turn to other than radical groups online. Pengajian could play a role -- so long as their leaders are trained to counsel individuals vulnerable to radicalization without alienating them, much less driving them out, as happened with Ayu.

Indonesian Muslim business associations in Hong Kong and elsewhere may also have a part to play. They could be encouraged by the Indonesian consulate to set up ventures with migrant workers, allowing workers who are attracted to extremist views to be exposed to other perspectives in a collegial setting.

Such exposure has proved effective in other contexts. For example, a reformed terrorist in Lamongan, in East Java, has set up a livestock cooperative bringing together former radicals and nonradicals, and that proximity reportedly helped change some of the jihadis' views over time. Programs could be put in place in Hong Kong to get radical domestic workers involved in, for example, businesses selling Muslim garments and Islamic herbal medicine, goods in high demand among migrants.

The causes that lead migrant maids and nannies to join jihad are complex. Deportations and arrests are no solution; if anything, they are a sign of failure, evidence that radicalization has already occurred. The Indonesian government's recent decision to block Telegram is an ineffectual form of prevention because it targets the means of radicalization rather than its sources. A better approach would seek to build viable communities, including spiritual ones, for migrant workers in order to forestall the sense of alienation that leads some of them to embrace terrorism.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Nava Nuraniyah is an analyst at the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict, in Jakarta.

Domestic workers in Hong Kong last year. Some 500,000 migrants from Indonesia work in Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore, most of them as maids, nannies or caretakers. LAM YIK FEI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES 

Document NYTF000020170719ed7j0005c



The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
Antiquities Dealer Sues Wall Street Journal

By BARRY MEIER 
573 words
19 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
3
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A leading antiquities dealer sued The Wall Street Journal on Monday, asserting he had been damaged by an article in May that said he was under investigation for possibly trafficking in artifacts looted by ISIS.

In the libel suit, the dealer, Hicham Aboutaam, said he has never handled antiquities looted by terrorists and that sales at his Manhattan-based gallery, Phoenix Ancient Art, have plummeted.

The article reported that authorities in Switzerland, France, Belgium and the United States were investigating Mr. Aboutaam and his older brother, Ali Aboutaam.

After it appeared, the Toledo Museum of Art returned a $50,000 donation the gallery had made to support an antiquities-related exhibition currently on display there ''The Berlin Painter and His World,'' the dealer said in an interview.

Hicham Aboutaam's ''personal and professional reputation and business opportunities have been decimated,'' according to the lawsuit filed in Manhattan Supreme Court.

Colleen Schwartz, a spokeswoman for Dow Jones & Company, which publishes The Journal, released a statement Tuesday that described the article as ''thoroughly reported, fair and wholly accurate.''

''We fully stand by the article,'' the statement continued, ''and will mount a robust defense to Hicham Aboutaam's lawsuit.''

Since its emergence, ISIS, or the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, has destroyed archaeological sites in Syria and elsewhere and authorities have stated that the terror group raises funds by selling off looted artifacts.

The May 31st Journal article said that neither Mr. Aboutaam nor his brother had been charged with any wrongdoing in connection with the inquiries cited by the law enforcement officials. The article said the Aboutaams were on a list of 15 dealers whom French authorities were focusing on but it did not name the other dealers.

A spokesperson for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, which handles investigations into the smuggling of looted art, did not return a call seeking comment.

A spokeswoman for the Toledo museum, Candice L. Harrison, declined to comment on the returned donation.

Ali Aboutaam, who lives in Geneva and operates his own gallery there, is not a party to the lawsuit. A lawyer for Hicham Aboutaam, Richard Emery, said the business in Geneva has not suffered the same level of damage.

The Aboutaam brothers, like other dealers in ancient art, are no strangers to controversy. In 2004, they were mentioned in an article in The New York Times that traced the journey of a looted Egyptian artifact, which passed through their hands. The brothers said at the time that they had not realized the piece was looted.

That same year, Hicham Aboutaam pleaded guilty to a federal charge that he had falsified a customs document about the origins of an ancient ceremonial drinking vessel that his gallery later sold for $950,000.

In late 2016, the Justice Department filed a lawsuit against the Islamic State seeking to recover antiquities looted by the terrorist group but to date United States officials have not brought related actions against individual dealers.

Patty Gerstenblith, a professor of law at DePaul University and an expert on the antiquities market, said she believed that most of the Islamic State-looted artifacts are not likely to be major ones, which would be easier to identify, but coins or small artifacts whose origins are unclear.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020170719ed7j0004x



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Jordanian Sergeant Sentenced to Life in Prison for Killing 3 U.S. Soldiers at an Air Base

By RANA F. SWEIS 
943 words
18 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A Jordanian soldier was convicted of murder and sentenced to life in prison on Monday for the deaths of three United States soldiers whom he shot at an air base in November.

The soldier, First Sgt. Ma'arik al-Tawayha, 39, had pleaded not guilty, saying that he opened fire because the Americans had failed to stop their car as they approached the gate of the air base, and that he thought the base was under attack. ''I was doing my job,'' he said as he was led from the courtroom.

Jordanian officials initially believed his account -- angering their American counterparts -- but later backed away from it, and charged Sergeant Tawayha with premeditated murder.

The trial, which lasted over a month, did not establish a motive for the killings, but Jordanian officials said there was no evidence that Sergeant Tawayha had ties to extremist groups. The F.B.I. has opened an investigation into the case, as is common in matters that potentially involve terrorism.

The victims -- Staff Sgt. Matthew C. Lewellen, 27, of Kirksville, Mo.; Staff Sgt. Kevin J. McEnroe, 30, of Tucson; and Staff Sgt. James F. Moriarty, 27, of Kerrville, Tex. -- were killed shortly before noon on Nov. 4.

They were part of a four-vehicle convoy returning to the King Faisal air base outside the southern town of Al Jafr, after conducting weapons training at a nearby range, according to a United States military investigation that was completed March 7.

As the soldiers waited outside a gate to the base, Sergeant Tawayha opened fire with his M-16 rifle, killing Sergeant McEnroe and mortally wounding Sergeant Lewellen, who were both in the second vehicle of the convoy.

Sergeant Moriarty and another soldier got out of other vehicles and sought cover, according to the investigation. They tried to make clear that they were not a threat, but when the shooting continued, they returned fire. Sergeant Moriarty was fatally injured after he and Sergeant Tawayha exchanged fire. The fourth soldier, who survived, shot and seriously wounded Sergeant Tawayha.

The investigation concluded that the three soldiers ''were properly trained, equipped and armed'' and had been following ''established procedures for entering the gate.'' It found ''no evidence that substantiates post-incident allegations and speculation that alcohol was involved,'' and no evidence that ''the Americans were the first ones to fire their weapons.''

Video footage of the firefight has been shown to the bereaved relatives, but not released to the public. The relatives said the video showed that the gunfight lasted about six minutes and that Sergeant Tawayha reloaded and opened fire, even though the Americans waved and yelled: ''We're Americans! We're friendly.''

In an open letter on Monday to Jordan's ambassador to the United States, Sergeant Moriarty's father, James R. Moriarty, who is a lawyer in Houston, called the conviction ''a good first step'' but said that the victims' families had made other demands, which had not been met.

The families asked that the video be released publicly; that the F.B.I. be given a fresh chance to interview Sergeant Tawayha about his motives; that other guards who were at the gate that day be held responsible; and that Jordan extradite Ahlam Aref Ahmad Al-Tamimi, who has been charged in the United States with involvement in a 2001 attack on a pizza restaurant in Jerusalem that killed 15 people, including two Americans.

There was no immediate response from the Jordanian government.

In Washington, Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said: ''We respect the Jordanian legal process. We are reassured to see that the perpetrator has been brought to justice.'' He added: ''Despite this tragedy, Jordan remains a strategic partner.''

However, the lack of a clear motivation for the killings has continued to trouble observers.

''Attacks on Americans are not only limited to ISIS,'' said Amer Al Sabaileh, a political analyst. ''You might not find any trace between him and a terrorist organization, but maybe he had hatred toward America or something triggered it in him.''

While many Jordanians say they understand the need for their country's security alliance with the United States, others are angered about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the 2003 invasion of Iraq and the American response to the Syrian civil war -- all of which resulted in large flows of refugees to Jordan.

The violence was also particularly alarming because it echoed a November 2015 episode in which a Jordanian police captain killed two Americans, along with two fellow Jordanians and a South African, at a police training center in Amman, the capital.

Sergeant Tawayha said at his trial that he did not resent the American presence at the base. He is part of a tribe, the Howeitat, which on Monday issued a statement criticizing the court's judgment.

''We condemn this ruling against this nation's son, who was defending himself and his country and was shot by the Americans who refused to stop at the base,'' the tribe said. ''Is Arab blood cheap and American blood more worthy? This is an unjust ruling.''

The tribe is known in Jordan for its role in the Pan-Arab uprising that ended Ottoman rule and paved the way for the kingdom's eventual independence.

Along with the prison sentence, the military judge, Col. Mohammed al-Afeef, ordered that Sergeant Tawayha be dismissed from the Army and that he pay 91 Jordanian dinars (about $128) for the bullets used to fire on the soldiers.

Follow Rana F. Sweis on Twitter @ranasweis.

Document NYTF000020170718ed7i0005d



World; Middle East
Colleagues of Princeton University Scholar Convicted of Spying in Iran Express Shock

By RICK GLADSTONE 
883 words
18 July 2017
01:50
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Colleagues of an American student from Princeton University who was jailed in Iran on spying charges expressed shock on Monday, calling him a gifted and innocent history scholar whose ordeal has traumatized his family and community.

Academics and Iran experts said the arrest and punishment of the student, Xiyue Wang, first announced in Iran on Sunday, may chill scholarly ties between the United States and Iran, subverting Iranian President Hassan Rouhani’ promise of more openness.

“his kind of situation makes me wake up in a cold sweat,”aid Bruce Carruthers, the director of the Buffett Institute for Global Studies at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill. “t is a deeply worrisome event, and I hope to God that it is not a trend or harbinger of things to come.”

Despite the history of hostility between the United States and Iran, scholarly exchanges have survived. But Mr. Wang’ case, Mr. Carruthers said, shows that “ visitor like that can be a bargaining chip.”

Mr. Wang, 37, a naturalized American citizen from China, was arrested in Iran last August while researching Persian history for his doctoral thesis. He had been examining and scanning public records of events during the 19th and early-20th centuries.

Iran’ judiciary, which broke the news of Mr. Wang’ arrest and punishment on Sunday, said Mr. Wang had entered the country “nder the cover of a researcher,”ad secretly worked for American and British intelligence via a “pider web”f connections and had digitally archived 4,500 documents.

Mr. Wang was sentenced to 10 years in prison, which could further irritate relations with the United States, where Iran’ incarceration of Americans has been a festering issue.

Princeton University acknowledged after the announcement that it had known about Mr. Wang’ arrest but had sought to keep it quiet, respecting his family’ wishes while working with the State Department and other channels to secure his release. Mr. Wang has a wife and a child in the United States.

In a statement to Princeton University faculty, students and staff on Monday, the university’ president, Christopher L. Eisgruber, explained the school’ earlier silence, saying it reflected “he recommendation of multiple advisers inside and outside of government who counseled us that publicity might be harmful to our student’ interests.”

Mr. Wang’ colleagues were frank in their anger about what had befallen him.

“iyue Wang is an unbelievable scholar, father and classmate,”Elaine Ayers, a doctoral candidate in the history of science, wrote on her Twitter account. “eyond concern for his safety and well-being.”

Anna Lind-Guzik, a graduate student in Russian history, wrote: “his is nuts! Xiyue Wang is a friend. We did all our coursework together. He’ a kind family man, great scholar & furthest thing from a spy.”

Mr. Wang’ thesis adviser, Professor Stephen Kotkin, strongly defended Mr. Wang’ work in a statement sent via email, describing him as a linguistically gifted doctoral candidate whose research “equired field work at multiple sites throughout a vast and complex region.”

Mr. Kotkin also implicitly criticized the Iranian judicial authorities, saying they made a colossal misjudgment about what constitutes espionage.

Trita Parsi, the president of the National Iranian American Council, a group that has advocated for improved relations with Iran, also described the accusations against Mr. Wang as ridiculous. “rom the evidence made public by Iran’ Judiciary against Mr. Wang, it appears that his only crime was to read books at a public library,”r. Parsi said.

He also said Mr. Wang’ prosecution reflected efforts by hard-line opponents of President Hassan Rouhani to sabotage his effort to promote interactions with the West.

“his serves to deter those who want to study in the country,”e said. “s they see Rouhani having greater success, things like this, precisely because they’e so absurd, will have a chilling effect.”

Mr. Wang’ case also reverberated in Beijing, his birthplace, where he had always shown a penchant for foreign languages.

According to Chinese media accounts, Mr. Wang went to the United States when he was 19 and studied at the University of Washington and Harvard University, focusing on southern Asian languages and religion in Middle Asia.

He became proficient in Pashto, a language spoken in Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, and for a time worked as a translator for the International Committee of the Red Cross in Kandahar, Afghanistan, where he helped Afghans traumatized by violence and death from the American-led war against the Taliban.

An article about Mr. Wang posted in 2010 on the Red Cross’ Chinese-language website, titled “e and the Taliban, Face to Face,”escribed Kandahar as “he most dangerous place in the world”or a translator.

Adam Wu and Christian Bischoff contributed reporting.

* Iran Dominates in Iraq After U.S. ‘anded the Country Over’

* For Iran, Qatar Crisis Is a Welcome Distraction

* Finding Bravado, and Worry, at an Iranian Shrine Where \b ISIS\b0  Struck

* Trump Under Pressure to Get Answers From Iran on Missing Ex-F.B.I. Agent

Xiyue Wang at his apartment in Hong Kong in 2009. Mr. Wang was sentenced to 10 years in prison on Sunday. | via Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170717ed7h008vh



Arts and Leisure Desk; SECTAR
Fixing the Met: Art Fans Speak

By JASON FARAGO and SOPHIE HAIGNEY 
3,602 words
16 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

HELP WANTED: Stately home seeks caretaker for priceless collection of antiquities, pictures, bronzes and bric-a-brac. Successful applicant will oversee staff of 2,500, ensure upkeep, supervise purchases and promote estate's interests at home and abroad. Manor is leaky -- planned extension delayed (owners have second home nearby). Send réumé to 1000 Fifth Avenue, Manhattan. (Those with dust allergies need not apply.)

O.K., finding a new director for the Metropolitan Museum of Art will take more than a LinkedIn posting -- but the hunt is on for a successor to Thomas P. Campbell, whose resignation last winter added a kink to the Met's tangle of troubles. Attendance, at seven million, is at a high. Exhibitions are some of the finest anywhere. Yet as it approaches its 150th birthday, the museum lumbers under a nearly $15 million deficit; a planned new wing for modern and contemporary art has been deferred; and the Met's optional admissions charge may be replaced with a mandatory entrance fee for out-of-towners.

A new director, expected to be named later this year, will have to plot a new path forward. But it's still the grandest job in the art world -- even though some aspects of that job must now be shared with Daniel H. Weiss, its president, who was garlanded last month with the additional title of chief executive. (Mr. Campbell held that title previously, and at most museums the artistic head occupies the top post.) With the new director reporting to Mr. Weiss, and not the other way around, many aspects of the job-share still have to be worked out.

The Met's lease on the Breuer runs out in 2023. Assuming the Whitney Museum of American Art doesn't take it back, should the Met extend its lease? How can older and newer art speak to each other at the Breuer and on Fifth Avenue (and even at the Cloisters, the third location)? Can we get better food than the public cafeteria, and can we have our metal admissions badges back? Can the Met keep up its crucial, but budget-straining, efforts to digitize its collections? How should it draw a younger, more diverse audience?

The 10th man -- or first woman -- to serve as Met director thus already has a full inbox. But here, a range of Met-ophiles -- artists and archaeologists, chefs and curators, designers and D.J.s, playwrights and performers -- offer their own ideas and expectations for how a new director can rethink the world's greatest museum for a new century. Some of these suggestions are bold, others more whimsical, but all of them come from people who want nothing more than to see the museum on solid ground.

These are edited excerpts from recent conversations.

Ayad Akhtar

Playwright, ''Disgraced'' (Pulitzer Prize, 2013)

I remember when MoMA raised the ticket price to $20. And I heard that oddly enough, counterintuitively, admissions went up -- but I wasn't making enough money to justify spending $20 a ticket. Because of that, I ended up going to the Met more.

Glenn Ligon

Artist

I was at a talk where a prominent museum director was asked by a colleague, What was the most important lesson he had learned while on the job? His response was ''I learned to listen to artists.''

One thing the new director needs to do is make the galleries in the Met places where artists actually want to show their work. They need to make proper galleries to show their contemporary collection. And if they don't change the galleries right away, they need to at least rotate the collection once in a while so it doesn't feel like it is a storage area that someone left the door open to.

(Mr. Ligon is in the Met's collection.)

Paul D. Miller (a.k.a. DJ Spooky)

Experimental and electronic artist; hip-hop musician

The average person looks at a painting for six seconds. Technology might be a good way to hold people's attention for longer. I remember when Pokéon Go got wildly popular and everyone was running around looking for various characters, and you had all these kids gathering around these virtual watering holes. They weren't there for six seconds; they were there for minutes. So I think museums could use augmented reality to keep people looking. You can hold your phone up to a painting and get information about it. You could have artists narrate their own work. You could have Waze bring you through the museum, or even the voice of Elvis, if you synthesized it. The Met is a perfect petri dish for a whole kaleidoscope of experiences to create more immersion in the museum. It's important that they change and update their app constantly. I like to say we live in the world of unfinished work.

(DJ Spooky was a resident artist at the Met in 2012.)

Takashi Murakami

Artist

At the Met, the collection is just so rare. Kano Sansetsu's screen ''Old Plum'' [from the Edo period, 1646] has been in the center of my heart always. I used to go see it many times when I first started living in New York -- and of course the other works surrounding it. I don't know about the turmoil, but the Met is going to be O.K. because of the potential of the collection.

Simon Doonan

Fashion commentator

If the Met could extend into Central Park with an outdoor sculpture garden, it could truly become a destination. There are a couple that come to mind, like the Hakone Open-Air Museum and sculpture park in Japan, or Storm King Art Center upstate. From an engagement perspective, it would be an incredible Instagram opportunity. Oh, there would also have to be a cafe. A kind of groovy al fresco eatery.

(Mr. Doonan designed displays for the Met's ''Costumes of Royal India'' show.)

Montana Simone

Owner, Idio Gallery, Bushwick, Brooklyn

I was thinking about my last visit to the Met, showing it off to my parents who haven't been in town in years. I truly felt like a part of it, and then I walked outside, and my mom's, like, the David Koch Plaza? What? And it underscores something that a lot of us accept about New York -- the repercussions of conservative old money underwriting culture in the city. In some ways that's been important, but it's also continued the direction that a lot of the politics of the country have continued downward. I would urge a new leader of the Met, even if they are not the C.E.O. and if they can't rename the plaza, to at least show some kind of self-awareness and transparency as a public institution and hold educational programming about sustainability that will have as much of an impact as putting a climate-denier's name on a plaza.

Nico Muhly

Composer

I feel like the Met has been killing it recently -- ''Sara Berman's Closet'' [by the artists Maira and Alex Kalman recreating the modest closet of Ms. Kalman's mother] being an especially poignant example of using that space in a poetic and surprising way. The one thing underexplored is the Met as a space for site-specific theater. I remember as a boy watching the ''Sesame Street'' movie ''Don't Eat the Pictures,'' which takes place at the Met -- absolutely terrifying stuff; an Egyptian boy comes back from beyond the grave and asks Big Bird to help him get his heart weighed to see if he can go to the cosmic afterlife. What you want is to hire Robert Wilson to do a live version of this in the Temple of Dendur. Can you imagine how beautiful it would be -- Big Bird moving really slowly, and a small child and a heart projected on the floor and the stars visible through the roof? I would go to that.

Bill Telepan

Restaurateur, chef

They have a restaurant in the Met? I would never think to go there to eat. I would say to a friend, let's go through MoMA, and pop down to Bar Room [at the Modern restaurant] for a drink and a snack. You go to the Whitney, and after that you'll pop into Untitled. The Met Breuer has Flora, the guys from the Estela [restaurant]. So my first suggestion is: Get a good food program there, whether it's a fancy, high-end place or not. You have this beautiful rooftop, and you could have a food element there. If you're going to build a new wing, make sure half of it's a restaurant by a really good restaurateur. I mean, I'll do it if they want me to.

Another idea: They should have coffee stands throughout with chairs and the tiniest little tables, and a guy with an espresso machine just hanging out. Places where you could actually sit among the El Greco paintings with a little coffee. It would keep you there. It'd be awesome.

Sharon Zukin

Author and sociology professor, City University of New York

The Metropolitan Museum is a national treasure, but it's dependent on the city government and on donations to function, so maybe it's time to rethink the way an encyclopedic museum works. They have so much work that they can't show it, and then they try to expand the physical plant. Whatever they do requires them to raise enormous amounts of capital and justify that by getting more visitors. This grow-or-die commandment poses enormous difficulties and burdens on museums and the people who love them. One wild suggestion would be to become more decentralized, like libraries: Break down the Metropolitan Museum experience, officially, and make different hives within the museum, and charge lower admission fees to go into one specific section or another. Another possibility is to send things out of the museum on long-term loans as free installations to democratize access further. That would sure beautify the public schools.

Zainab Bahrani

Professor, ancient Near Eastern art and archaeology, Columbia University

One of the things that I've dreamed about -- though maybe it's just a pipe dream -- is for the Met to create a sister relationship with museums in Iraq and, ultimately, Syria that need to be renovated and restarted. For instance, the Mosul Museum [in Iraq, looted and smashed by the Islamic State] has just been liberated from the ISIS occupation. Wouldn't it be wonderful if they could partner with American colleagues, even over Skype? That's one way the Met can contribute its professionalism and expertise to preserving that cultural heritage. And the Met's own galleries for ancient Near Eastern art could use some spiffing up. Highlighting these galleries with a new installation would bring more attention to the incredibly rich art and architectural traditions of this region. This is more important than ever now, since so much is being deliberately destroyed.

(Dr. Bahrani was a curator in the department of ancient Near Eastern art at the Met in the early 1990s and has organized workshops with the Met in Istanbul and Amman.)

Mark Bradford

Artist

I hope the new director will be asking museumgoers, How can we serve you better? Today we have the possibility to reanimate what a museum can look like and expand the idea. A director should have the flexibility to be not just a fund-raiser but to get out, listen, be part of the community. Take a risk, maybe bring a Planned Parenthood office onto your campus. Art history is about context; it's about the sociopolitical environment that produces art. What environment are we building now, and what will it produce? The museum could be finding creative ways to implement this sustained dialogue.

(Mr. Bradford is in the Met's collection.)

Cheech Marin

Comedian, actor, founder, Cheech Marin Center for Chicano Art, Culture and Industry

Show more Chicano art! I have always said you can't love or hate Chicano art unless you've seen it. This is a valuable and important school of art that's being ignored and needs shelf space.

Benjamin Millepied

Choreographer; artistic director, L.A. Dance Project

The Met should be open until midnight twice a week. There should be ambitious site-specific performances, which are broadcast live, and well-programmed concerts. Imagine live music and dance performances in unexpected programs on late nights. The right programming could attract a younger audience and turn the Met into the place to be. The museum also needs two terrific restaurants. There is so much to appreciate in that setting, and no place to dine.

Julie Gaines

Owner, Fishs Eddy

I have this discussion with my son, who's a painter, all the time: What's wrong with the Met? Several years ago, there was an exhibit at MoMA that paired older artists and newer ones. It put together Céanne's ''The Bather'' with this contemporary photograph of a teenager at the beach by Rineke Dijkstra, who I'd never even heard of before that show, and it made me think completely differently about ''The Bather.'' Educating people that way is more inventive than just lectures. They could do more of taking pieces that are already in the Met -- like African masks -- and pairing them with other pieces in the permanent collection. People who want more information will get the audio recordings, but there's also a way to teach through art. We look at it through our own lenses.

It would also be great if there were some rooms that had fewer paintings. Psychologically it would make you look at art differently. Right now, the pieces are all placed more or less at the same height, and the same distance apart. It's monotonous. Maybe if they could kind of change the permanent collection up and give more importance to a Courbet, or some other small painting, it would allow you to sit and look at it. You're talking to someone who moves their art up and down as a hobby. I nail and then unnail things all the time. In my next life, I'm going to be a curator.

Judith Bernstein

Artist

They should make a conscious effort to feature more art by women and to take more chances. They shouldn't wait until someone has been around for 20 years. I have a vested interest in work that's sexual, and political. The Met should have a show called ''The History of Political Art.'' They could start with Goya and then move on to Kähe Kollwitz [1867--1945], and political art that deals with the Vietnam War -- and art that deals with AIDS. They could put the sexual political stuff, the feminists and L.G.B.T.Q. artists, on display. Donald Trump is on everyone's mind, and it's important to address this issue at this moment.

Michael Bierut

Graphic designer

One of the biggest challenges they have is this simple thing called way-finding. You go up those stairs, which is an iconic New York experience, and then you go into grand hall, and it's like waking up with amnesia in the world's busiest train station. You forget where you are, and no one's helping you figure out where you need to go. The museum should reward serendipity to a certain degree, and making unexpected discoveries on the way to whatever you think you were looking for. But people need more help. Curators under the leadership of the new director can figure out how to complement the collection with old-fashioned hand-held paper maps, signs people look for as a matter of course, and new technology like apps and GPS. Now it's like doing Sudoku in some Martian-based 39-number [counting] system. It just doesn't seem solvable.

Victoria Newhouse

Museums expert; author, ''Chaos and Culture'' (2017)

For me, the Metropolitan Museum is the Louvre of the United States, and frankly I would not reimagine it. I think the Met is exactly right in terms of the curators and programmers it has. But I do think there are changes that could be made. The full board of trustees is way too big. I understand that it's near to 100 people, and I think that makes it very difficult to manage and get meaningful input. I've been told by people working at the museum that there are a number of people on the board who contribute very little except money. There should be some people on that board who take their participation very seriously on issues at the museum.

In terms of the direction being divided between two people, my art friends all say, Who in heaven's name is going to want that second job if they're answering to someone else, and if every time they come up with an idea, the money guy is going to say, Oh no, bottom line? This structure has been tried a number of times. It was tried at the Met with Bill [William H.] Luers and Philippe de Montebello. It was tried in Philadelphia, too, when Anne d'Harnoncourt shared responsibility with Robert Scott. In both of those cases, it was a very problematic decision.

(Ms. Newhouse was a consultant for the architect search committee for the new modern and contemporary wing in 2016.)

David Rockwell

Architect and Tony-winning scenic designer; co-author, ''Spectacle.''

I think about what a kind of formidable structure the building is for kids -- and I take my kids there a lot. It's interesting to imagine, from a family point of view, about the experience of entering the Met and how to make it more permeable, starting with those incredible steps at the front of the building. It's one of the great places to hang out -- the üer-doorstep. Performances at the base of those entry steps could be formalized, something where artists are invited. There are great architectural spaces that aren't currently used for exhibits proper and could be used as public space in a welcoming way. It's interesting to think about how to link the backside of the museum to Central Park that might particularly address kids and families -- a secret garden or art path.

Siri Hustvedt

Novelist, author of ''A Woman Looking at Men Looking at Women: Essays on Art, Sex, and the Mind'' (2016)

Because about 70 percent of curators in the U.S., perhaps even in the world, are women, there's something bizarre about the fact that the Met has never had a woman director. Appointing a woman would be important from a symbolic perspective, but it's also important that they pick a woman who thinks deeply about the museum and its role in the culture. A person who simply bemoans the numbers and the fact that change isn't occurring quickly enough is not the answer. The question is why art by women continues to be ''women's art,'' not just ''art.''

I've seen Met advertisements that say, ''come celebrate Women's History Month at the Met,'' and, frankly, that strikes me as a touch condescending. The powers that be don't really know how to address this issue. Self-interrogation would be a good place to start. The Met should have a mission statement, a full-throated and wholehearted recognition that part of the history of museums has been marginalization of women and many other people. It should be deeply a part of the museum's mission. Though the Met has been making something of an effort -- the Vigé Le Brun exhibition was great -- the representation of women in their collections is pretty feeble. Since the Guerrilla Girls, we still don't feel that the behemoth has dramatically changed.

Hank Willis Thomas

Artist and a founder of For Freedoms, an artist-run 'super PAC'

The Met and the American Museum of Natural History really set the tone for how visitors understand history and culture. The organization of a museum helps create those narratives. At the Met, if you walk in and go to the left, you have Greece and Rome and beyond that, Africa. And to the right, you have Egypt. And the question for me is, Where is Egypt? Oh yeah, I think Egypt's in Africa. If the Met's trying to be objective, objectively Egypt should be closer to Africa.

A lot of students learn about history through art, and the narrative of anything related to Africa and Polynesia and indigenous America is still laden with this notion of primitivism. And if I'm a kid in the Met, I wouldn't really see an acknowledgment that Egypt, one of the foundations of civilization and of modern intellectual life, was part of Africa and that Egyptians had a range of skin tones, but they definitely didn't look like Elizabeth Taylor. The excision of Egypt from Africa has been so successful -- has there ever been a movie made with Africans playing Egyptians? The responsibility of museums is to correct those narratives and explain: What did those people really look like? What was their art like?

(Mr. Thomas has organized public programs with the education department at the Met.)

Additional interviews by Robin Pogrebin, Hilarie M. Sheets, Roslyn Sulcas, Michael Walker. Edited by Barbara Graustark.

DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS BY ADAM SIMPSON) (AR1; AR16; AR17) 

Document NYTF000020170719ed7g0000n



Briefing
Donald Trump Jr., Macron, Senate Republicans: Your Weekend Briefing

By MAYA SALAM and HEATHER CASEY 
1,294 words
16 July 2017
12:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Here are the week’ top stories, and a look ahead.

1. For President Trump, politics has been hitting home.

Scrutiny of the family sharpened after his son Donald Trump Jr., above, revealed that he’ met with a Kremlin-linked lawyer in June 2016 in hopes of unearthing incriminating information on Hillary Clinton. Also in attendance were a Russian-American lobbyist and top campaign advisers, including Jared Kushner.

Here’ our look at how the meeting fits into the timeline of other events last summer.

Many conservatives don’ seem that bothered by the revelations involving Russia. Why? Our analyst points to admiration for President Vladimir Putin —specially for outmaneuvering Barack Obama on the world stage.

____

2. While visiting with President Emmanuel Macron of France in Paris for Bastille Day, President Trump defended his son’ actions and said he was “ wonderful young man.”

The two leaders sought to play down sharp differences over trade, immigration and climate change, and, in the end, forged an unlikely friendship. Above, the presidents with their wives, Brigitte, left, and Melania.

Back in the U.S., the Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity —ormed by Mr. Trump to investigate possible election fraud —ill hold its first meeting this week, without the extensive personal information on voters it requested from states.

____

3. On Capitol Hill, the Senate majority leader announced Saturday night that he will delay votes on a bill to dismantle the Affordable Care Act, because Senator John McCain, above, is recovering from surgery.

Without Mr. McCain, Republicans would not have the votes they need to take up or pass the bill this week. Two crucial Republican senators have said they remain unswayed by the newly revised health care proposal.

A key change would allow insurance companies to provide the kind of bare-bones plans some deride as “unk insurance.”he bill also provides $45 billion for opioid addiction treatment.

Our magazine writer traveled to a small town in New Hampshire, where one police officer has been tasked with trying to curb the rash of opioid overdoses.

____

4. China cremated its most prominent political prisoner and only Nobel Peace laureate, Liu Xiaobo, and dropped his ashes into the sea, ensuring that there would be no grave to serve as a magnet for pro-democracy protesters.

Long jailed, Mr. Liu developed liver cancer and died last week under guard at a government hospital, a pointed reminder that human rights issues have receded in Western diplomacy with China.

In 1989, Mr. Liu kept vigil on Tiananmen Square to protect protesters from encroaching soldiers and in 2008 initiated a pro-democracy petition, earning the enmity of the Communist leaders.

____

5. A gruesome murder case is still unfolding outside of Philadelphia, where the bodies of four missing young men were unearthed at a remote farm.

Cosmo DiNardo, above —ho has been described by prosecutors, his own lawyers and the police as mentally ill —onfessed and named a cousin as an accomplice. Officials say drug deals were involved.

Here’ what we know so far.

____

6. In a medical milestone, a gene-altering leukemia therapy was unanimously recommended by an F.D.A. panel, putting it on track to be the first gene therapy to reach the market.

Emily Whitehead, 12, above, is the first child ever given the altered cells. Now cancer free, she helped lobby the panel for approval.

In other health news, a study found that phthalates —hemicals banned from many products as potentially harmful to children —xist in high concentrations in the processed cheese powder in boxed mac and cheese products.

____

7. Turning to climate, Antarctica’ landscape has dramatically changed. A massive chunk of floating ice that weighs more than a trillion metric tons broke away.

News organizations trying to help audiences understand the scope of the development compared the size of the iceberg to Luxembourg, Qatar and, in our case, Delaware.

____

8. Now to the borderlands of the United States and Mexico. To the people who live there, the edges of these two countries are where language, culture, family and business overlap.

We take you there in this three-part video series.

____

9. The prime minister of Iraq, Haider al-Abadi, declared victory over the Islamic State in Mosul, but the scale of the humanitarian crisis there is only beginning to emerge.

Our correspondent traveled to the battered city to show what \b ISIS\b0  left behind from three years of rule —ike a sword, a ruined church and a child’ backpack filled with explosives.

____

10. Let’ escape briefly to a place where visuals and poetry merge into a singular experience. We asked six photographers to use works by six rising American poets for inspiration.

The photographers approached the assignment in unexpected ways, and each offered insight into his or her process and interpretation.

Damon Winter, immersed in a poem that spoke to grief, took the photograph above in Ithaca, N.Y.

____

11. In London, Garbiñ Muguruza, above, beat Venus Williams in two sets, becoming the first Spanish woman to take the Wimbledon singles title since 1994.

And Roger Federer won his record eighth Wimbledon title by defeating Marin Cilic in straight sets The victory, his first at Wimbledon since 2012, made him the oldest man to win at the All England Club in the Open era, which began in 1968.

Across the pond, the U.S. Women’ Open golf tournament is in its final round at the Trump National Golf Club in New Jersey. On Friday, when President Trump attended, some activists protested the choice of locale, but most of the players welcomed his presence.

____

12. For “ame of Thrones”ans, winter is finally here. Before Season 7 kicks off tonight (9 p.m. Eastern, HBO), let’ review what you need to remember. And our in-house G.O.T. obsessives are ready to email you a weekly newsletter with exclusive interviews and explainers. Sign up here.

Also, if you’e using your friend’ ex-boyfriend’ parents’assword to watch “ame of Thrones”r any TV show, you’e not alone. Good news: Our examination of the legalities suggests the practice is probably O.K.

____

13. Finally, we leave you with a bit of armchair travel to the lonely landscape of the North Dakota Badlands, where dinosaurs and rhinoceroses once roamed.

Travelers join paleontologists to help excavate cinematic favorites like triceratops and Tyrannosaurus Rex.

Our writer said she left a dig “usty, blistered, sunburned, scraped and exhausted,”ut also uplifted by “ greater appreciation of our fleeting place in history, our smallness on this earth and how much there is left to discover about the places we think we know.”

Have a great week.

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Weekend Briefing is published Sundays at 6 a.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Evening Briefing, weeknights at 6 p.m. Eastern.

Want to look back? Here’ Friday’ Evening Briefing.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

* Donald Trump, Paris, Wimbledon: Your Friday Evening Briefing

Sam Hodgson for The New York Times | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | Al Drago/The New York Times | Kin Cheung/Associated Press | Matt Rourke/Associated Press | T.J. Kirkpatrick for The New York Times | British Antarctic Survey, via Associated Press | The New York Times | Rukmini Callimachi/The New York Times | Damon Winter/The New York Times | Glyn Kirk/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Helen Sloan/HBO | Janie Osborne for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170716ed7g0018h



TEHRAN'S TURN | PART 1
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Iran Dominates in Iraq After U.S. Opened Door

By TIM ARANGO; Falih Hassan and Omar al-Jawoshy contributed reporting from Baghdad, and employees of The New York Times from Diyala Province, Hilla and Najaf. 
4,325 words
16 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- Walk into almost any market in Iraq and the shelves are filled with goods from Iran -- milk, yogurt, chicken. Turn on the television and channel after channel broadcasts programs sympathetic to Iran.

A new building goes up? It is likely that the cement and bricks came from Iran. And when bored young Iraqi men take pills to get high, the illicit drugs are likely to have been smuggled across the porous Iranian border.

And that's not even the half of it.

Across the country, Iranian-sponsored militias are hard at work establishing a corridor to move men and guns to proxy forces in Syria and Lebanon. And in the halls of power in Baghdad, even the most senior Iraqi cabinet officials have been blessed, or bounced out, by Iran's leadership.

When the United States invaded Iraq 14 years ago to topple Saddam Hussein, it saw Iraq as a potential cornerstone of a democratic and Western-facing Middle East, and vast amounts of blood and treasure -- about 4,500 American lives lost, more than $1 trillion spent -- were poured into the cause.

From Day 1, Iran saw something else: a chance to make a client state of Iraq, a former enemy against which it fought a war in the 1980s so brutal, with chemical weapons and trench warfare, that historians look to World War I for analogies. If it succeeded, Iraq would never again pose a threat, and it could serve as a jumping-off point to spread Iranian influence around the region.

In that contest, Iran won, and the United States lost.

Over the past three years, Americans have focused on the battle against the Islamic State in Iraq, returning more than 5,000 troops to the country and helping to force the militants out of Iraq's second-largest city, Mosul.

But Iran never lost sight of its mission: to dominate its neighbor so thoroughly that Iraq could never again endanger it militarily, and to use the country to effectively control a corridor from Tehran to the Mediterranean.

''Iranian influence is dominant,'' said Hoshyar Zebari, who was ousted last year as finance minister because, he said, Iran distrusted his links to the United States. ''It is paramount.''

The country's dominance over Iraq has heightened sectarian tensions around the region, with Sunni states, and American allies, like Saudi Arabia mobilizing to oppose Iranian expansionism. But Iraq is only part of Iran's expansion project; it has also used soft and hard power to extend its influence in Lebanon, Syria, Yemen and Afghanistan, and throughout the region.

Iran is a Shiite state, and Iraq, a Shiite majority country, was ruled by an elite Sunni minority before the American invasion. The roots of the schism between Sunnis and Shiites, going back almost 1,400 years, lie in differences over the rightful leaders of Islam after the death of the Prophet Muhammad. But these days, it is about geopolitics as much as religion, with the divide expressed by different states that are adversaries, led by Saudi Arabia on one side and Iran on the other.

Iran's influence in Iraq is not just ascendant, but diverse, projecting into military, political, economic and cultural affairs.

At some border posts in the south, Iraqi sovereignty is an afterthought. Busloads of young militia recruits cross into Iran without so much as a document check. They receive military training and are then flown to Syria, where they fight under the command of Iranian officers in defense of the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad.

Passing in the other direction, truck drivers pump Iranian products -- food, household goods, illicit drugs -- into what has become a vital and captive market.

Iran tips the scales to its favor in every area of commerce. In the city of Najaf, it even picks up the trash, after the provincial council there awarded a municipal contract to a private Iranian company. One member of the council, Zuhair al-Jibouri, resorted to a now-common Iraqi aphorism: ''We import apples from Iran so we can give them away to Iranian pilgrims.''

Politically, Iran has a large number of allies in Iraq's Parliament who can help secure its goals. And its influence over the choice of interior minister, through a militia and political group the Iranians built up in the 1980s to oppose Mr. Hussein, has given it substantial control over that ministry and the federal police.

Perhaps most crucial, Parliament passed a law last year that effectively made the constellation of Shiite militias a permanent fixture of Iraq's security forces. This ensures Iraqi funding for the groups while effectively maintaining Iran's control over some of the most powerful units.

Now, with new parliamentary elections on the horizon, Shiite militias have begun organizing themselves politically for a contest that could secure even more dominance for Iran over Iraq's political system.

To gain advantage on the airwaves, new television channels set up with Iranian money and linked to Shiite militias broadcast news coverage portraying Iran as Iraq's protector and the United States as a devious interloper.

Partly in an effort to contain Iran, the United States has indicated that it will keep troops behind in Iraq after the battle against the Islamic State. American diplomats have worked to emphasize the government security forces' role in the fighting, and to shore up a prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, who has seemed more open to the United States than to Iran.

But after the United States' abrupt withdrawal of troops in 2011, American constancy is still in question here -- a broad failure of American foreign policy, with responsibility shared across three administrations.

Iran has been playing a deeper game, parlaying extensive religious ties with Iraq's Shiite majority and a much wider network of local allies, as it makes the case that it is Iraq's only reliable defender.

A Road to the Sea

Iran's great project in eastern Iraq may not look like much: a 15-mile stretch of dusty road, mostly gravel, through desert and scrub near the border in Diyala Province.

But it is an important new leg of Iran's path through Iraq to Syria, and what it carries -- Shiite militiamen, Iranian delegations, trade goods and military supplies -- is its most valuable feature.

It is a piece of what analysts and Iranian officials say is Iran's most pressing ambition: to exploit the chaos of the region to project influence across Iraq and beyond. Eventually, analysts say, Iran could use the corridor, established on the ground through militias under its control, to ship weapons and supplies to proxies in Syria, where Iran is an important backer of Mr. Assad, and to Lebanon and its ally Hezbollah.

At the border to the east is a new crossing built and secured by Iran. Like the relationship between the two countries, it is lopsided.

The checkpoint's daily traffic includes up to 200 Iranian trucks, carrying fruit and yogurt, concrete and bricks, into Iraq. In the offices of Iraqi border guards, the candies and soda offered to guests come from Iran.

No loaded trucks go the other way.

''Iraq doesn't have anything to offer Iran,'' Vahid Gachi, the Iranian official in charge of the crossing, said in an interview in his office, as lines of tractor-trailers poured into Iraq. ''Except for oil, Iraq relies on Iran for everything.''

The border post is also a critical transit point for Iran's military leaders to send weapons and other supplies to proxies fighting the Islamic State in Iraq.

After the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, ISIL or Daesh, swept across Diyala and neighboring areas in 2014, Iran made clearing the province, a diverse area of Sunnis and Shiites, a priority.

It marshaled a huge force of Shiite militias, many trained in Iran and advised on the ground by Iranian officials. After a quick victory, Iranians and their militia allies set about securing their next interests here: marginalizing the province's Sunni minority and securing a path to Syria. Iran has fought aggressively to keep its ally Mr. Assad in power in order to retain land access to its most important spinoff in the region, Hezbollah, the military and political force that dominates Lebanon and threatens Israel.

A word from Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, Iran's powerful spymaster, sent an army of local Iraqi contractors scrambling, lining up trucks and bulldozers to help build the road, free of charge. Militiamen loyal to Iran were ordered to secure the site.

Uday al-Khadran, the Shiite mayor of Khalis District in Diyala, is a member of the Badr Organization, an Iraqi political party and militia established by Tehran in the 1980s to fight against Mr. Hussein during the Iran-Iraq war.

On an afternoon earlier this year, he spread a map across his desk and proudly discussed how he helped build the road, which he said was ordered by General Suleimani, the commander of the Quds Force, the branch of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps responsible for foreign operations. General Suleimani secretly directed Iran's policy in Iraq after the American invasion in 2003, and was responsible for the deaths of hundreds of American soldiers in attacks carried out by militias under his control.

''I love Qassim Suleimani more than my children,'' he said.

Mr. Khadran said the general's new road would eventually be a shortcut for religious pilgrims from Iran to reach Samarra, Iraq, the location of an important shrine.

But he also acknowledged the route's greater strategic significance as part of a corridor secured by Iranian proxies that extends across central and northern Iraq. The connecting series of roads skirts the western city of Mosul and stretches on to Tal Afar, an Islamic State-controlled city where Iranian-backed militias and Iranian advisers have set up a base at an airstrip on the outskirts.

''Diyala is the passage to Syria and Lebanon, and this is very important to Iran,'' said Ali al-Daini, the Sunni chairman of the provincial council there.

Closer to Syria, Iranian-allied militias moved west of Mosul as the battle against the Islamic State unfolded there in recent months. The militias captured the town of Baaj, and then proceeded to the Syrian border, putting Iran on the cusp of completing its corridor.

Back east, in Diyala, Mr. Daini said he had been powerless to halt what he described as Iran's dominance in the province.

When Mr. Daini goes to work, he said, he has to walk by posters of Iran's revolutionary leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, outside the council building.

Iran's militias in the province have been accused of widespread sectarian cleansing, pushing Sunnis from their homes to establish Shiite dominance and create a buffer zone on its border. The Islamic State was beaten in Diyala more than two years ago, but thousands of Sunni families still fill squalid camps, unable to return home.

Now, Diyala has become a showcase for how Iran views Shiite ascendancy as critical to its geopolitical goals.

''Iran is smarter than America,'' said Nijat al-Taie, a Sunni member of the provincial council and an outspoken critic of Iran, which she calls the instigator of several assassination attempts against her. ''They achieved their goals on the ground. America didn't protect Iraq. They just toppled the regime and handed the country over to Iran.''

The Business of Influence

The lives of General Suleimani and other senior leaders in Tehran were shaped by the prolonged war with Iraq in the 1980s. The conflict left hundreds of thousands dead on both sides, and General Suleimani spent much of the war at the front, swiftly rising in rank as so many officers were killed.

''The Iran-Iraq war was the formative experience for all of Iran's leaders,'' said Ali Vaez, an Iran analyst at the International Crisis Group, a conflict resolution organization. ''From Suleimani all the way down. It was their 'never again' moment.''

A border dispute over the Shatt al Arab waterway that was a factor in the hostilities has still not been resolved, and the legacy of the war's brutality has influenced the Iranian government ever since, from its pursuit of nuclear weapons to its policy in Iraq.

''This is a permanent scar in their mind,'' said Mowaffak al-Rubaie, a lawmaker and former national security adviser. ''They are obsessed with Baathism, Saddam and the Iran-Iraq war.''

More than anything else, analysts say, it is the scarring legacy of that war that has driven Iranian ambitions to dominate Iraq.

Particularly in southern Iraq, where the population is mostly Shiite, signs of Iranian influence are everywhere.

Iranian-backed militias are the defenders of the Shiite shrines in the cities of Najaf and Karbala that drive trade and tourism. In local councils, Iranian-backed political parties have solid majorities, and campaign materials stress relationships with Shiite saints and Iranian clerics.

If the Iraqi government were stronger, said Mustaq al-Abady, a businessman from just outside Najaf, ''then maybe we could open our factories instead of going to Iran.'' He said his warehouse was crowded with Iranian imports because his government had done nothing to promote a private sector, police its borders or enforce customs duties.

Raad Fadhil al-Alwani, a merchant in Hilla, another southern city, imports cleaning supplies and floor tiles from Iran. He slaps ''Made in Iraq'' labels in Arabic on bottles of detergent, but the reality is that he owns a factory in Iran because labor is cheaper there.

''I feel like I am destroying the economy of Iraq,'' he said. But he insists that Iraqi politicians, by deferring to Iranian pressure and refusing to support local industry, have made it hard to do anything else.

Najaf attracts millions of Iranian pilgrims each year visiting the golden-domed shrine of Imam Ali, the first Shiite imam. Iranian construction workers -- many of whom are viewed as Iranian spies by Iraqi officials -- have also flocked to the city to renovate the shrine and build hotels.

In Babil Province, according to local officials, militia leaders have taken over a government project to set up security cameras along strategic roads. The project had been granted to a Chinese company before the militias intervened, and now the army and the local police have been sidelined from it, said Muqdad Omran, an Iraqi Army captain in the area.

Iran's pre-eminence in the Iraqi south has not come without resentment. Iraqi Shiites share a faith with Iran, but they also hold close their other identities as Iraqis and Arabs.

''Iraq belongs to the Arab League, not to Iran,'' said Sheikh Fadhil al-Bidayri, a cleric at the religious seminary in Najaf. ''Shiites are a majority in Iraq, but a minority in the world. As long as the Iranian government is controlling the Iraqi government, we don't have a chance.''

In this region where the Islamic State's military threat has never encroached, Iran's security concerns are mostly being addressed by economic manipulation, Iraqi officials say. Trade in the south is often financed by Iran with credit, and incentives are offered to Iraqi traders to keep their cash in Iranian banks.

Baghdad's banks play a role, too, as the financial anchors for Iraqi front companies used by Iran to gain access to dollars that can then finance the country's broader geopolitical aims, said Entifadh Qanbar, a former aide to the Iraqi politician Ahmad Chalabi, who died in 2015.

''It's very important for the Iranians to maintain corruption in Iraq,'' he said.

The Militias' Long Arm

For decades, Iran smuggled guns and bomb-making supplies through the vast swamps of southern Iraq. And young men were brought back and forth across the border, from one safe house to another -- recruits going to Iran for training, and then back to Iraq to fight. At first the enemy was Mr. Hussein; later, it was the Americans.

Today, agents of Iran's Revolutionary Guards openly recruit fighters in the Shiite-majority cities of southern Iraq. Buses filled with recruits easily pass border posts that officials say are essentially controlled by Iran -- through its proxies on the Iraqi side, and its own border guards on the other.

While Iran has built up militias to fight against the Islamic State in Iraq, it has also mobilized an army of disaffected young Shiite Iraqi men to fight on its behalf in Syria.

Mohammad Kadhim, 31, is one of those foot soldiers for Iran, having served three tours in Syria. The recruiting pitch, he said, is mostly based in faith, to defend Shiite shrines in Syria. But Mr. Kadhim said he and his friends signed up more out of a need for jobs.

''I was just looking for money,'' he said. ''The majority of the youth I met fighting in Syria do it for the money.''

He signed up with a Revolutionary Guards recruiter in Najaf, and then was bused through southern Iraq and into Iran, where he underwent military training near Tehran.

There, he said, Iranian officers delivered speeches invoking the martyrdom of Imam Hussein, the revered seventh-century Shiite figure whose death at the hands of a powerful Sunni army became the event around which Shiite spirituality would revolve. The same enemies of the Shiites who killed the imam are now in Syria and Iraq, the officers told the men.

After traveling to Iran, Mr. Kadhim came home for a break and then was shipped to Syria, where Hezbollah operatives trained him in sniper tactics.

Iran's emphasis on defending the Shiite faith has led some here to conclude that its ultimate goal is to bring about an Iranian-style theocracy in Iraq. But there is a persistent sense that it just would not work in Iraq, which has a much larger native Sunni population and tradition, and Iraq's clerics in Najaf, including Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the world's pre-eminent Shiite spiritual leader, oppose the Iranian system.

But Iran is taking steps to translate militia power into political power, much as it did with Hezbollah in Lebanon, and militia leaders have begun political organizing before next year's parliamentary elections.

In April, Qais al-Khazali, a Shiite militia leader, delivered a speech to an audience of Iraqi college students, railing against the United States and the nefarious plotting of Turkey and Saudi Arabia. Then, a poet who was part of Mr. Khazali's entourage stood up and began praising General Suleimani.

For the students, that was the last straw. Chants of ''Iran out! Iran out!'' began. Scuffles broke out between students and Mr. Khazali's bodyguards, who fired their rifles into the air just outside the building.

''The thing that really provoked us was the poet,'' said Mustafa Kamal, a student at the University of al-Qadisiya in Diwaniya, in southern Iraq, who participated in the protest.

Mr. Kamal and his fellow students quickly learned how dangerous it could be to stand up to Iran these days.

First, militiamen began threatening to haul them off. Then media outlets linked to the militias went after them, posting their pictures and calling them Baathists and enemies of Shiites. When a mysterious car appeared near Mr. Kamal's house, his mother panicked that militiamen were coming for her son.

Then, finally, Mr. Kamal, a law student, and three of his friends received notices from the school saying they had been suspended for a year.

''We thought we had only one hope, the university,'' he said. ''And then Iran also interfered there.''

Mr. Khazali, whose political and militia organization, Asaib Ahl al-Haq, is deeply connected with Iran, has been on a speaking tour on campuses across Iraq as part of an effort to organize political support for next year's national election. This has raised fears that Iran is trying not only to deepen its influence within Iraqi education, but also to transform militias into outright political and social organizations, much as it did with Hezbollah in Lebanon.

''It's another type of Iranian infiltration and the expansion of Iran's influence,'' said Beriwan Khailany, a lawmaker and member of Parliament's higher-education committee. ''Iran wants to control the youth, and to teach them the Iranian beliefs, through Iraqis who are loyal to Iran.''

Political Ascendancy

When a group of Qatari falcon hunters, ''including members of the royal family, were kidnapped in 2015 while on safari in the southern deserts of Iraq, Qatar called Iran and its militia allies -- not the central government in Baghdad.

For Mr. Abadi, the prime minister, the episode was an embarrassing demonstration of his government's weakness at the hands of Iran, whose proxy militia Kataibb Hezbollah was believed to be behind the kidnapping.

So when the hostage negotiations were about to end, Mr. Abadi pushed back.

Around noon on a day in April, a government jet from Qatar landed in Baghdad, carrying a delegation of diplomats and 500 million euros stuffed into 23 black boxes.

The hunters were soon on their way home, but the ransom did not go to the Iranian-backed militiamen who had abducted the Qataris; the cash ended up in a central bank vault in Baghdad.

The seizure of the money had been ordered by Mr. Abadi, who was furious at the prospect of militias, and their Iranian and Hezbollah benefactors, being paid so richly right under the Iraqi government's nose.

''Hundreds of millions to armed groups?'' Mr. Abadi said in a public rant. ''Is this acceptable?''

In Iraq, the kidnapping episode was seen as a violation of the country's sovereignty and emblematic of Iran's suffocating power over the Iraqi state.

In a post on Twitter, Mr. Zebari, the former finance minister, who was previously foreign minister, called the episode a ''travesty.''

Mr. Zebari knows firsthand the power of Iran over the Iraqi state.

Last year, he said, he was ousted as finance minister because Iran perceived him as being too close to the United States. The account was verified by a member of Parliament who was involved in the removal of Mr. Zebari, and who spoke on the condition of anonymity to avoid angering Iran.

Mr. Zebari, who recounted the events in an interview from his mountainside mansion in northern Iraq, said that when President Barack Obama met with Mr. Abadi last September at the United Nations, the American leader personally lobbied to save Mr. Zebari's job. Even that was not enough.

Mr. Abadi now finds himself in a difficult position. If he makes any move that can be seen as confrontational toward Iran, or as positioning himself closer to the United States, it could place a cloud over his political future.

''He had two options: to be with the Americans or with the Iranians,'' said Izzat Shahbander, a prominent Iraqi Shiite leader who once lived in exile in Iran while Mr. Hussein was in power. ''And he chose to be with the Americans.''

Mr. Abadi, who took office in 2014 with the support of both the United States and Iran, has seemed more emboldened to push back against Iranian pressure since President Trump took office.

In addition to seizing the ransom money, he has promoted an ambitious project for an American company to secure the highway from Baghdad to Amman, Jordan, which Iran has opposed. He has also begun discussing with the United States the terms of a deal to keep American forces behind after the Islamic State is defeated.

Some are seeing an American troop commitment as a chance to revisit the 2011 withdrawal of United States forces that seemingly opened a door for Iran.

When American officials in Iraq began the slow wind-down of the military mission there, in 2009, some diplomats in Baghdad were cautiously celebrating one achievement: Iran seemed to be on its heels, its influence in the country waning.

''Over the last year, Iran has lost the strategic initiative in Iraq,'' one diplomat wrote in a cable, later released by WikiLeaks.

But other cables sent warnings back to Washington that were frequently voiced by Iraqi officials they spoke to: that if the Americans left, then Iran would fill the vacuum.

Ryan C. Crocker, the American ambassador in Iraq from 2007 to 2009, said that if the United States left again after the Islamic State was defeated, ''it would be effectively just giving the Iranians a free rein.''

But many Iraqis say the Iranians already have free rein. And while the Trump administration has indicated that it will pay closer attention to Iraq as a means to counter Iran, the question is whether it is too late.

''Iran is not going to sit silent and do nothing,'' said Sami al-Askari, a senior Shiite politician who has good relationships with both the Iranians and Americans. ''They have many means. Frankly, the Americans can't do anything.''

Shiite militiamen on patrol in al-Mazraa, a village in Salahuddin Province, Iraq. (A1); Suspected Islamic State fighters detained in Qaraqosh, near Mosul. Top, workers unloading Iranian imports.(A10); Karbala, a holy city for Shiites. Far right, portraits of members of Iraqi forces and Shiite militias at a Najaf cemetery.; Members of the Popular Mobilization Forces, a mostly Shiite militia group, at Iraq's Syrian border. While Iran has built up militias to combat the Islamic State in Iraq, it has also mobilized Shiite Iraqis to fight on its behalf in Syria. (A10-A11); Guarding a road in Diyala Province that begins near the Iranian border. Top, mourning in Najaf for a fighter for the Badr Organization, an Iraqi political party and militia established by Tehran. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SERGEY PONOMAREV FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A12) 

Document NYTF000020170716ed7g0006p



The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECT
Fixing the Met: Art Lovers Speak

By JASON FARAGO and SOPHIE HAIGNEY 
3,624 words
16 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

HELP WANTED: Stately home seeks caretaker for priceless collection of antiquities, pictures, bronzes and bric-a-brac. Successful applicant will oversee staff of 2,500, ensure upkeep, supervise purchases and promote estate's interests at home and abroad. Manor is leaky -- planned extension delayed (owners have second home nearby). Send réumé to 1000 Fifth Avenue, Manhattan. (Those with dust allergies need not apply.)

O.K., finding a new director for the Metropolitan Museum of Art will take more than a LinkedIn posting -- but the hunt is on for a successor to Thomas P. Campbell, whose resignation last winter added a kink to the Met's tangle of troubles. Attendance, at seven million, is at a high. Exhibitions are some of the finest anywhere. Yet as it approaches its 150th birthday, the museum lumbers under a nearly $15 million deficit; a planned new wing for modern and contemporary art has been deferred; and the Met's optional admissions charge may be replaced with a mandatory entrance fee for out-of-towners.

A new director, expected to be named later this year, will have to plot a new path forward. But it's still the grandest job in the art world -- even though some aspects of that job must now be shared with Daniel H. Weiss, its president, who was garlanded last month with the additional title of chief executive. (Mr. Campbell held that title previously, and at most museums the artistic head occupies the top post.) With the new director reporting to Mr. Weiss, and not the other way around, many aspects of the job-share still have to be worked out.

The Met's lease on the Breuer runs out in 2023. Assuming the Whitney Museum of American Art doesn't take it back, should the Met extend its lease? How can older and newer art speak to each other at the Breuer and on Fifth Avenue (and even at the Cloisters, the third location)? Can we get better food than the public cafeteria, and can we have our metal admissions badges back? Can the Met keep up its crucial, but budget-straining, efforts to digitize its collections? How should it draw a younger, more diverse audience?

The 10th man -- or first woman -- to serve as Met director thus already has a full inbox. But here, a range of Met-ophiles -- artists and archaeologists, chefs and curators, designers and D.J.s, playwrights and performers -- offer their own ideas and expectations for how a new director can rethink the world's greatest museum for a new century. Some of these suggestions are bold, others more whimsical, but all of them come from people who want nothing more than to see the museum on solid ground.

These are edited excerpts from recent conversations. Share your own tips for the Met's new director on Facebook .

______

Paul D. Miller (a.k.a. DJ Spooky)

Experimental and electronic artist; hip-hop musician

The average person looks at a painting for six seconds. Technology might be a good way to hold people's attention for longer. I remember when Pokéon Go got wildly popular and everyone was running around looking for various characters, and you had all these kids gathering around these virtual watering holes. They weren't there for six seconds; they were there for minutes. So I think museums could use augmented reality to keep people looking. You can hold your phone up to a painting and get information about it. You could have artists narrate their own work. You could have Waze bring you through the museum, or even the voice of Elvis, if you synthesized it. The Met is a perfect petri dish for a whole kaleidoscope of experiences to create more immersion in the museum. It's important that they change and update their app constantly. I like to say we live in the world of unfinished work.

(DJ Spooky was a resident artist at the Met in 2012.)

______

Glenn Ligon

Visual Artist

I was at a talk where a prominent museum director was asked by a colleague, What was the most important lesson he had learned while on the job? His response was ''I learned to listen to artists.''

One thing the new director needs to do is make the galleries in the Met places where artists actually want to show their work. They need to make proper galleries to show their contemporary collection. And if they don't change the galleries right away, they need to at least rotate the collection once in a while so it doesn't feel like it is a storage area that someone left the door open to.

(Mr. Ligon is in the Met's collection.)

______

Takashi Murakami

Visual Artist

At the Met, the collection is just so rare. Kano Sansetsu's screen ''Old Plum''[from the Edo period, 1646] has been in the center of my heart always. I used to go see it many times when I first started living in New York -- and of course the other works surrounding it. I don't know about the turmoil, but the Met is going to be O.K. because of the potential of the collection.

______

Ayad Akhtar

Playwright, ''Disgraced'' (Pulitzer Prize, 2013)

I remember when MoMA raised the ticket price to $20. And I heard that oddly enough, counterintuitively, admissions went up -- but I wasn't making enough money to justify spending $20 a ticket. Because of that, I ended up going to the Met more.

______

Simon Doonan

Fashion commentator

If the Met could extend into Central Park with an outdoor sculpture garden, it could truly become a destination. There are a couple that come to mind, like the Hakone Open-Air Museum and sculpture park in Japan, or Storm King Art Center upstate. From an engagement perspective, it would be an incredible Instagram opportunity. Oh, there would also have to be a cafe. A kind of groovy al fresco eatery.

(Mr. Doonan designed displays for the Met's ''Costumes of Royal India'' show.)

______

Nico Muhly

Composer

I feel like the Met has been killing it recently -- ''Sara Berman's Closet'' [by the artists Maira and Alex Kalman recreating the modest closet of Ms. Kalman's mother] being an especially poignant example of using that space in a poetic and surprising way. The one thing underexplored is the Met as a space for site-specific theater. I remember as a boy watching the ''Sesame Street'' movie ''Don't Eat the Pictures,'' which takes place at the Met -- absolutely terrifying stuff; an Egyptian boy comes back from beyond the grave and asks Big Bird to help him get his heart weighed to see if he can go to the cosmic afterlife. What you want is to hire Robert Wilson to do a live version of this in the Temple of Dendur. Can you imagine how beautiful it would be -- Big Bird moving really slowly, and a small child and a heart projected on the floor and the stars visible through the roof? I would go to that.

______

Montana Simone

Owner, Idio Gallery , Bushwick, Brooklyn

I was thinking about my last visit to the Met, showing it off to my parents who haven't been in town in years. I truly felt like a part of it, and then I walked outside, and my mom's, like, the David Koch Plaza? What? And it underscores something that a lot of us accept about New York -- the repercussions of conservative old money underwriting culture in the city. In some ways that's been important, but it's also continued the direction that a lot of the politics of the country have continued downward. I would urge a new leader of the Met, even if they are not the C.E.O. and if they can't rename the plaza, to at least show some kind of self-awareness and transparency as a public institution and hold educational programming about sustainability that will have as much of an impact as putting a climate-denier's name on a plaza.

______

Bill Telepan

Restaurateur, chef

They have a restaurant in the Met? I would never think to go there to eat. I would say to a friend, let's go through MoMA, and pop down to Bar Room [at the Modern restaurant] for a drink and a snack. You go to the Whitney, and after that you'll pop into Untitled. The Met Breuer has Flora, the guys from the Estela [restaurant]. So my first suggestion is: Get a good food program there, whether it's a fancy, high-end place or not. You have this beautiful rooftop, and you could have a food element there. If you're going to build a new wing, make sure half of it's a restaurant by a really good restaurateur. I mean, I'll do it if they want me to.

Another idea: They should have coffee stands throughout with chairs and the tiniest little tables, and a guy with an espresso machine just hanging out. Places where you could actually sit among the El Greco paintings with a little coffee. It would keep you there. It'd be awesome.

______

Zainab Bahrani

Professor, ancient Near Eastern art and archaeology, Columbia University

One of the things that I've dreamed about -- though maybe it's just a pipe dream -- is for the Met to create a sister relationship with museums in Iraq and, ultimately, Syria that need to be renovated and restarted. For instance, the Mosul Museum [in Iraq, looted and smashed by the Islamic State] has just been liberated from the ISIS occupation. Wouldn't it be wonderful if they could partner with American colleagues, even over Skype? That's one way the Met can contribute its professionalism and expertise to preserving that cultural heritage. And the Met's own galleries for ancient Near Eastern art could use some spiffing up. Highlighting these galleries with a new installation would bring more attention to the incredibly rich art and architectural traditions of this region. This is more important than ever now, since so much is being deliberately destroyed.

(Dr. Bahrani was a curator in the department of ancient Near Eastern art at the Met in the early 1990s and has organized workshops with the Met in Istanbul and Amman.)

______

Mark Bradford

Artist

I hope the new director will be asking museumgoers, How can we serve you better? Today we have the possibility to reanimate what a museum can look like and expand the idea. A director should have the flexibility to be not just a fund-raiser but to get out, listen, be part of the community. Take a risk, maybe bring a Planned Parenthood office onto your campus. Art history is about context; it's about the sociopolitical environment that produces art. What environment are we building now, and what will it produce? The museum could be finding creative ways to implement this sustained dialogue.

(Mr. Bradford is in the Met's collection.)

______

Sharon Zukin

Author and sociology professor, City University of New York

The Metropolitan Museum is a national treasure, but it's dependent on the city government and on donations to function, so maybe it's time to rethink the way an encyclopedic museum works. They have so much work that they can't show it, and then they try to expand the physical plant. Whatever they do requires them to raise enormous amounts of capital and justify that by getting more visitors. This grow-or-die commandment poses enormous difficulties and burdens on museums and the people who love them. One wild suggestion would be to become more decentralized, like libraries: Break down the Metropolitan Museum experience, officially, and make different hives within the museum, and charge lower admission fees to go into one specific section or another. Another possibility is to send things out of the museum on long-term loans as free installations to democratize access further. That would sure beautify the public schools.

______

Cheech Marin

Comedian, actor, founder, Cheech Marin Center for Chicano Art, Culture and Industry

Show more Chicano art! I have always said you can't love or hate Chicano art unless you've seen it. This is a valuable and important school of art that's being ignored and needs shelf space.

______

Benjamin Millepied

Choreographer; artistic director, L.A. Dance Project

The Met should be open until midnight twice a week. There should be ambitious site-specific performances, which are broadcast live, and well-programmed concerts. Imagine live music and dance performances in unexpected programs on late nights. The right programming could attract a younger audience and turn the Met into the place to be. The museum also needs two terrific restaurants. There is so much to appreciate in that setting, and no place to dine.

______

Michael Bierut

Graphic designer

One of the biggest challenges they have is this simple thing called way-finding. You go up those stairs, which is an iconic New York experience, and then you go into grand hall, and it's like waking up with amnesia in the world's busiest train station. You forget where you are, and no one's helping you figure out where you need to go. The museum should reward serendipity to a certain degree, and making unexpected discoveries on the way to whatever you think you were looking for. But people need more help. Curators under the leadership of the new director can figure out how to complement the collection with old-fashioned hand-held paper maps, signs people look for as a matter of course, and new technology like apps and GPS. Now it's like doing Sudoku in some Martian-based 39-number [counting] system. It just doesn't seem solvable.

______

David Rockwell

Architect and Tony-winning scenic designer; co-author, ''Spectacle.''

I think about what a kind of formidable structure the building is for kids -- and I take my kids there a lot. It's interesting to imagine, from a family point of view, about the experience of entering the Met and how to make it more permeable, starting with those incredible steps at the front of the building. It's one of the great places to hang out -- the üer-doorstep. Performances at the base of those entry steps could be formalized, something where artists are invited. There are great architectural spaces that aren't currently used for exhibits proper and could be used as public space in a welcoming way. It's interesting to think about how to link the backside of the museum to Central Park that might particularly address kids and families -- a secret garden or art path.

______

Victoria Newhouse

Museums expert; author, ''Chaos and Culture'' (2017)

For me, the Metropolitan Museum is the Louvre of the United States, and frankly I would not reimagine it. I think the Met is exactly right in terms of the curators and programmers it has. But I do think there are changes that could be made. The full board of trustees is way too big. I understand that it's near to 100 people, and I think that makes it very difficult to manage and get meaningful input. I've been told by people working at the museum that there are a number of people on the board who contribute very little except money. There should be some people on that board who take their participation very seriously on issues at the museum.

In terms of the direction being divided between two people, my art friends all say, Who in heaven's name is going to want that second job if they're answering to someone else, and if every time they come up with an idea, the money guy is going to say, Oh no, bottom line? This structure has been tried a number of times. It was tried at the Met with Bill [William H.] Luers and Philippe de Montebello. It was tried in Philadelphia, too, when Anne d'Harnoncourt shared responsibility with Robert Scott. In both of those cases, it was a very problematic decision.

(Ms. Newhouse was a consultant for the architect search committee for the new modern and contemporary wing in 2016.)

______

Siri Hustvedt

Novelist, author of '' A Woman Looking at Men Looking at Women: Essays on Art, Sex, and the Mind '' (2016)

Because about 70 percent of curators in the U.S., perhaps even in the world, are women, there's something bizarre about the fact that the Met has never had a woman director. Appointing a woman would be important from a symbolic perspective, but it's also important that they pick a woman who thinks deeply about the museum and its role in the culture. A person who simply bemoans the numbers and the fact that change isn't occurring quickly enough is not the answer. The question is why art by women continues to be ''women's art,'' not just ''art.''

I've seen Met advertisements that say, ''come celebrate Women's History Month at the Met,'' and, frankly, that strikes me as a touch condescending. The powers that be don't really know how to address this issue. Self-interrogation would be a good place to start. The Met should have a mission statement, a full-throated and wholehearted recognition that part of the history of museums has been marginalization of women and many other people. It should be deeply a part of the museum's mission. Though the Met has been making something of an effort -- the Vigé Le Brun exhibition was great -- the representation of women in their collections is pretty feeble. Since the Guerrilla Girls, we still don't feel that the behemoth has dramatically changed.

______

Julie Gaines

Owner, Fishs Eddy

I have this discussion with my son, who's a painter, all the time: What's wrong with the Met? Several years ago, there was an exhibit at MoMA that paired older artists and newer ones. It put together Céanne's ''The Bather'' with this contemporary photograph of a teenager at the beach by Rineke Dijkstra, who I'd never even heard of before that show, and it made me think completely differently about ''The Bather.'' Educating people that way is more inventive than just lectures. They could do more of taking pieces that are already in the Met -- like African masks -- and pairing them with other pieces in the permanent collection. People who want more information will get the audio recordings, but there's also a way to teach through art. We look at it through our own lenses.

It would also be great if there were some rooms that had fewer paintings. Psychologically it would make you look at art differently. Right now, the pieces are all placed more or less at the same height, and the same distance apart. It's monotonous. Maybe if they could kind of change the permanent collection up and give more importance to a Courbet, or some other small painting, it would allow you to sit and look at it. You're talking to someone who moves their art up and down as a hobby. I nail and then unnail things all the time. In my next life, I'm going to be a curator.

______

Judith Bernstein

Visual Artist

They should make a conscious effort to feature more art by women and to take more chances. They shouldn't wait until someone has been around for 20 years. I have a vested interest in work that's sexual, and political. The Met should have a show called ''The History of Political Art.'' They could start with Goya and then move on to Kähe Kollwitz [1867--1945], and political art that deals with the Vietnam War -- and art that deals with AIDS. They could put the sexual political stuff, the feminists and L.G.B.T.Q. artists, on display. Donald Trump is on everyone's mind, and it's important to address this issue at this moment.

______

Hank Willis Thomas

Artist and a founder of For Freedoms, an artist-run 'super PAC'

The Met and the American Museum of Natural History really set the tone for how visitors understand history and culture. The organization of a museum helps create those narratives. At the Met, if you walk in and go to the left, you have Greece and Rome and beyond that, Africa. And to the right, you have Egypt. And the question for me is, Where is Egypt? Oh yeah, I think Egypt's in Africa. If the Met's trying to be objective, objectively Egypt should be closer to Africa.

A lot of students learn about history through art, and the narrative of anything related to Africa and Polynesia and indigenous America is still laden with this notion of primitivism. And if I'm a kid in the Met, I wouldn't really see an acknowledgment that Egypt, one of the foundations of civilization and of modern intellectual life, was part of Africa and that Egyptians had a range of skin tones, but they definitely didn't look like Elizabeth Taylor. The excision of Egypt from Africa has been so successful -- has there ever been a movie made with Africans playing Egyptians? The responsibility of museums is to correct those narratives and explain: What did those people really look like? What was their art like?

(Mr. Thomas has organized public programs with the education department at the Met.)

Share your tips for the Met's new director on Facebook.

______

Additional interviews by Robin Pogrebin, Hilarie M. Sheets, Roslyn Sulcas, Michael Walker. Edited by Barbara Graustark. Animations by Fraser Croall.

Document NYTF000020170716ed7g00063



National Desk; SECTA
A Reverence for Putin On the Right Provides Cover for the President

By JEREMY W. PETERS 
1,314 words
15 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Years before the words ''collusion'' and ''Russian hacking'' became associated with President Vladimir V. Putin, some prominent Republicans found far more laudatory ways to talk about the Russian leader.

''Putin decides what he wants to do, and he does it in half a day,'' Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York mayor and longtime friend and adviser to President Trump, gushed in 2014.

Mr. Putin was worthy of the Nobel Peace Prize, K. T. McFarland said in 2013, before going on to serve a brief and ill-fated stint as Mr. Trump's deputy national security adviser.

''A great leader,'' ''very reasoned,'' and ''extremely diplomatic,'' was how Mr. Trump himself described Mr. Putin that same year.

Though such fondness for Mr. Putin fell outside the Republican Party's mainstream at the time, it became a widely held sentiment inside the conservative movement by the time Mr. Trump started running for president in 2015. And it persists today, despite evidence of Russian intervention in the 2016 American election and Mr. Putin's increasingly authoritarian tendencies at home.

The veneration of Mr. Putin helps explain why revelations about Russia's involvement in the election -- including recent reports that members of Mr. Trump's inner circle set up a meeting at which they expected a representative of the Russian government to give them incriminating information about Hillary Clinton -- and Mr. Trump's reluctance to acknowledge it, have barely penetrated the consciousness of the president's conservative base.

Mr. Putin is no arch-villain in this understanding of America-Russian relations. Rather, he personifies many of the qualities and attitudes that conservatives have desired in a president: a respect for traditional Christian values, a swelling nationalist pride and an aggressive posture toward foreign adversaries.

In this view, the Russian president is a brilliant tactician, a slayer of murderous Islamic extremists -- and not incidentally, a leader who outmaneuvered and emasculated President Barack Obama on the world stage. And because of that, almost any other transgression seems forgivable.

''There are conservatives here who maybe read into Russia things they wish were true in the United States,'' said Angela Stent, director of the Center for Eurasian, Russian and East European Studies at Georgetown University. ''And they imagine Russia and Putin as the kind of strong, traditional conservative leader whom they wish they had in the United States.'' To these conservatives, she added, ''Russia is the true defender of Christian values. We are decadent.''

Mr. Trump's opponents have tried repeatedly to make an issue of the mutual admiration between him and the Russian president, anticipating that Republicans would not tolerate any whiff of sympathy from one of their own toward the leader of what Ronald Reagan called the ''evil empire.'' But Mr. Trump has never had to wait long for conservatives to leap to his defense -- and often Mr. Putin's as well.

''My guess is that Trump voters would say: 'Hey, you know what? I kind of like the fact that Putin's endorsed Trump,' '' Rush Limbaugh told his listeners in December 2015. ''At least Putin's killing terrorists. At least Putin's made an enemy out of ISIS. We don't seem to be able to do that.''

After Mr. Trump was elected and evidence of Russian hacking had started to accumulate, the praise for Mr. Putin from the right continued. Kimberly Guilfoyle, a Fox News host who once said Mr. Trump had considered naming her as his press secretary, said that she wished Mr. Putin could be president of the United States for just 48 hours. That way, as she put it, ''Americans don't have to worry and wake up in the morning fearful of a group that's murderous and horrific like ISIS.''

In dismissing the threat from Russia, Mr. Trump and many conservatives now, ironically, echo Mr. Obama, who in 2012 brushed off the warnings of Mitt Romney, his Republican opponent, that Russia was the United States' ''No. 1 geopolitical foe.''

''The 1980s are now calling to ask for their foreign policy back,'' Mr. Obama scoffed during a debate with Mr. Romney, a quip that some Democrats now regret.

It would be difficult to overstate how large the Soviet Union once loomed in the Republican Party's foreign policy through four decades of the Cold War. Its dissolution softened attitudes toward Russia, but some Republicans are still baffled by Mr. Trump's friendly overtures.

''It's like being raised in a church and someone says, 'Actually, no, you're a Buddhist,' '' said Stuart Stevens, a former adviser to Mr. Romney. ''The role of the Republican Party has been to tell the truth about what Russia and the Soviet Union was, not what it was pretending to be,'' he added. ''Now some conservatives have gotten into the 'let's give Russia the benefit of the doubt' business.''

The unflattering comparisons with Mr. Obama became personal in 2014 after Mr. Putin invaded Crimea, an act of aggression that was widely condemned by the United States and its allies but praised as a display of brawn and guts by many on the right.

Sarah Palin, for one, questioned Mr. Obama's ''potency'' and added that no one had any such doubts about Mr. Putin. ''People are looking at Putin as one who wrestles bears and drills for oil,'' she told Sean Hannity on Fox News.

''He's looking like a real man,'' Mr. Limbaugh declared approvingly in 2014.

Angelo Carusone, president of Media Matters, which has tracked the conservative media's depiction of the Russian president, described Mr. Putin as taking on ''a Paul Bunyan-esque persona among this audience.''

Mr. Putin's mystique for conservatives resembles in many ways the image that Mr. Trump has cultivated for himself.

Both are go-it-alone nationalists who value strength and decisiveness over thoughtful deliberation. Both have dedicated themselves to defending Christians and their faith -- Mr. Trump through his ''religious freedom'' initiatives and Mr. Putin through his strengthening of ties to the Russian Orthodox Church. Both have condemned Christian persecution in the Middle East. Both have taken a more forgiving view of human rights abuses.

''This is consistent with a nationalist, populist, authoritarian point of view,'' said William Kristol, the editor at large of the conservative Weekly Standard. That view, he added, ''would ridicule the promotion of human rights and democracy as globalism, or criticize occasionally deferring to allies when you want to keep them on board as weak, or mock worrying about public opinion in allied nations as naïe.''

''The admiration of Putin is part of that story,'' Mr. Kristol said.

Beyond foreign policy, some conservatives saw Mr. Putin as a committed warrior in the culture wars they were losing at home. In Russia Mr. Putin led a crackdown on gay rights by taking such steps as criminalizing behavior that could be seen as promoting anything other than heterosexual relationships. This has earned him praise from leaders of the Christian right like Franklin Graham, who said in 2014 that Russia was doing more than the United States to protect its children.

Writing in 2013, Pat Buchanan, the commentator whose anti-establishment, conservative presidential campaigns in the 1990s emphasized such social issues, described Mr. Putin as a natural ally.

''In the culture war for mankind's future, is he one of us?'' Mr. Buchanan wrote, quickly answering his own question. ''He is seeking to redefine the 'Us vs. Them' world conflict of the future as one in which conservatives, traditionalists and nationalists of all continents and countries stand up against the cultural and ideological imperialism of what he sees as a decadent West.''

Rudolph W. Giuliani, with Lech Walesa, left, is one of many Republicans who have praised the leadership of Vladimir V. Putin. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EVAN VUCCI/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170715ed7f0003w



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Leader Killed, U.S. Says

By MICHAEL R. GORDON 
333 words
15 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The leader of the Islamic State's branch in Afghanistan, Abu Sayed, was killed by an American drone strike this week, the Pentagon said on Friday.

The strike, on Tuesday, targeted the militants' headquarters in Kunar Province, Afghanistan.

Other members of the group were also killed in the operation, the Pentagon said in a statement, which asserted that the attack would ''significantly disrupt the terror group's plans to expand its presence in Afghanistan.''

The Islamic State, however, has proved its resilience by replacing its leaders soon after they are killed.

Mr. Sayed was chosen to lead the group in Afghanistan after his predecessor, Abdul Hasib, was killed in April during a special forces raid in Nangarhar Province, where the militant group has been active. Two United States Army Rangers were killed in the April operation, perhaps by so-called friendly fire, the Pentagon has said.

In Afghanistan, the group goes by the Islamic State in Khorasan, an ancient name for the region that includes portions of Afghanistan and Pakistan. It has sought to expand the scope of its operations in Afghanistan, but the location of the latest strike, in Kunar Province, suggests the group may be falling back from its stronghold of neighboring Nangarhar.

The Trump administration is conducting a review to determine its broader strategy to deal with the nearly 16-year-old conflict in Afghanistan. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, who had told lawmakers that he expected the review to be completed by mid-July, told reporters on Friday that it was close to completion.

''We're not going to meet some timeline if we are not ready,'' he said. ''But we're pretty close.''

As a stopgap, the White House has authorized Mr. Mattis to send nearly 4,000 troops to Afghanistan, though none appear to have been deployed so far.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170715ed7f00041



Arts; Art & Design
Fixing the Met: Art Lovers Speak

By JASON FARAGO and SOPHIE HAIGNEY 
3,634 words
14 July 2017
19:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

HELP WANTED: Stately home seeks caretaker for priceless collection of antiquities, pictures, bronzes and bric-a-brac. Successful applicant will oversee staff of 2,500, ensure upkeep, supervise purchases and promote estate’ interests at home and abroad. Manor is leaky —lanned extension delayed (owners have second home nearby). Send réumé to 1000 Fifth Avenue, Manhattan. (Those with dust allergies need not apply.)

O.K., finding a new director for the Metropolitan Museum of Art will take more than a LinkedIn posting —ut the hunt is on for a successor to Thomas P. Campbell, whose resignation last winter added a kink to the Met’ tangle of troubles. Attendance, at seven million, is at a high. Exhibitions are some of the finest anywhere. Yet as it approaches its 150th birthday, the museum lumbers under a nearly $15 million deficit; a planned new wing for modern and contemporary art has been deferred; and the Met’ optional admissions charge may be replaced with a mandatory entrance fee for out-of-towners.

A new director, expected to be named later this year, will have to plot a new path forward. But it’ still the grandest job in the art world —ven though some aspects of that job must now be shared with Daniel H. Weiss, its president, who was garlanded last month with the additional title of chief executive. (Mr. Campbell held that title previously, and at most museums the artistic head occupies the top post.) With the new director reporting to Mr. Weiss, and not the other way around, many aspects of the job-share still have to be worked out.

The Met’ lease on the Breuer runs out in 2023. Assuming the Whitney Museum of American Art doesn’ take it back, should the Met extend its lease? How can older and newer art speak to each other at the Breuer and on Fifth Avenue (and even at the Cloisters, the third location)? Can we get better food than the public cafeteria, and can we have our metal admissions badges back? Can the Met keep up its crucial, but budget-straining, efforts to digitize its collections? How should it draw a younger, more diverse audience?

The 10th man —r first woman —o serve as Met director thus already has a full inbox. But here, a range of Met-ophiles —rtists and archaeologists, chefs and curators, designers and D.J.s, playwrights and performers —ffer their own ideas and expectations for how a new director can rethink the world’ greatest museum for a new century. Some of these suggestions are bold, others more whimsical, but all of them come from people who want nothing more than to see the museum on solid ground.

These are edited excerpts from recent conversations.  Share your own tips for the Met’ new director on Facebook  .

______

Paul D. Miller (a.k.a. DJ Spooky)

Experimental and electronic artist; hip-hop musician

The average person looks at a painting for six seconds. Technology might be a good way to hold people’ attention for longer. I remember when Pokéon Go got wildly popular and everyone was running around looking for various characters, and you had all these kids gathering around these virtual watering holes. They weren’ there for six seconds; they were there for minutes. So I think museums could use augmented reality to keep people looking. You can hold your phone up to a painting and get information about it. You could have artists narrate their own work. You could have Waze bring you through the museum, or even the voice of Elvis, if you synthesized it. The Met is a perfect petri dish for a whole kaleidoscope of experiences to create more immersion in the museum. It’ important that they change and update their app constantly. I like to say we live in the world of unfinished work.

(DJ Spooky was a  resident artist  at the Met in 2012.)

______

Glenn Ligon

Visual Artist

I was at a talk where a prominent museum director was asked by a colleague, What was the most important lesson he had learned while on the job? His response was “ learned to listen to artists.”

One thing the new director needs to do is make the galleries in the Met places where artists actually want to show their work. They need to make proper galleries to show their contemporary collection. And if they don’ change the galleries right away, they need to at least rotate the collection once in a while so it doesn’ feel like it is a storage area that someone left the door open to.

(Mr. Ligon is in the Met’ collection.)

______

Takashi Murakami

Visual Artist

At the Met, the collection is just so rare. Kano Sansetsu’ screen “ld Plum”[from the Edo period, 1646] has been in the center of my heart always. I used to go see it many times when I first started living in New York —nd of course the other works surrounding it. I don’ know about the turmoil, but the Met is going to be O.K. because of the potential of the collection.

______

Ayad Akhtar

Playwright, “isgraced”Pulitzer Prize, 2013)

I remember when MoMA raised the ticket price to $20. And I heard that oddly enough, counterintuitively, admissions went up —ut I wasn’ making enough money to justify spending $20 a ticket. Because of that, I ended up going to the Met more.

______

Simon Doonan

Fashion commentator

If the Met could extend into Central Park with an outdoor sculpture garden, it could truly become a destination. There are a couple that come to mind, like the Hakone Open-Air Museum and sculpture park in Japan, or Storm King Art Center upstate. From an engagement perspective, it would be an incredible Instagram opportunity. Oh, there would also have to be a cafe. A kind of groovy al fresco eatery.

(Mr. Doonan designed displays for the Met’ “ostumes of Royal India”how.)

______

Nico Muhly

Composer

I feel like the Met has been killing it recently —“Sara Berman’ Closet” [by the artists Maira and Alex Kalman recreating the modest closet of Ms. Kalman’ mother] being an especially poignant example of using that space in a poetic and surprising way. The one thing underexplored is the Met as a space for site-specific theater. I remember as a boy watching the “esame Street”ovie “Don’ Eat the Pictures,”hich takes place at the Met —bsolutely terrifying stuff; an Egyptian boy comes back from beyond the grave and asks Big Bird to help him get his heart weighed to see if he can go to the cosmic afterlife. What you want is to hire Robert Wilson to do a live version of this in the Temple of Dendur. Can you imagine how beautiful it would be —ig Bird moving really slowly, and a small child and a heart projected on the floor and the stars visible through the roof? I would go to that.

______

Montana Simone

Owner,  Idio Gallery  , Bushwick, Brooklyn

I was thinking about my last visit to the Met, showing it off to my parents who haven’ been in town in years. I truly felt like a part of it, and then I walked outside, and my mom’, like, the David Koch Plaza? What? And it underscores something that a lot of us accept about New York —he repercussions of conservative old money underwriting culture in the city. In some ways that’ been important, but it’ also continued the direction that a lot of the politics of the country have continued downward. I would urge a new leader of the Met, even if they are not the C.E.O. and if they can’ rename the plaza, to at least show some kind of self-awareness and transparency as a public institution and hold educational programming about sustainability that will have as much of an impact as putting a climate-denier’ name on a plaza.

______

Bill Telepan

Restaurateur, chef

They have a restaurant in the Met? I would never think to go there to eat. I would say to a friend, let’ go through MoMA, and pop down to Bar Room [at the Modern restaurant] for a drink and a snack. You go to the Whitney, and after that you’l pop into Untitled. The Met Breuer has Flora, the guys from the Estela [restaurant]. So my first suggestion is: Get a good food program there, whether it’ a fancy, high-end place or not. You have this beautiful rooftop, and you could have a food element there. If you’e going to build a new wing, make sure half of it’ a restaurant by a really good restaurateur. I mean, I’l do it if they want me to.

Another idea: They should have coffee stands throughout with chairs and the tiniest little tables, and a guy with an espresso machine just hanging out. Places where you could actually sit among the El Greco paintings with a little coffee. It would keep you there. It’ be awesome.

______

Zainab Bahrani

Professor, ancient Near Eastern art and archaeology, Columbia University

One of the things that I’e dreamed about —hough maybe it’ just a pipe dream —s for the Met to create a sister relationship with museums in Iraq and, ultimately, Syria that need to be renovated and restarted. For instance, the Mosul Museum [in Iraq, looted and smashed by the Islamic State] has just been liberated from the ISIS occupation. Wouldn’ it be wonderful if they could partner with American colleagues, even over Skype? That’ one way the Met can contribute its professionalism and expertise to preserving that cultural heritage. And the Met’ own galleries for ancient Near Eastern art could use some spiffing up. Highlighting these galleries with a new installation would bring more attention to the incredibly rich art and architectural traditions of this region. This is more important than ever now, since so much is being deliberately destroyed.

(Dr. Bahrani was a curator in the department of ancient Near Eastern art at the Met in the early 1990s and has organized workshops with the Met in Istanbul and Amman.)

______

Mark Bradford

Artist

I hope the new director will be asking museumgoers, How can we serve you better? Today we have the possibility to reanimate what a museum can look like and expand the idea. A director should have the flexibility to be not just a fund-raiser but to get out, listen, be part of the community. Take a risk, maybe bring a Planned Parenthood office onto your campus. Art history is about context; it’ about the sociopolitical environment that produces art. What environment are we building now, and what will it produce? The museum could be finding creative ways to implement this sustained dialogue.

(Mr. Bradford is in the Met’ collection.)

______

Sharon Zukin

Author and sociology professor, City University of New York

The Metropolitan Museum is a national treasure, but it’ dependent on the city government and on donations to function, so maybe it’ time to rethink the way an encyclopedic museum works. They have so much work that they can’ show it, and then they try to expand the physical plant. Whatever they do requires them to raise enormous amounts of capital and justify that by getting more visitors. This grow-or-die commandment poses enormous difficulties and burdens on museums and the people who love them. One wild suggestion would be to become more decentralized, like libraries: Break down the Metropolitan Museum experience, officially, and make different hives within the museum, and charge lower admission fees to go into one specific section or another. Another possibility is to send things out of the museum on long-term loans as free installations to democratize access further. That would sure beautify the public schools.

______

Cheech Marin

Comedian, actor, founder, Cheech Marin Center for Chicano Art, Culture and Industry

Show more Chicano art! I have always said you can’ love or hate Chicano art unless you’e seen it. This is a valuable and important school of art that’ being ignored and needs shelf space.

______

Benjamin Millepied

Choreographer; artistic director, L.A. Dance Project

The Met should be open until midnight twice a week. There should be ambitious site-specific performances, which are broadcast live, and well-programmed concerts. Imagine live music and dance performances in unexpected programs on late nights. The right programming could attract a younger audience and turn the Met into the place to be. The museum also needs two terrific restaurants. There is so much to appreciate in that setting, and no place to dine.

______

Michael Bierut

Graphic designer

One of the biggest challenges they have is this simple thing called way-finding. You go up those stairs, which is an iconic New York experience, and then you go into grand hall, and it’ like waking up with amnesia in the world’ busiest train station. You forget where you are, and no one’ helping you figure out where you need to go. The museum should reward serendipity to a certain degree, and making unexpected discoveries on the way to whatever you think you were looking for. But people need more help. Curators under the leadership of the new director can figure out how to complement the collection with old-fashioned hand-held paper maps, signs people look for as a matter of course, and new technology like apps and GPS. Now it’ like doing Sudoku in some Martian-based 39-number [counting] system. It just doesn’ seem solvable.

______

David Rockwell

Architect and Tony-winning scenic designer; co-author, “pectacle.”

I think about what a kind of formidable structure the building is for kids —nd I take my kids there a lot. It’ interesting to imagine, from a family point of view, about the experience of entering the Met and how to make it more permeable, starting with those incredible steps at the front of the building. It’ one of the great places to hang out —he üer-doorstep. Performances at the base of those entry steps could be formalized, something where artists are invited. There are great architectural spaces that aren’ currently used for exhibits proper and could be used as public space in a welcoming way. It’ interesting to think about how to link the backside of the museum to Central Park that might particularly address kids and families — secret garden or art path.

______

Victoria Newhouse

Museums expert; author, “haos and Culture”2017)

For me, the Metropolitan Museum is the Louvre of the United States, and frankly I would not reimagine it. I think the Met is exactly right in terms of the curators and programmers it has. But I do think there are changes that could be made. The full board of trustees is way too big. I understand that it’ near to 100 people, and I think that makes it very difficult to manage and get meaningful input. I’e been told by people working at the museum that there are a number of people on the board who contribute very little except money. There should be some people on that board who take their participation very seriously on issues at the museum.

In terms of the direction being divided between two people, my art friends all say, Who in heaven’ name is going to want that second job if they’e answering to someone else, and if every time they come up with an idea, the money guy is going to say, Oh no, bottom line? This structure has been tried a number of times. It was tried at the Met with Bill [William H.] Luers and Philippe de Montebello. It was tried in Philadelphia, too, when Anne d’arnoncourt shared responsibility with Robert Scott. In both of those cases, it was a very problematic decision.

(Ms. Newhouse was a consultant for the architect search committee for the new modern and contemporary wing in 2016.)

______

Siri Hustvedt

Novelist, author of “ A Woman Looking at Men Looking at Women: Essays on Art, Sex, and the Mind  ”2016)

Because about 70 percent of curators in the U.S., perhaps even in the world, are women, there’ something bizarre about the fact that the Met has never had a woman director. Appointing a woman would be important from a symbolic perspective, but it’ also important that they pick a woman who thinks deeply about the museum and its role in the culture. A person who simply bemoans the numbers and the fact that change isn’ occurring quickly enough is not the answer. The question is why art by women continues to be “omen’ art,”ot just “rt.”

I’e seen Met advertisements that say, “come celebrate Women’ History Month at the Met,”nd, frankly, that strikes me as a touch condescending. The powers that be don’ really know how to address this issue. Self-interrogation would be a good place to start. The Met should have a mission statement, a full-throated and wholehearted recognition that part of the history of museums has been marginalization of women and many other people. It should be deeply a part of the museum’ mission. Though the Met has been making something of an effort —he Vigé Le Brun exhibition was great —he representation of women in their collections is pretty feeble. Since the Guerrilla Girls, we still don’ feel that the behemoth has dramatically changed.

______

Julie Gaines

Owner,  Fishs Eddy 

I have this discussion with my son, who’ a painter, all the time: What’ wrong with the Met? Several years ago, there was an exhibit at MoMA that paired older artists and newer ones. It put together Céanne’ “he Bather”ith this contemporary photograph of a teenager at the beach by Rineke Dijkstra, who I’ never even heard of before that show, and it made me think completely differently about “he Bather.”ducating people that way is more inventive than just lectures. They could do more of taking pieces that are already in the Met —ike African masks —nd pairing them with other pieces in the permanent collection. People who want more information will get the audio recordings, but there’ also a way to teach through art. We look at it through our own lenses.

It would also be great if there were some rooms that had fewer paintings. Psychologically it would make you look at art differently. Right now, the pieces are all placed more or less at the same height, and the same distance apart. It’ monotonous. Maybe if they could kind of change the permanent collection up and give more importance to a Courbet, or some other small painting, it would allow you to sit and look at it. You’e talking to someone who moves their art up and down as a hobby. I nail and then unnail things all the time. In my next life, I’ going to be a curator.

______

Judith Bernstein

Visual Artist

They should make a conscious effort to feature more art by women and to take more chances. They shouldn’ wait until someone has been around for 20 years. I have a vested interest in work that’ sexual, and political. The Met should have a show called “he History of Political Art.”hey could start with Goya and then move on to Kähe Kollwitz [1867–945], and political art that deals with the Vietnam War —nd art that deals with AIDS. They could put the sexual political stuff, the feminists and L.G.B.T.Q. artists, on display. Donald Trump is on everyone’ mind, and it’ important to address this issue at this moment.

______

Hank Willis Thomas

Artist and a founder of For Freedoms, an artist-run ‘uper PAC’

The Met and the American Museum of Natural History really set the tone for how visitors understand history and culture. The organization of a museum helps create those narratives. At the Met, if you walk in and go to the left, you have Greece and Rome and beyond that, Africa. And to the right, you have Egypt. And the question for me is, Where is Egypt? Oh yeah, I think Egypt’ in Africa. If the Met’ trying to be objective, objectively Egypt should be closer to Africa.

A lot of students learn about history through art, and the narrative of anything related to Africa and Polynesia and indigenous America is still laden with this notion of primitivism. And if I’ a kid in the Met, I wouldn’ really see an acknowledgment that Egypt, one of the foundations of civilization and of modern intellectual life, was part of Africa and that Egyptians had a range of skin tones, but they definitely didn’ look like Elizabeth Taylor. The excision of Egypt from Africa has been so successful —as there ever been a movie made with Africans playing Egyptians? The responsibility of museums is to correct those narratives and explain: What did those people really look like? What was their art like?

(Mr. Thomas has organized public programs with the education department at the Met.)

Share your tips for the Met’ new director on Facebook.

______

Additional interviews by Robin Pogrebin, Hilarie M. Sheets, Roslyn Sulcas, Michael Walker. Edited by Barbara Graustark. Animations by Fraser Croall.

Adam Simpson | Adam Simpson | Adam Simpson | Adam Simpson | Adam Simpson | Adam Simpson 

Document NYTFEED020170714ed7e0076d



Contests
The Learning Network
Summer Reading Contest, Week 5 | What Interested You Most in The Times This Week? Why?

By KATHERINE SCHULTEN 
794 words
14 July 2017
13:11
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Welcome to Week 5 of our Summer Reading Contest, which runs until Aug. 24. What did you read, watch or listen to in The Times this week?

Whatever got your attention, just post a comment here by July 21 at 7 a.m. Eastern and tell us all about it.

We hope you’l click around nytimes.com and find your own great articles, features and multimedia, but we know that not everyone who participates has a Times subscription. Because all links to Times content from our site are free, every week we try to help by posting interesting pieces from a variety of sections.

For example, this week you may have read front-page news articles like ...

Russian Dirt on Clinton? ‘ Love It,’onald Trump Jr. Said

An Iceberg the Size of Delaware Just Broke Away From Antarctica

Military Plane Crashes in Mississippi, Killing at Least 16

Iraq Declares Victory Over \b ISIS\b0  in Mosul

Campus Rape Policies Get a New Look as the Accused Get DeVos’ Ear

Or, maybe you found stories like these from the Style, Sports, International, Magazine, Business, Arts, U.S. and Food sections:

Where Does the Time Go? You Can Find Out, if You Dare

Moon Express Sets Its Sights on Deliveries to the Moon and Beyond

The Original Fake News: Soccer Transfers

Examining the Gulf of Distance Between ‘a’nd ‘aha’

When Just Vanilla Won’ Do, How About a Blueberry Pie Oreo?

Long After Protests, Students Shun the University of Missouri

Shunned During Her Period, Nepali Woman Dies of Snakebite

Baseball’ Story So Far

Where and How to See the Total Eclipse This Summer in the U.S.

Saudi Arabia to Offer Physical Education Classes for Girls

Harvard Panel Suggests Ending a Tradition: Exclusive Clubs

The Pop-Up Employer: Build a Team, Do the Job, Say Goodbye

Girl Scouts Troop Will Expand to 15 Homeless Shelters

How to Throw a Relaxed Parisian Dinner Party

Venus Williams, Defying Age and Skeptics, Reaches Wimbledon Final

How to Stop Breaking Up

Or, maybe you were more into multimedia like ...

Video | Ants Can Build an Eiffel Tower (Sort Of)

Interactive Quiz | If You Fix This, You Fix a Big Piece of the Climate Puzzle

Photos | Start Your Engines:Photography’ Romance with the Car

Photos | The Nebulous Passage Into Womanhood

Infographic and Article | Why Some Men Don’ Work: Video Games Have Gotten Really Good

Video | Studying Sharks, Up Close and Personal

Photos | A Mausoleum for Endangered Species

Photos and Poems | America Today, In Vision and Verse

Or, you might be a fan of the Opinion section, finding pieces like ...

Cliffhangers Are Ruining the Golden Age of TV

Racism Is Everywhere, So Why Not Move South?

My Son, the Jihadist

My Time Is Past. It’ Your Chance Now.

Who Do We Think Of as Poor?

Podcasts for the Recent College Grad

A Conspiracy of Dunces

How We Are Ruining America  and ‘t’ Not the Fault of the Sandwich Shop’ Readers Debate David Brooks’ Column

Whatever caught your eye, tell us about it in the comments.

Need more details? The contest rules are all here, and you can read the work of last year’ winners here. A quick overview, though:

•ou can choose from anything published in the print paper or on NYTimes.com in 2017, including videos, graphics and photographs. (In your response, please include the URL or headline of the piece you pick.)

•e’l post this question each Friday from today through Aug. 18, and you’l have until the next Friday morning to respond with your picks. Then we’l close that post and open a new one with the same question.

•e’l choose at least one favorite answer to feature on our site each week. Winners from this week will be announced on Aug. 1.

•eel free to participate each week, but we allow only one submission per person per week.

•he contest is open to students ages 13 to 19 from anywhere in the world.

_________

While this is the only Student Opinion question we’l be asking this summer, here are 179 questions from this school year, all still open to comment.

Carl Richards | Tim Lahan | Donald Trump Jr. received an email on June 3, 2016, promising dirt on Hillary Clinton. The information was described as being part of Russia's support for his father’ presidential bid. His reply? “ love it.” By Drew Jordan | New research shows how ants band together to survive floods. Find out why these tiny creatures are surprisingly good architects when they all work together. | By JAMES GORMAN and MAE RYAN 

Document NYTFEED020170714ed7e003h1



National Desk; SECTA
Single-Minded at Homeland Security

By RON NIXON 
1,151 words
14 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
13
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- When President Trump addressed employees of the Department of Homeland Security, just five days after being sworn in, he essentially had one issue on his mind: cracking down on illegal immigration.

Absent from the speech was any mention of the department's other responsibilities, like protecting the nation's critical infrastructure, including computer systems, ensuring airline passenger safety or even protecting the president himself.

The address in January, critics said, reflected the president's nearly single-minded priority for the Department of Homeland Security, which employs nearly 250,000 people in seven agencies.

''It's all immigration, it's the wall and it's enforcement,'' said Juliette Kayyem, a Homeland Security official in the Obama administration. ''Nothing about FEMA or cyber or counterintelligence,'' she added, referring to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. ''Just immigration all the time.''

Homeland Security officials reject the idea that the agency is too focused on immigration. Officials noted that Mr. Trump signed an executive order on cybersecurity and has proposed adding money and staff to the agency's cybersecurity efforts.

The officials add that the president appointed Brock Long, an experienced emergency management official, to head FEMA. Mr. Long was confirmed, 95 to 4, by the Senate.

They also point out that John F. Kelly, the Homeland Security secretary, has taken a number of steps to protect air travel, including a temporary ban on portable electronics from some countries and implementing new screening measures to thwart attacks.

''No one is going to tell you that immigration and border security aren't priorities; they are the priorities that the president ran on,'' said Jonathan Hoffman, assistant secretary for public affairs at the department. ''But the focus on these issues isn't so much that we have neglected any part of the Department of Homeland Security.''

But so far the Trump administration has focused on illegal immigration: building a wall along the border with Mexico, hiring thousands of new Border Patrol and Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents and deporting tens of thousands of people in the country illegally.

Illegal immigration was the centerpiece of Mr. Trump's presidential campaign, drawing large crowds as he promised to build a border wall and deport millions in the country illegally. But security experts said the country faces a number of continuing threats ranging from domestic terrorists to attacks from political extremists and cyberattacks against the nation's election systems that demand the full attention of the Department of Homeland Security.

''John Kelly and his staff have a wide portfolio,'' said Tom Ridge, who served as the first Homeland Security secretary, under President George W. Bush. ''I hope the White House realizes that they have an enormous job in protecting the border and the nation's infrastructure from cyberattacks. They can't be used just to keep campaign promises.''

The budget proposal Mr. Trump submitted to Congress prioritizes agencies and programs that target illegal immigration.

Under the plan, funding would increase just over 21 percent for Customs and Border Protection, the parent agency of the Border Patrol. Much of the increase would be used to build a border wall. But the agency would also be charged with hiring 5,000 new Border Patrol agents, even as the number of people crossing the border illegally has declined. Last month, 21,659 border crossers were caught, compared with 45,722 in June 2016, a 53 percent decrease.

Immigrations and Customs Enforcement's budget would increase even more, nearly 30 percent. The new funding would pay for more deportation officers, detention centers and money to fly or bus unauthorized immigrants back to their home countries.

But other services and programs within Homeland Security would have their funding cut. The proposed budget includes cuts to the Coast Guard, elimination of the Transportation Security Administration's teams of uniformed armed officers that sweep public facilities and shutdowns of several of the department's national labs, including one in New York City that helps detect nuclear radiation. Several grant programs that pay for local police officers in airports or those that fight extremism would be cut or reprogrammed.

For example, Life After Hate, a group that works to deradicalize neo-Nazis and members of white supremacist groups, was slated to get $400,000 in the final days of the Obama administration. But Homeland Security canceled funding to the group in favor of groups and law enforcement agencies that target Muslim extremists.

Cutting grant programs that combat domestic extremism is a mistake when attacks by white supremacist and other hate groups are on the rise, said Erroll Southers, a former F.B.I. agent who is the director of a program at the University of Southern California that studies homegrown extremism.

''You can't just focus on threats by ISIS or other groups, although it's important,'' he said, referring to the Islamic State. ''But there are real threats here at home that have to be addressed.''

Mr. Hoffman, the Homeland Security spokesman, said that the agency's critics were misguided and that their criticism did not reflect the day-to-day operation of the department.

''We're not out there talking about cybersecurity, T.S.A., FEMA and other issues every day, but the focus is on it every day,'' he said. ''All the components and agencies are sufficiently funded to do their jobs.''

Senator Kamala Harris, Democrat of California, a frequent critic of the department, said the White House bore a large share of the blame for what she considered the agency's overemphasis on targeting immigrants who were in the country illegally but posed little threat.

But she said Mr. Kelly should also be held accountable for the agency's immigration priorities. Ms. Harris was one of nearly a dozen Democratic senators who did not vote to confirm him.

''During his confirmation hearing, Mr. Kelly came across as this person who would be a moderating voice in the Trump administration, someone who would speak truth to power,'' said Ms. Harris, a member of the Homeland Security Committee. ''But that's not what we're seeing from him as secretary of Homeland Security. Under him, this agency has seemed eager to carry out the destructive immigration policies of this administration.''

Leon E. Panetta, a former director of the C.I.A. and secretary of defense, said Mr. Kelly was simply following orders.

''John Kelly is being a good Marine,'' Mr. Panetta said. ''He was loyal to me, and he's loyal to his commander in chief. I don't think some of the things the department is doing reflect the views of John Kelly.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

President Trump at the Department of Homeland Security. He has made cracking down on illegal immigration a priority. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170714ed7e0004y



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
OpEd; SECT
 ISIS ' defeat, and freedom in Kurdistan

By AZIZ AHMAD 
1,134 words
14 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The International New York Times
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq -- Flanked by senior military commanders, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq on Monday announced the defeat of the Islamic State in Mosul. The bloody, nine-month reconquest of Iraq's second-largest city after three years of occupation by the terror group was achieved thanks to close military cooperation between our Kurdish pesh merga forces and the Iraqi Army.

But there are still large areas of the country where the Islamic State is dug in, and much remains to be done. For the Kurds, the partnership with Iraqi forces makes a long-overdue political reckoning necessary and urgent.

This is why Iraqi Kurdistan will take the important step of holding a referendum on independence on Sept. 25. We believe this vote will give us a mandate to pursue a negotiated settlement with Mr. Abadi -- and political recognition from his government is paramount.

The outcome of an agreement between Erbil, the capital of Iraqi Kurdistan, and Baghdad, the Iraqi capital, will have repercussions far beyond our borders. The hope of the United States administration for a second, moderate Iraqi government in 2018 relies on buy-in from both the Kurds and the Iraqis.

Washington's default position has been that a unified Iraq within its current borders offers a viable future for the country. That view needs to be overhauled. This failed policy has threatened the very fabric of our societies, both within and beyond Iraq's borders, fueling repression at home and conflict abroad. Washington should now encourage Baghdad to negotiate with Erbil, to achieve a realignment in the region on our own terms that can shape bilateral relations between Iraq and Kurdistan.

This would be the culmination of decades of struggle for Kurdish self-determination. My own journey along this road began in March 1991. It was a day that should have brought regeneration for the Kurds of Iraq after an uprising against Saddam Hussein; instead, panic spread through my hometown, Zakho, in Iraqi Kurdistan. As I walked home beside my mother that spring evening, the sound of a nearby explosion sent us dashing for our neighbor's bomb shelter.

Each year, I revisit that moment in the dark underground retreat filled with shaken mothers. Later that night, my family squeezed into a truck carrying dozens of others to the nearby foothills for a five-day trek to refuge from Saddam Hussein in Turkey. That journey on foot across the snow-covered mountains of northern Iraq remains seared in my memory.

A century after the breakdown of the Ottoman boundaries, Iraq remains a forced union of peoples whose national aspirations and sense of identity have been suppressed. Members of my family spent decades in exile from successive Iraqi governments that, since the turn of the 20th century, butchered generations of Kurdish men, women and children who struggled to find their place in this artificial state.

Thus there has always been a lingering, unresolved question of identity for the Kurds of Iraq. That identity will finally achieve resolution when the people of Iraqi Kurdistan vote in the referendum. This expression of popular will should not only close a long chapter of grief but also bring new certainty and stability to an increasingly volatile region plagued by sectarian conflict and bloodshed.

Inside Iraq, a vote for independence will reconfigure the relationship with Baghdad as a just agreement between two sovereign nations. In the past, the forced unity with Baghdad crippled our efforts in the fight against the Islamic State. Even as the extremist group overran the country, Baghdad continued to lobby against Western support for the Kurds.

This foolish expedient put us all at risk. It created an absurd situation in which the central government funneled billions of dollars for the administration of services in territory held by the Islamic State even as it suspended the Kurdistan Regional Government's share of the national budget. Rather than come together to defeat a common existential threat, Baghdad blocked licenses for nonlethal equipment and armored vehicles for Kurdish security forces, further feeding ingrained resentments.

I saw the lifesaving difference that night-vision goggles could make for pesh merga sentries facing unseen adversaries in Mosul. By contrast, Baghdad's Shiite militias were armed to the teeth with American gear, and their veterans receive state benefits.

In December 2016, I was part of a high-level Kurdish delegation that visited the White House to discuss our national aspirations. During a passionate exchange, we were asked to delay our dream of statehood for the sake of Iraq's war against the Islamic State. We have heard this argument before, many times.

In 2003, we agreed to American requests to give the state of Iraq a chance. Since then, Baghdad's failure to keep its promises of genuine partnership together with greater autonomy has hardened our resolve. We reject the premise that our independence would destabilize the country. The state of Iraq is prone to instability; the crises that threaten to tear it apart at the seams will not end with the Islamic State's defeat. The country's polarized political system, which is characterized by the privileged position of its Shiite leadership, will endure, leaving minorities, including Iraqi Sunnis, marginalized. It was precisely this toxic political space that allowed the Islamic State to emerge.

In the next six months, the Islamic State will be militarily defeated in Iraq. But rather than a repeating of past mistakes, the war's imminent end should lead to a realistic assessment in Erbil, Baghdad and Washington about the country's inevitable next chapter. Although we have differences on borders, an agreement in principle to live alongside each other as two independent states would be a meaningful start.

This move would not change Iraq's fragile borders. It would instead formalize a relationship with Baghdad and our neighbors on an equal footing to define economic, security and trade terms. And just as neither Erbil nor Baghdad interfered with Iran's recent elections or Turkey's referendum, we expect those countries to recognize that this is a decision for Iraq and its peoples.

The risk of sticking with a broken model is considerable. But a return to the unending conflict to which Iraq has been condemned for much of the past century is not an option. The Kurds are tired of war. We want to live in peace, alongside neighbors governed by shared values and the rule of law.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Aziz Ahmad (@azizkahmad) is an assistant to the chancellor of the Kurdistan Region Security Council.

Printing flags of Kurdistan in northern Iraq in June. SAFIN HAMED/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES 

Document NYTF000020170714ed7e0003u



Foreign Desk; SECTA
An Occupier Of Wall Street, Dead in Syria

By MEGAN SPECIA 
808 words
13 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Robert Grodt was a volunteer medic at the Occupy Wall Street protests in 2011, when he pulled Kaylee Dedrick, who had just been pepper-sprayed in the face, out of the crowd to treat her.

The pair quickly hit it off, and when video of Ms. Dedrick being sprayed in the face captured the world's attention, the spotlight turned to their budding romance. They again garnered media attention the next year, when they had a daughter -- quickly nicknamed ''Occubaby'' -- because she was conceived in the protest camp in Manhattan's Zuccotti Park where the pair had been camped out.

But then he made a dangerous decision that few young Westerners have made -- joining a Kurdish militia fighting in the Syrian War.

On Monday, Kurdish fighters announced that Mr. Grodt died on the outskirts of Raqqa, Syria.

Mr. Grodt, 28, had no military training and no previous connection to Syria. But he found himself on the front line of one of the most dangerous conflicts in the world.

''Rob felt strongly enough that he was willing to risk and ultimately give his life,'' said Ronald L. Kuby, a civil rights lawyer who met Mr. Grodt and Ms. Dedrick at the Occupy protest. ''It was a powerful vision.''

Mr. Grodt's family was told of his death by the State Department on Friday, said his mother, Tammy Grodt, but has few details on the circumstances of his death.

What they do have are two videos featuring Mr. Grodt and posted by the Kurdish militia he joined, the People's Protection Units, known as Y.P.G. One clip posted in June details his rationale for joining the group; the second was released on Tuesday when the Y.P.G. announced he had been killed.

In the video, Mr. Grodt says he joined the militia because he was committed to the Kurdish independence movement. Kurds, members of a stateless ethnic group, have been fighting for autonomy in the region for decades.

''My reason for joining the Y.P.G. was to help the Kurdish people in their struggle for autonomy,'' Mr. Grodt says. He also says he wants to fight ISIS.

The Y.P.G. has become a major player in the Syrian conflict, making up the bulk of coalition ground forces fighting the Islamic State in parts of the country. Although the coalition is backed by the United States, many of the Y.P.G. leaders have roots in the Kurdistan Workers' Party, or P.K.K., which is on the State Department's list of foreign terror organizations.

The coalition has pushed closer to the Islamic State stronghold of Raqqa in recent weeks, trying to wrest the city from the extremist group.

Mr. Grodt's mother said she saw her son's decision to join the militia as an extension of a life spent fighting for what he saw as a noble cause, and a penchant for fighting for the oppressed.

She remembered when he told her that he was hitchhiking across the United States from his home in California to join the Occupy Wall Street protest in New York.

''It was hard to let him go,'' she said. ''I wasn't against it but I did tell him, 'You are a braver, more adventurous person than I am.' He was a medic for the movement, so it was not just to be there to cause upset. He was there for the solutions.''

She said that in Syria, he hoped to be part of reconstruction of areas destroyed during battle, and he wanted to raise awareness for the Kurdish cause.

Mr. Grodt's sister, Meghann Conforti, said he had explained to her that he would be on the front line, information he initially kept from his mother.

After Mr. Grodt left the United States, he kept in sporadic contact with his family over Facebook and Skype, and he often spoke with Ms. Dedrick and their daughter.

On the same day that it announced Mr. Grodt's death, the Y.P.G. announced the death of two other foreign fighters: Nicholas Alan Warden, an American, and a British citizen, Luke Rutter.

Mrs. Grodt said she last spoke to her son in May. The recent intensifying of fighting in the region had made it harder for him to get in touch, she said.

The clip offers a final message to his family.

''Just know that I love you all, and there is a lot that goes unsaid,'' Mr. Grodt says, before directly addressing his 4-year-old, Teagan. ''To my daughter, I am sorry that I am not there.''

Robert Grodt, a medic during the Occupy Wall Street protests, in a video before he was killed in Syria. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROJAVA DEFENSE UNITS/Y.P.G.) 

Document NYTF000020170713ed7d0006a



opinion
The Challenges After Mosul; Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
697 words
12 July 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Iraq’ prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, and Iraqi security forces deserved to celebrate after re-establishing control over Mosul, which the Islamic State occupied for three years in its bloody quest for a caliphate. The celebration should be brief. There is still plenty of urgent work to be done —y Iraqis, the United States, regional neighbors and others —o stabilize Iraq and Syria while also working to counter ISIS’nsidious ideology. And a new report about the high civilian casualty rate demands that President Trump and the Pentagon rethink how the war is being fought.

The focus among ISIS’oes has been killing the terrorists in Iraq and in Syria, where American-backed Syrian forces are closer to recapturing ISIS headquarters, in Raqqa. The longer-term challenge will be addressing the complex factors that have created conditions for the group to thrive, including destructive rivalries between Sunni and Shiite Muslims, corruption and the failure of governments to meet their citizens’conomic and security needs.

In Mosul, there are pockets of resistance and residual threats from ISIS sleeper cells, suicide bombers and houses rigged with explosives. Any satisfaction over the military success must be tempered by the high death toll, with perhaps over 1,000 Iraqi soldiers and hundreds, if not thousands, of civilians killed in nine months of fighting. ISIS used civilians as human shields, while Iraqi and the American-led coalition forces could have done more to protect civilians, says a new report by Amnesty International.

Mosul residents have been left traumatized by the psychological, sexual and physical violence suffered during three years of ISIS control. The city has been devastated, including the iconic Al Nuri mosque and much of the rest of its religious and cultural heritage. At least $1 billion is needed for reconstruction so that thousands of displaced Iraqis can return home. The coalition of nations that joined with America to fight ISIS has raised funds through the United Nations to rebuild Iraq and Syria; some are meeting in Washington this week to decide on future steps.

The obvious question is, what comes next? The Trump administration has so far failed to put forward a comprehensive strategy to deal with postwar reconstruction in Mosul and other challenges. The White House is reportedly debating whether to get involved in Iraq’ long-term recovery, the kind of overseas venture Mr. Trump disparaged during the election campaign. His proposal to greatly reduce the State Department aid budget would limit what America could do. Iraqis bear the primary responsibility for stabilizing their country, but they cannot do it without help.

One unanswered question is how to ensure that Iraq’ Shiite-led government guarantees the Sunni minority security and brings Sunnis into the political process. Its failure to do so, dating back to 2003, when the Americans invaded and deposed Saddam Hussein, created the fertile ground in which ISIS flourished. Mr. Abadi has been more inclusive than his predecessor, but there is a long way to go. Serious efforts are also needed to curb corruption, which undermines public trust.

Tensions between Kurds and Iraqis in northern Iraq must be managed, as must Kurdish aspirations for independence in Iraqi Kurdistan. Preventing Iran from expanding its influence in Iraq and in Syria, where with Russia it is a major ally of the Assad regime, is also important. Left unaddressed, such situations will continue to roil Iraqi politics and lead to new conflicts that ISIS can exploit.

Another dilemma is what to do about the ISIS fighters who are even now melting back into local communities to regroup, not just in the Middle East but in far-flung parts of the globe. There must also be efforts at the local level to persuade young people not to join militant groups that manipulate Islam for violent purposes.

Iraq squandered one opportunity to remake itself into a stable and pluralistic country. With ISIS on the run, it should seize this second chance.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY FELIPE DANA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

Document INHT000020170713ed7c0000i



The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
‘he Daily’ Donald Trump Jr.’ Deadline

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
621 words
12 July 2017
11:44
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device : On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

It was Tuesday morning. The New York Times had emails between Donald Trump Jr. and a trusted intermediary about setting up a meeting to discuss information that “ould incriminate Hillary and her dealings with Russia and would be very useful to your father.”

The reporters working on the article called Donald Trump Jr. for comment, telling him that he had until 11 a.m. to comment. An hour before that deadline, he gave a statement —on Twitter and to the world.

On today’ episode:

•att Apuzzo, one of the reporters who has been investigating the ties between the Trump campaign and Russia, discusses unearthing Donald Trump Jr.’ emails and demystifies the term “ollusion.”

•e hear from Rukmini Callimachi and her producer, Andy Mills, as they travel through the streets of Mosul in the hours after the Iraqi government declared victory over Islamic State militants.

Background reading:

•ussian dirt on Clinton? “I love it,”Donald Trump Jr. said in an email.

•Photographs of what \b ISIS\b0  left behind in Mosul.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

On your iPhone or iPad:

Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “he Daily.”

Once you’e on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “ubscribe”utton to have new episodes sent to your phone free.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

On your Android phone or tablet:

You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, managing producer; Lynsea Garrison, producer; Rachel Quester, producer; Andy Mills, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director; Pedro Rosado, studio manager.

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

“his is obviously very high level and sensitive information but is part of Russia and its government’ support for Mr. Trump,”he email to Donald Trump Jr. said. “f it’ what you say I love it,”e replied. | Matt York/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170712ed7c001xh



Foreign Desk; SECTA
What  ISIS  Left Behind in Mosul

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
226 words
12 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A sword used in public executions, a ruined church and a child's backpack laden with explosives. These are some of the visible signs of the Islamic State's three-year rule over the Iraqi city of Mosul that Rukmini Callimachi, a New York Times correspondent, saw as she toured the ruins this week. The Iraqi military declared victory over the extremist group, but its legacy can still be seen on the damaged streets of the city.

Churches, like mosques, were crucial hideouts for Islamic State members. They assumed coalition forces would be reluctant to bomb such sites.; A backpack, decorated with a kitten, that contained sachets of white powder. Soldiers said it was C4, a plastic explosive.; Inside a school, the Islamic State, which rejects Western iconography, had blurred out the faces of Dora the Explorer and Donald Duck.; A sword found in the western part of the city. Iraqi soldiers said militants had used the weapon to behead people in public executions.; Iraq officially declared victory over the Islamic State in Mosul on Sunday, but a day later artillery could be heard in pockets of the city; Visiting journalists were allowed into the area only if they were traveling in Humvees. This is a view from inside one. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RUKMINI CALLIMACHI) 

Document NYTF000020170712ed7c0004y



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Iraq Celebrates A Win in Mosul As Rifts Widen

By TIM ARANGO; Falih Hassan contributed reporting. 
1,235 words
11 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq -- The fighting is all but over in Mosul, and the billboards are already up: hastily raised signs in which the government urged the city's Sunni residents to ''turn the page'' from the terrorists of the Islamic State.

As Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi visited Mosul to declare victory and call for unity, civilians on the longer-secured east side of the city danced and waved Iraqi flags. Some called for brotherhood between Sunnis and Shiites, or chanted, ''By our souls and blood, we sacrifice for you, Iraq!''

It is a moment for Iraqis to celebrate after nearly nine months of bloody warfare against the Sunni extremists of the Islamic State. But despite the flaring of hope for a new national unity, the government's costly victory in Mosul and the questions hanging over its aftermath feel more like the next chapter in the long story of Iraq's unraveling.

Most pressing is the need to bring back hundreds of thousands of displaced Sunni civilians. But Iraq has failed to rebuild and resettle some other communities freed from the Islamic State as tensions between the Sunni minority and the majority Shiites still undermine efforts to reunite the country.

Reports of past abuses by the Shiite-controlled government and its security forces and militia allies against Sunni families have kept sectarian divisions fresh. And with no sectarian reconciliation process to speak of, any setback in the resettling of Mosul could dangerously add to the list of grievances.

For the mostly Sunni residents of Mosul, there are the devastating aftereffects of living under the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, ISIL or Daesh. And there is deep doubt and fear over what will happen to them next.

''The people of Mosul need to be psychologically treated and rehabilitated through long-term programs,'' said Intisar al-Jibouri, a member of Parliament from Mosul. ''They have lost family members, been tortured, beaten for silly reasons by ISIS.''

Concerns are growing that Shiite militias that mobilized in other parts of the country to fight the Islamic State could turn their guns on one another in a scramble for power. And the thoughts of many in Iraq's Sunni community have stayed fixed on revenge against their neighbors who supported the Islamic State, with increasing reports of violent reprisals.

The Kurds, who have operated an autonomous enclave in the north since the 1990s, are moving quickly to hold a referendum on independence in September, despite pleas from American diplomats to hold off.

So, the end of the Mosul battle, even with the Islamic State still in control of other areas of the country, resurfaces a vital question that has been asked ever since the modern and multisectarian state of Iraq was created from the ashes of World War I: Can the country hold together?

At great cost in lives and property, Iraqis have shown that they can defeat the Islamic State militarily. But whether they are up to the political challenges to bring the country together again -- or even get the lights turned on in Mosul, or bring the displaced back home, for that matter -- is another question entirely.

''Right now we are only fighting Daesh militarily,'' said Jabar Yawar, the secretary general of the pesh merga, the Kurdish security forces in northern Iraq.

As for politics and governance, Mr. Yawar, whose men participated in the early phases of the Mosul battle last fall, said: ''There is nothing, no plan. We are fighting, and that's it.''

Hoshyar Zebari, Iraq's former foreign minister, a Kurd originally from Mosul, said, ''Everyone is in a hurry to achieve a military victory, without regard for the destruction or the day after.''

Mr. Zebari is now working to support the Kurdish referendum, which is likely to go forward despite objections from the United States, Turkey and Iran. Most expect a resounding ''yes'' vote, given the depth of feeling among Kurds to have their own state.

''Forget Kurdistan,'' said Masrour Barzani, the chancellor of the Kurdistan Region Security Council and the area's top intelligence official. ''Is the rest of Iraq united? Even the Arabs in Iraq are not united.''

He continued: ''We are not the reason Iraq is falling apart. I think Iraq is a fabricated state. It was built on the wrong foundations.''

And then there is Syria. The civil war across the border, as much as the sectarian policies of the former prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, helped the Islamic State regenerate in Iraq after its predecessor, Al Qaeda in Iraq, was largely eradicated. The group was able to expand into Syria before sweeping across the border in 2014 and taking Mosul.

Without peace in Syria, officials say, there is little chance for peace and stability in Iraq.

''Syria and Iraq are closely connected,'' Mr. Maliki said in an interview this year. ''If the situation in Syria is unstable, Iraq will be unstable.''

When asked about the future of Iraq after the Islamic State, Mr. Maliki said: ''The state cannot control the situation. The coming phase will be bad.''

With the larger questions hanging over the country, the immediate challenge of stabilizing Mosul is monumental, especially in the city's west side. The fight has essentially turned the city into two, divided by the Tigris River. The west is a gray, dusty wasteland of flattened buildings and upturned, charred trucks; even the windows of the cars civilians are driving have been blown out. Cross the bridge, though, and suddenly the world emerges in light and color, with shops and restaurants open, and loud traffic jams.

Fighting continued on Monday in a small patch of the old city, and security forces there rescued two more girls from Iraq's Yazidi religious minority who had been held as sex slaves. The United Nations, meanwhile, put out an urgent call for funding from other nations to help the nearly 700,000 civilians still displaced from the fighting.

All day long on Monday, Iraqi state television played patriotic songs in honor of the security forces, and later in the evening, a news flash alerted that Mr. Abadi would make a ''historic'' speech, surrounded by soldiers. The prime minister, once again, declared victory in Mosul, saying, ''Iraq is now more united than ever,'' and he declared Tuesday a national holiday of celebration.

In the skies over Mosul, Iraqi airplanes dropped three million leaflets on a city where many of the residents are no longer there.

Each leaflet showed a map of Mosul in the colors of the Iraqi flag -- red, white and black -- with the message: ''Mosul has been returned to the bosom of Iraq.''

Iraqi soldiers walked along a damaged street in Mosul on Sunday. Fighting continued on Monday in a small patch of the city's west side, a gray wasteland of flattened buildings and charred trucks. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FELIPE DANA/ASSOCIATED PRESS); A federal police officer waved an Iraqi flag during a celebration on Sunday in Mosul after the government declared victory in a bloody nine-month campaign against the Islamic State in the city. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FADEL SENNA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES); A destroyed bridge in Mosul. Now that the militants have been driven out, the long process of rebuilding and resettling begins. (PHOTOGRAPH BY THAIER AL-SUDANI/REUTERS) (A6) 

Document NYTF000020170711ed7b0005g



Europe Edition
Briefing
Mosul, Hamburg, Wimbledon: Your Monday Briefing

By PATRICK BOEHLER 
1,305 words
10 July 2017
06:15
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up .)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•raq’ prime minister declared victory  and congratulated his armed forces for wresting Mosul, the country’ second-largest city, from the Islamic State.

But government troops were still mopping up pockets of resistance and expected guerrilla attacks for weeks to come. Analysts warn that ISIS, despite its losses, remains a potent force for inspiring global terrorism .

Meanwhile, the U.S., Russia and Jordan agreed on fostering a cease-fire  in Syria’ southwest. Peace talks in Geneva resume today .

_____

•he residents of Hamburg, Germany, are assessing ( and cleaning up ) the damage left behind by violent clashes on the sidelines  of the G-20 summit meeting.

In a victory for Chancellor Angela Merkel , world leaders declared  they would move forward on climate change without the U.S. It was also a sign that European leaders have stopped trying to paper over their differences  with the Trump administration.

For President Trump, the trip to Europe was a surprising early high point in his presidency. Especially in Poland, he found that there might be a market for conservative nationalism .

_____

•ussia cheered  Mr. Trump’ meeting with President Vladimir Putin , and Mr. Trump took to Twitter to declare that it was time for the U.S. to work constructively with the Kremlin, despite the invasion of Ukraine and meddling in the American presidential election.

Mr. Trump announced, then backed away from, a potential cybersecurity initiative with Moscow, a shift that prompted bipartisan derision .

White House advisers told our reporters that Mr. Trump’ eldest son agreed to meet with a Kremlin-connected Russian lawyer  during the U.S. presidential election after being promised damaging information about Hillary Clinton .

They met at Trump Tower  on June 9, 2016, along with Paul Manafort , then the Trump campaign chairman, and Jared Kushner , the president’ son-in-law.

_____

•“e will revolt against injustice.”

In Turkey, hundreds of thousands of protesters arrived in Istanbul  in the culmination of a three-week march from Ankara that was led by politicians from the main opposition party.

Participants condemned President Recep Tayyip Erdogan ’ widening crackdown on dissent after a failed coup last July.

Rex Tillerson , the U.S. secretary of state, “raised the Turkish people —rave men and women”ho “tood up against coup plotters and defended their democracy,”s he met his Turkish counterpart in Ankara  on Sunday. He did not mention the crackdown.

_____

•teep mountain climbs and daredevil descents made the Tour de France’ Stage 9 the most grueling so far . Several riders, including Richie Porte, above, crashed. Chris Froome retained his overall lead.

At Wimbledon, all the fourth-round singles matches will be played on Manic Monday . “ love this day,”ominic Thiem’ coach told us. “verything seems possible.”ere’ today’ schedule .

Finally, Wayne Rooney, one of the best soccer players England has produced, returned to Everton F.C., where his career began. For the club, it was a decision made with the heart rather than the head, our correspondent writes .

_____

Business

•he cost of electric cars is falling much faster than expected , based in part on a plunge in battery prices and aggressive policies in China and Europe.

•he arrest of a Volkswagen executive suggests that U.S. federal investigators examining the company’ emissions scandal could seek to pressure lower-level employees  to testify against their superiors.

• group of news organizations in the U.S. is seeking bargaining rights  against Facebook and Google over the online behemoths’ominance in digital advertising and distribution.

•AT&T ’ $85.4 billion bid for Time Warner is mired in uncertainty , as White House critics fear potential political interference and business leaders watch for a precedent to their own acquisitions.

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets .

In the News

• o one appeared to have been injured by a fire that erupted at Camden Lock Market, a popular tourist destination in London. [ Associated Press ]

•irefighters in London say a lack of equipment, particularly fire engines with sufficiently long ladders, impeded rescue efforts during the Grenfell Tower blaze. [ The New York Times ]

•n Kiev, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said that the U.S. would not lift sanctions against Russia until Moscow restores Ukraine’ “erritorial integrity.” The New York Times ]

•even years ago, a self-immolation of a vendor in Tunisia set off the Arab Spring. Now, such grim acts have become commonplace. [ The New York Times ]

•n Yemen, cholera has infected more than 269,000 people and killed at least 1,614, according to Unicef . [ The New York Times ]

•Moscow’ Bolshoi Theater abruptly canceled a show about Rudolf Nureyev, a ballet dancer who defected to the West in 1961. [ The Guardian ]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•orking out in the hot weather? Try a hot bath  beforehand.

•ake a batch of the Ritz-Carlton ’ blueberry muffins , and enjoy them in the morning with coffee.

Noteworthy

•Unesco added new sites to its World Heritage List. Among them: the ancient core of Hebron in the Israeli-occupied West Bank  and Asmara, the Eritrean capital , and England’ Lake District , above.

• new study sheds light on why coral glows in the deep, dark sea. It shines to drive photosynthesis  for algae, which in turn create food for the coral.

•aha or ha? Digital laughter can be used for all kinds of activities, including flirtation or conveying skepticism. Here’ a look at the micronuances .

•est your knowledge of international affairs with our global news quiz . (We also have a weekly health quiz .)

Back Story

Like music? Then you might want to check out the Montreux Jazz Festival.

It’ underway on the shores of Lake Geneva in Switzerland. If you happen to be —ike us —lsewhere, you can stream the concerts live  on the festival’ website.

Once devoted almost entirely to European jazz, it has evolved into something far more inclusive. Its founder, Claude Nobs , was criticized for continuing to use the term “azz”o describe the event even after other styles of music were introduced.

“ontreux Jazz is a brand name, and most of the people know what to expect,”r. Nobs, who died in 2013, said in a 2006 interview with Billboard magazine.

This year, the festival’  eclectic program  included sold-out concerts by the British pop stars The Pet Shop Boys  and the American R&B singer Lauryn Hill . The Senegalese singer Youssou N’our  is scheduled to perform on the final day, Saturday.

The festival has also been a prolific venue for recording. The pianist Bill Evans recorded a Grammy-winning album  there in the second year, kicking off a series that comprises what is now an extensive audio archive recognized by Unesco .

Palko Karasz contributed reporting.

_____

This briefing was prepared for the European morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian  and American  mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here  .

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com .

Ahmad Al-Rubaye/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Michael Probst/Associated Press | Mikhail Klimentiev/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Philippe Lopez/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Fabrizio Bensch/Reuters | Hannah Mckay/Reuters | Getty Images | Phil Moore for The New York Times | Valentin Flauraud/European Pressphoto Agency | Hundreds of thousands of protesters arrived in Istanbul for the end of the three-week March for Justice. Led by Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the head of the main opposition party, they protested the government's recent crackdown on dissenters. | By DAPHNE RUSTOW and MARK SCHEFFLER 

Document NYTFEED020170710ed7a0012x



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Is Routed As Iraqi Forces Reclaim Mosul

By TIM ARANGO and MICHAEL R. GORDON; Reporting was contributed by Rukmini Callimachi and Falih Hassan from Mosul, Omar al-Jawoshy from Baghdad, and an employee of The New York Times from Erbil, Iraq. 
2,142 words
10 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq -- Dressed in a military uniform, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi arrived here in Mosul on Sunday to congratulate Iraq's armed forces for wresting the city from the Islamic State. The victory marked the formal end of a bloody campaign that lasted nearly nine months, left much of Iraq's second-largest city in ruins, killed thousands of people and displaced nearly a million more.

While Iraqi troops were still mopping up the last pockets of resistance and could be facing guerrilla attacks for weeks, the military began to savor its triumph in the shattered alleyways of the old city, where the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, put up a fierce last stand.

Hanging over the declaration of victory is the reality of the hard road ahead. The security forces in Mosul still face dangers, including Islamic State sleeper cells and suicide bombers. And they must clear houses rigged with explosive booby traps so civilians can return and services can be restored.

Mosul was the largest city in either Iraq or Syria held by the Islamic State, and its loss signifies the waning territorial claims of a terrorist group that had its beginnings in the aftermath of the American invasion of Iraq in 2003. The group is also threatened with the loss of its de facto capital, the Syrian city of Raqqa, which is encircled by Arab and Kurdish fighters supported by the United States.

But the end of the Islamic State's hold on Mosul does not mean peace is at hand. Other cities and towns in Iraq remain under the militants' control, and Iraqis expect an increase in terrorist attacks in urban centers, especially in the capital, Baghdad, as the group reverts to its insurgent roots.

''It's going to continue to be hard every day,'' said Col. Pat Work, the commanding officer of the Second Brigade, 82nd Airborne Division, which is carrying out the American advisory effort here.

''Iraqi security forces need to be on the top of their game, and we need to be over their shoulder helping them as they move through this transition to consolidate gains and really sink their hold in on the west side,'' Colonel Work said as he rolled through the streets of western Mosul recently in an armored vehicle. ''ISIS will challenge this.''

The victory could have been sweeter as the Iraqis were denied the symbolism of hanging the national flag from the Grand al-Nuri Mosque and its distinctive leaning minaret, which was wiped from the skyline in recent weeks as a final act of barbarity by Islamic State militants who packed it with explosives and brought it down as government troops approached.

It was at that mosque in June 2014 where Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi strode to the top of a pulpit and declared himself the leader of a caliphate straddling the borders of Iraq and Syria, a vast territory where for three years Islamist extremists have governed with a strict form of Islamic law, held women as sex slaves, carried out public beheadings and plotted terrorist attacks against the West.

This past week, as fighting raged nearby, Iraqi soldiers took selfies in front of the stump of the minaret and posed at the spot where Mr. Baghdadi made his speech. Destruction surrounded them, as did the stench of decaying bodies of Islamic State fighters, left to rot in the blazing sun.

The battle for Mosul began in October, after months of planning between Iraqis and American advisers, and some Obama administration officials had hoped it would conclude before they left office, giving a boost to the departing president's efforts to defeat the Islamic State.

Instead, it lasted until now, and it was far more brutal than many expected. With dense house-to-house fighting and a ceaseless barrage of snipers and suicide bombers, the fight for Mosul was some of the toughest urban warfare since World War II, American commanders have said. Iraqi officers, whose lives have been defined by ceaseless war, said the fighting was among the worst they had seen.

''I have been with the Iraqi Army for 40 years,'' said Maj. Gen. Sami al-Aradi, a commander of Iraq's special forces. ''I have participated in all of the battles of Iraq, but I've never seen anything like the battle for the old city.'' He continued: ''We have been fighting for each meter. And when I say we have been fighting for each meter, I mean it literally.''

Even as Mr. Abadi arrived here outfitted in the black uniform of Iraq's elite Counterterrorism Service, Iraqi forces were pressing to erase a pocket of Islamic State resistance by the Tigris River. Speaking from his base in the old city, Lt. Gen. Abdul-Wahab al-Saadi, a senior commander in that service, said that the militants' enclave was about 200 yards long and 50 yards wide and that he expected it to be taken later in the day or on Monday.

After arriving here, Mr. Abadi met with the Federal Police, who have taken significant losses in the battle, and went to visit the joint command overseeing the operation. But in an acknowledgment that the victory he had come to proclaim was not completely sealed, Iraqi officials said the prime minister would not make a public statement until the last patch of Islamic State territory in Mosul was cleared.

Earlier in the day, a post on Mr. Abadi's official Twitter account stated that he had come to Mosul ''to announce its liberation and congratulate the armed forces and Iraqi people on this victory.''

PM Al-Abadi arrives in Mosul to announce its liberation and congratulate the armed forces and Iraqi people on this victory pic.twitter.com/bUtkj7z88A -- Haider Al-Abadi (@HaiderAlAbadi) July 9, 2017

Some militants had sought to escape by swimming across the river, but General Saadi said his soldiers had shot them. The general said he had planted the Iraqi flag on the banks of the Tigris on Sunday morning -- an act he described as a ''special moment'' in which he reflected on the many soldiers he had lost in the long battle.

The retaking of the city, by all accounts, came at a great cost. Sensitive to the mounting casualties, the Iraqi government does not disclose how many of its troops have been killed. But deaths among Iraqi security forces in the Mosul battle had reached 774 by the end of March, according to American officers, which suggests the toll is more than a thousand now.

Even more civilians are estimated to have been killed, many at the hands of the Islamic State and some inadvertently by American airstrikes. At least seven journalists were killed, including two French correspondents and their fixer, an Iraqi Kurdish journalist, in a mine explosion in recent weeks.

The Iraqis and their international partners will now be confronted by the immense challenge of restoring essential services like electricity and rebuilding destroyed hospitals, schools, homes and bridges, which were wrecked in the ground combat or by the airstrikes, artillery fire and Himars rocket attacks carried out by the American-led coalition to help Iraqi troops advance.

''When the fighting stops, the humanitarian crisis continues,'' said Lise Grande, the deputy special representative for Iraq for the United Nations secretary general.

Western Mosul, especially its old city, where the Islamic State made its last stand, was hit particularly hard, becoming a gray and decimated landscape. As the combat has drawn to a close, thousands of civilians have begun to return. But 676,000 of those who left the western half of the city have yet to come back, according to United Nations data.

It is not hard to see why. Of the 54 neighborhoods in western Mosul, 15 neighborhoods that include 32,000 houses were heavily damaged, according to data provided by Ms. Grande. An additional 23 neighborhoods are considered to be moderately damaged. The cost of the near-term repairs and the more substantial reconstruction that is needed in Mosul has been estimated by United Nations experts at more than $700 million, she said.

In the heart of the old city, craters littered intersections and roadways, marking the places where bombs pummeled the ground, dropped from coalition warplanes. Street after street was covered in soaring piles of rubble, with rebar poking out of shattered masonry.

In a church used as a weapons-making factory by the Islamic State, mortars were lying on the ground next to a pink backpack decorated with a picture of a kitten. When troops unzipped the backpack, they found plastic sachets of a white explosive powder, which they identified as C4 used in militants' bombs.

The military victory in Mosul has come without a political agreement between Iraq's two largest communities, Sunni and Shiite Arabs, whose stark sectarian divisions led to the rise of the Islamic State. For many members of Iraq's minority Sunnis, the Islamic State was seen as a protector against abuses they had suffered under Iraq's Shiite-led government, especially under the former prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki.

After the Islamic State seized Mosul in 2014, many Sunnis welcomed them. Mr. Maliki was then removed from office, replaced by Mr. Abadi, a more moderate and less sectarian leader, but one widely viewed as weak. Under Mr. Abadi, there has been no meaningful reconciliation.

''I will leave Mosul because it has become a destroyed city,'' said Aisha Abdullah, a teacher who endured life under the Islamic State. ''In every corner of it there is memory and blood.''

And while the Islamic State, with its harsh rule, alienated many of the Sunni residents it sought to represent, residents said its ideology caught on among some of the population, particularly young men.

''There is no use in reconstructing the city if the people of Mosul don't change,'' Ms. Abdullah said. ''There are still many people who assist ISIS, and the acts of violence will never end.''

Marwan Saeed, another Mosul resident, who lives in the city's east side, which was liberated in January and where life has largely been restored to normal, with schools and shops reopening and most civilians returning home, said he feared for the future, now more than ever.

''Frankly, I'm desperate over the future,'' he said. ''ISIS destroyed the people's mentality, and the wars destroyed the infrastructure, and we paid the price. There is no such thing as the phase 'after ISIS.' ISIS is a mentality, and this mentality will not end with guns alone.''

Iraqi forces still have to retake several Islamic State strongholds: Hawija and Tal Afar in northern Iraq and a series of towns in Iraq's Euphrates River valley, stretching from Anah to Qaim.

While this is happening, Syrian fighters backed by American firepower are to complete the taking of Raqqa before moving to surround and kill the militants in Euphrates River towns on the Syrian side of the border.

''Mosul and Raqqa is not the end of it by any stretch of the imagination,'' said Brig. Gen. Andrew A. Croft, a senior Air Force officer with the American-led task force that is fighting the Islamic State.

And there is the fear that many Islamic State fighters who were not captured or killed had simply put down their guns and blended in with the civilian population, to live to fight another day.

The wives of Islamic State fighters also pose a risk. In the last week, a woman holding a baby and wearing a long-sleeved robe that disguised a hand-held detonator tried to blow herself up as she approached an Iraqi soldier, said Second Lt. Muntather Laft, a media officer with the Counterterrorism Service.

''Do you know that most of the ISIS fighters have shaved their beards and took off their clothes, and now they are free?'' said Zuhair Hazim al-Jibouri, a member of Mosul's local council.

Much of the old city of Mosul was destroyed in fierce fighting. Mosul was the largest city in Iraq or Syria held by the Islamic State. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AHMAD AL-RUBAYE/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A1); Above, Iraqi special forces troops celebrated after reaching the banks of the Tigris River on Sun- day. Right, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, third from left, arrived in Mosul. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY FELIPE DANA/ASSOCIATED PRESS; AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES); Members of the Iraqi Counterterrorism Service walked past the bodies of militants in the old city of Mosul on Sunday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALAA AL-MARJANI/REUTERS) (A5) 

Document NYTF000020170710ed7a0004q



World; Middle East
Iraq’ Moment of Celebration Is One of Deeper Risk, Too

By TIM ARANGO 
1,176 words
10 July 2017
20:12
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq —he fighting is all but over in Mosul, and the billboards are already up: hastily raised signs in which the government urged the city’ Sunni residents to “urn the page”rom the terrorists of the Islamic State.

As Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi visited Mosul to declare victory and call for unity, civilians on the longer-secured east side of the city danced and waved Iraqi flags. Some called for brotherhood between Sunnis and Shiites, or chanted, “y our souls and blood, we sacrifice for you, Iraq!”

It is a moment for Iraqis to celebrate after nearly nine months of bloody warfare against the Sunni extremists of the Islamic State. But despite the flaring of hope for a new national unity, the government’ costly victory in Mosul and the questions hanging over its aftermath feel more like the next chapter in the long story of Iraq’ unraveling.

With no reconciliation process to speak of, sectarian tensions between Iraq’ Sunni minority and the majority Shiite community that now controls the government.

And even as the focus in Mosul turns now to bringing back hundreds of thousands of displaced Sunni civilians, the stark failures of that process in some other places freed from the Islamic State —nd reports of abuses at the hands of the government forces and their militia allies —ake clear that the challenge is not done here.

For the mostly Sunni residents of Mosul, there are the devastating aftereffects of living under the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0 , ISIL or Daesh. And there is deep doubt and fear over what will happen to them next.

“he people of Mosul need to be psychologically treated and rehabilitated through long-term programs,”aid Intisar al-Jibouri, a member of Parliament from Mosul. “hey have lost family members, been tortured, beaten for silly reasons by ISIS.”

Concerns are growing that Shiite militias that mobilized in other parts of the country to fight the Islamic State could turn their guns on one another in a scramble for power. And the thoughts of many in Iraq’ Sunni community have stayed fixed on revenge against their neighbors who supported the Islamic State, with increasing reports of violent reprisals.

The Kurds, who have operated an autonomous enclave in the north since the 1990s, are moving quickly to hold a referendum on independence in September, despite pleas from American diplomats to hold off.

So, the end of the Mosul battle, even with the Islamic State still in control of other areas of the country, resurfaces a vital question that has been asked ever since the modern and multisectarian state of Iraq was created from the ashes of World War I: Can the country hold together?

At great cost in lives and property, Iraqis have shown that they can defeat the Islamic State militarily. But whether they are up to the political challenges to bring the country together again —r even get the lights turned on in Mosul, or bring the displaced back home, for that matter —s another question entirely.

“ight now we are only fighting Daesh militarily,”aid Jabar Yawar, the secretary general of the pesh merga, the Kurdish security forces in northern Iraq.

As for politics and governance, Mr. Yawar, whose men participated in the early phases of the Mosul battle last fall, said: “here is nothing, no plan. We are fighting, and that’ it.”

Hoshyar Zebari, Iraq’ former foreign minister, a Kurd originally from Mosul, said, “veryone is in a hurry to achieve a military victory, without regard for the destruction or the day after.”

Mr. Zebari is now working to support the Kurdish referendum, which is likely to go forward despite objections from the United States, Turkey and Iran. Most expect a resounding “es”ote, given the depth of feeling among Kurds to have their own state.

“orget Kurdistan,”aid Masrour Barzani, the chancellor of the Kurdistan Region Security Council and the area’ top intelligence official. “s the rest of Iraq united? Even the Arabs in Iraq are not united.”

He continued: “e are not the reason Iraq is falling apart. I think Iraq is a fabricated state. It was built on the wrong foundations.”

And then there is Syria. The civil war across the border, as much as the sectarian policies of the former prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, helped the Islamic State regenerate in Iraq after its predecessor, Al Qaeda in Iraq, was largely eradicated. The group was able to expand into Syria before sweeping across the border in 2014 and taking Mosul.

Without peace in Syria, officials say, there is little chance for peace and stability in Iraq.

“yria and Iraq are closely connected,”r. Maliki said in an interview this year. “f the situation in Syria is unstable, Iraq will be unstable.”

When asked about the future of Iraq after the Islamic State, Mr. Maliki said: “he state cannot control the situation. The coming phase will be bad.”

With the larger questions hanging over the country, the immediate challenge of stabilizing Mosul is monumental, especially in the city’ west side. The fight has essentially turned the city into two, divided by the Tigris River. The west is a gray, dusty wasteland of flattened buildings and upturned, charred trucks; even the windows of the cars civilians are driving have been blown out. Cross the bridge, though, and suddenly the world emerges in light and color, with shops and restaurants open, and loud traffic jams.

Fighting continued on Monday in a small patch of the old city, and security forces there rescued two more girls from Iraq’ Yazidi religious minority who had been held as sex slaves. The United Nations, meanwhile, put out an urgent call for funding from other nations to help the nearly 700,000 civilians still displaced from the fighting.

All day long on Monday, Iraqi state television played patriotic songs in honor of the security forces, and later in the evening, a news flash alerted that Mr. Abadi would make a “istoric”peech, surrounded by soldiers. The prime minister, once again, declared victory in Mosul, saying, “raq is now more united than ever.”

And in the skies over Mosul, Iraqi airplanes dropped three million leaflets on a city where many of the residents are no longer there.

Each leaflet showed a map of Mosul in the colors of the Iraqi flag —ed, white and black —ith the message: “osul has been returned to the bosom of Iraq.”

Falih Hassan contributed reporting.

An old bridge destroyed by clashes in Mosul, Iraq. | Thaier Al-Sudani/Reuters | A federal police officer waved an Iraqi flag amid a celebration on Sunday in Mosul after the government declared victory in the embattled city. | Fadel Senna/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Iraqi soldiers walked along a damaged street in Mosul on Sunday. Fighting continued on Monday in a small patch of the old city. | Felipe Dana/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170710ed7a0050m



Foreign Desk; SECTA
State Crumbling,  ISIS  Is Reclaiming Insurgent Roots

By BEN HUBBARD and ERIC SCHMITT; Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul. 
1,811 words
9 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- Three years ago, a black-clad cleric named Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi ascended a mosque pulpit in the Iraqi city of Mosul and addressed the world as leader of a new terrorist state.

The announcement of the so-called caliphate was a high point for the extremist fighters of the Islamic State. Their exhibitionist violence and apocalyptic ideology helped them seize vast stretches of territory in Syria and Iraq, attract legions of foreign fighters and create an administration with bureaucrats, courts and oil wells.

Now, their state is crumbling.

In Syria, American-backed militias have surrounded Raqqa, the group's capital, and breached its historic walls. Across the border, Iraqi forces have seized the remains of the Mosul mosque where Mr. Baghdadi appeared and besieged the remaining jihadists in a shrinking number of city blocks.

But the loss of its two largest cities will not spell a final defeat for the Islamic State -- also known as ISIS, ISIL and Daesh -- according to analysts and American and Middle Eastern officials. The group has already shifted back to its roots as an insurgent force, but one that now has an international reach and an ideology that continues to motivate attackers around the world.

''These are obviously major blows to ISIS because its state-building project is over, there is no more caliphate, and that will diminish support and recruits,'' said Hassan Hassan, a senior fellow at the Tahrir Institute for Middle East Policy in Washington and a co-author of a book on the group. ''But ISIS today is an international organization. Its leadership and its ability to grow back are still there.''

The Islamic State has overshadowed its jihadist precursors like Al Qaeda by not just holding territory, but by running cities and their hinterlands for an extended period, winning the group credibility in the militant world and allowing it to build a complex organization.

So even while its physical hold slips, its surviving cadres -- middle managers, weapons technicians, propagandists and other operatives -- will invest that experience in the group's future operations.

And even though its hold on crucial urban centers is being shaken, the Islamic State is in no way homeless yet.

In Iraq, the group still controls Tal Afar, Hawija, other towns and much of Anbar Province. In Syria, most of its top operatives have fled Raqqa in the past six months for other towns still under ISIS control in the Euphrates River valley, according to American and Western military and counterterrorism officials who have received intelligence briefings.

Many have relocated to Mayadeen, a town 110 miles southeast of Raqqa near oil facilities and with supply lines through the surrounding desert. They have taken with them the group's most important recruiting, financing, propaganda and external operations functions, American officials said. Other leaders have been spirited out of Raqqa by a trusted network of aides to a string of towns from Deir al-Zour to Abu Kamal.

American Special Operations forces have targeted this area heavily with armed Reaper drones and attack planes, disrupting and damaging the Islamic State's leadership and ability to carry out plots. But the battle for Raqqa still could last many months.

It is all a new chapter in the history of a group whose roots go back to the United States' invasion of Iraq in 2003.

Fighting under various names and leaders, the Sunni militants who would evolve into the Islamic State killed many Iraqis and American troops before Sunni tribal fighters paid by the United States decimated them, driving the survivors underground by the time the United States withdrew from Iraq in 2011.

But new conflicts provided new opportunities. After the outbreak of the civil war in Syria in 2011, the group dispatched operatives there to build the force that later seized the country's east, including Raqqa, which became its administrative capital.

Then it turned its sights back to Iraq, seizing Mosul in 2014, where Mr. Baghdadi made clear what distinguished his followers from Al Qaeda: They were not just insurgents, but also the founders of a state infused with extremist ideology.

Now, senior American intelligence and counterterrorism officials say that more than 60,000 Islamic State fighters have been killed since June 2014, including much of the group's leadership, and that the group has lost about two-thirds of its peak territory.

But those officials, including Lt. Gen. Michael K. Nagata, one of the Army's top Special Operations officers, also acknowledged that the Islamic State had retained much of its ability to inspire, enable and direct terrorist attacks.

''When I consider how much damage we've inflicted and they're still operational, they're still capable of pulling off things like some of these attacks we've seen internationally,'' General Nagata said recently in an interview published by the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, ''we have to conclude that we do not yet fully appreciate the scale or strength of this phenomenon.''

The Islamic State has carried out nearly 1,500 attacks in 16 cities across Iraq and Syria after they were freed from the militants' control, showing that the group has reverted to its insurgent roots and foreshadowing long-term security threats, according to a study also published by the West Point center.

Internationally, the Islamic State has partly compensated for its losses at home by encouraging affiliates abroad -- in Libya, Egypt, Yemen, Afghanistan, Nigeria and the Philippines -- and by activating operatives elsewhere.

Between 100 and 250 ideologically driven foreigners are thought to have been smuggled into Europe from late 2014 to mid-2016, nearly all through Turkey after crossing a now rigidly enforced border, European intelligence officials say.

But they may not be the most dangerous threat facing the European authorities as long as Islamic State ideology continues to motivate attackers.

A recent study by the Program on Extremism at George Washington University and the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism examined 51 successful attacks in Europe and North America from June 2014, following the declaration of the caliphate, until June 2017, revealing that only 18 percent of the 65 attackers were known to have fought in Iraq or Syria.

Most were citizens of the countries they chose to strike.

Since the Islamic State's rise, the United States and its allies have focused on breaking the group's control of territory, but much less planning has gone into how communities damaged by jihadist rule will be rebuilt and governed afterward. Indeed, the jihadists' departure could accelerate other conflicts.

In Syria, the United States has armed and supported a militia called the Syrian Democratic Forces, or S.D.F., to fight the jihadists. Most of its leaders are Kurds, many with roots in the Kurdistan Workers' Party , or P.K.K., which the United States and Turkey consider a terrorist organization.

The group's ascendance has angered Turkey, which considers it a threat, as well as many Syrian Arabs, who see it as a front for Kurdish empowerment at their expense. It also remains unclear how the bodies set up to govern areas seized from the jihadists can be financed so they can rebuild, restore services and provide security.

The administration of President Trump has shown little interest in such measures, although experts consider them necessary to prevent the jihadists from returning.

''There is a tension in the U.S. approach, to avoid extended commitments and nation-building on one hand and the need to prevent the possibility of a jihadist resurgence in the future on the other,'' said Noah Bonsey, an analyst with the International Crisis Group.

In Iraq, the defeat of the Islamic State in Mosul sets the stage for new power struggles between the central government in Baghdad and the Kurds, who have taken control of the contested, oil-rich city of Kirkuk and plan to vote on independence later this year.

The fight against the Islamic State has also fueled the proliferation of Shiite militias, many of which are funded by Iran and are driven by a sectarian creed that has marginalized and worried Sunnis.

Many fear that with poor governance and sectarianism still the rule in Syria and Iraq, some reconstituted form of the Islamic State's extreme Sunni Islamism could yet find support.

''All of these conditions in the end form the basic environment for the group,'' said Hassan Abu Haniyeh, a Jordanian expert in extremist groups. ''They formed the environment for it to start and spread, and now they are increasing, not decreasing.''

The caliphate also lives on in the virtual realm, as its operatives and supporters churn out propaganda, bomb manuals, encryption guides and suggestions for how to kill the largest number of people with trucks.

Its members have played down their losses, portraying them as mere setbacks in the long-term, worldwide battle against those who reject their ideology.

''O brothers, I call upon you to rise up wherever you are and to surround them and monitor them, then attack them and kill them,'' a Chechen suicide bomber said in a video released posthumously last month. ''The disbelievers have gathered today from every faith and attacked the caliphate, but this had only added to our faith and courage.''

American officials acknowledged the difficulty of fighting the group online.

''We spend an inordinate amount of time and resources as the United States, but also as our partners, trying to not only defeat ISIS and their control of the physical caliphate, but their virtual space that they own,'' Thomas P. Bossert, Mr. Trump's Homeland Security and counterterrorism adviser, said last Sunday on ABC's ''This Week.'' ''They're proselytizing. It's troubling.''

Still, many Syrians and Iraqis whose lives the jihadists have ravaged are glad to see them chased out, despite worries about the future.

''I am happy that Daesh is dying, but the fear of what might come next is killing this happiness,'' said Ahmed Abdul-Qadir, a Raqqa native who was running an anti-jihadist media group in Turkey when gunmen he believes belonged to the Islamic State shot him in the jaw. He is now in France, and he communicated via Facebook chat because he is between surgeries that have made it hard to speak.

''It makes me wish that this whole organization would vanish and that no one who believes in its doctrine would remain alive,'' he said.

A bridge that was destroyed during fighting against the Islamic State in a village near Raqqa, Syria. The battle for Raqqa could still last many months. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GORAN TOMASEVIC/REUTERS); A member of the Syrian Democratic Forces inspected damage in a home in Raqqa last month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DELIL SOULEIMAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A9) 

Document NYTF000020170709ed790006o



opinion
The Islamic State Is Not Dead Yet; Contributing Op-Ed Writer

By ANTONY J. BLINKEN 
1,116 words
9 July 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The liberation of Mosul –he Islamic State’ de facto capital in Iraq —arks a turning point in the war against the world’ most dangerous terrorist group. Daesh, as the Islamic State is known throughout the Middle East, no longer controls significant territory in Iraq where it can harbor foreign fighters or exploit resources, like oil.

And its core narrative —uilding an actual state —s in tatters. But while the Trump administration will be right to celebrate the end of the caliphate as we know it, it is far too soon to feel comfortable, especially in the absence of a strategy for the day after Daesh.

Fifteen years ago, at the start of President George W. Bush’ run-up to the invasion of Iraq, then-Senators Joe Biden and Richard Lugar raised a prescient concern: “hen Saddam Hussein is gone, what would be our responsibilities? This question has not been explored but may prove to be the most critical.”

Substitute “slamic State”or “addam Hussein”nd the question they posed retains a fierce urgency today. Even when the Islamic State is defeated militarily, the political and economic conditions that facilitated its rise —nleashed in part by the 2003 invasion —ill continue to fester. How, then, to ensure that Daesh stays defeated?

Most urgent is a fully resourced effort to stabilize, secure, govern and rebuild liberated cities so that displaced people can come home safely.

The good news is that a coalition of 68 countries led by the United States to fight the Islamic State has raised the necessary funds to start that process through the United Nations. A similar plan exists for Syria.

But the ongoing civil war there will make it challenging to implement, as evidenced by the slow process of bringing the city of Tabqa —iberated two months ago and a gateway to the Islamic State’ Syrian capital in Raqqa —back to life.

Even more challenging is what comes next. Twenty-five million Sunni Muslims live between Baghdad and Damascus. They have been alienated from their governments.

Unless they can be convinced that their state will protect and not persecute them, an Islamic State 2.0 will find plenty of new recruits and supporters.

Iraq offers the best prospects for success. But left to their own devices, its leaders are more likely to perpetuate the conditions that gave rise to violent extremism. And Iraq’ neighbors will line up behind whichever sect they support, reinforcing a zero-sum mentality in Iraq itself.

That’ where American diplomacy comes in.

The United States can’ dictate outcomes to a sovereign Iraq. But it can support, incentivize and mobilize those willing to move Iraq in the right direction.

This starts with backing what Iraq’ prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, calls functioning federalism —iving Iraqis at the provincial level the responsibility and resources to provide for their own security, services and schools and to govern their day-to-day lives.

That’ the best way to convince Sunnis that their future is within Iraq and not with a new Islamic State. Iraq’ Sunnis used to oppose federalism in favor of a strong central government; increasingly, they embrace it.

Iraq’ constitution provides for decentralization, but it has yet to be put into effect. Some within the Shia community, goaded on by Iran, will insist on retaining the spoils of majoritarian rule, preserving a dominant Baghdad to lord it over the Sunnis.

Bringing functioning federalism to life begins with effectively implementing a law that governs Iraq’ militia, known as the Popular Mobilization Forces. Shiite P.M.F. units must be placed under state control, kept out of politics and away from Sunni areas.

Sunni P.M.F. units mobilized into the fight against the Islamic State need to stay on the state payroll and assume responsibility for securing their own territory. Baghdad also must make sure that investment and major infrastructure projects don’ bypass Sunni regions.

At the same time, the Trump administration should use the strong relations it has built with Iraq’ Sunni Arab neighbors to press them to engage Baghdad and advance Iraq’ regional integration, while moderating the Sunni community’ ambitions.

Their absence from Iraq has left a vacuum for Iran to fill. Their unconditional support for every Sunni demand feeds the sectarianism that further empowers Iran with Baghdad and risks tearing Iraq apart.

Kurdish ambitions pose an equally volatile challenge to Iraq’ stability. The Kurdish region’ leader, Massoud Barzani, has called for a referendum on independence in September.

Meanwhile, the Kurds have taken advantage of the fight against the Islamic State to seize control of 70 percent of the territories in northern Iraq that are in dispute between Arabs and Kurds, and which they won’ be inclined to give up. Kurdish independence is a powerful dream and Mr. Barzani sees its realization as the heart of his legacy.

But moving too fast will incur the wrath of both Baghdad and the Sunnis, not to mention Turkey and Iran. If oil prices stay low, the Kurds will be hard pressed to become self-sufficient.

Here too, the United States should resume its role as an honest broker. There’ a deal to be made that gives the Kurds greater control over the oil in their region, while keeping federal troops out and negotiating joint responsibility for the disputed and oil-rich city of Kirkuk. It won’ happen by itself.

One final question: What, if any, United States military presence should remain in Iraq to help make sure the Islamic State does not rise again?

America’ departure at the end of 2011 reflected the reality then, that most Iraqis simply wanted us gone. Now, as Iraq awakes from the Daesh nightmare, there may be greater appetite to keep some Americans around to train and enable Iraqi forces, and to provide intelligence and counterterrorism support —ut not to engage in combat. How the Trump administration navigates this political minefield will be another crucial test of its strategy.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Antony J. Blinken (@ABlinken), a managing director of the Penn Biden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement, was a deputy secretary of state in the Obama administration and is a contributing opinion writer.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY MATT ROTA)

* \b ISIS\b0 , Despite Heavy Losses, Still Inspires Global Attacks

* Iraqi Prime Minister Arrives in Mosul to Declare Victory Over \b ISIS\b0 

* In a Desperate Syrian City, a Test of Trump’ Policies

Document INHT000020170710ed7900007



Asia and Australia Edition
Briefing
Mosul, G-20, Tesla: Your Morning Briefing

By STEPHEN HILTNER 
1,268 words
9 July 2017
21:45
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•rime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq declared victory and congratulated his armed forces for wresting Mosul from the Islamic State.

Suicide bombers and guerrilla attacks could plague Iraq’ armed forces in the country’ second-largest city for weeks to come, but Mr. Abadi’ presence there formally ends a monthslong campaign that killed thousands of people and displaced nearly a million more.

The Iraqis now face the immense challenge of restoring essential services and rebuilding the city.

Analysts warn that ISIS, despite its losses, remains a potent force for inspiring global terror.

_____

•“ow it is time to move forward.”

Following his first face-to-face meeting with President Vladimir Putin of Russia, President Trump took to Twitter to address Russia’ meddling in the 2016 election, stating that he had “trongly pressed”r. Putin and declaring that it was time for the United States to work constructively with Russia.

While Mr. Trump has been dogged by revelations of undisclosed meetings between his associates and Russians, the president’ eldest son, Donald Trump Jr., is said to have arranged a meeting with a Kremlin-linked lawyer after he was told he would be provided with damaging details about Hillary Clinton.

The meeting —t Trump Tower on June 9, 2016 —s the first confirmed private meeting between a Russian national and members of Mr. Trump’ inner circle during the campaign.

_____

• he G-20 summit meeting in Hamburg, Germany, where public splits with President Trump were the order of the day, reflected the newly confrontational stance that European leaders are taking toward the United States.

The other members of the group broke explicitly with the U.S. on the subject of climate change and vowed to move forward collectively, declaring the Paris accord “rreversible.”

An Australian news broadcast that delivered a scathing evaluation of Mr. Trump’ performance at the meeting has gone viral on social media.

_____

•ur reporter is on the ground in Istanbul as hundreds of thousands of protesters arrive in the city as part of the March for Justice, a demonstration against President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’ widening crackdown on dissent.

The march, which began hundreds of miles away in Ankara on June 15, was led by politicians from Turkey’ main opposition party and has drawn increasing numbers of protesters along the way.

_____

•hina is facing renewed pressure to release one of its most prominent dissidents.

Liu Xiaobo, a political prisoner and Nobel laureate who is on medical parole in a Chinese hospital to receive treatment for late-stage liver cancer, was declared fit to travel abroad for medical care by American and German doctors on Sunday.

Mr. Liu is serving an 11-year sentence after being convicted of state subversion. Our Opinion columnist calls him “he Mandela of our age.”

_____

•n our latest edition of The Breakdown, news and notes from Australia, we look at Tesla’ plans to install the world’ largest lithium-ion battery. Check back at 3 p.m. Sydney time for a new edition.

Business

•he mass adoption of electric cars may occur sooner than you think.

A new report suggests that the cost of plug-in vehicles is falling much faster than expected, based in part on a plunge in battery prices and aggressive policies promoting zero-emission vehicles in China and Europe.

•Elon Musk, Telsa’ chief executive, gave the public a first glimpse of the much-anticipated Model 3. He tweeted photos of the electric car more than a year after it was first announced. There are some 370,000 pending reservations for the new model.

•esla sales are down in Hong Kong after the government ended a tax exemption for electric vehicles.

•rading partners around the world are cautiously awaiting word from the Trump administration on its decision regarding possible tariffs on steel imports.

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•irefighters in London say a lack of equipment, particularly fire engines with sufficiently long ladders, impeded rescue efforts during the Grenfell Tower blaze. [The New York Times]

• cease-fire in part of Syria was fostered by the United States, Russia and Jordan; it took effect at noon on Sunday. [The New York Times]

•n Australia, a new study found that antibiotics are being prescribed at up to nine times the recommended rates. [The Sydney Morning Herald]

•hina’ first operating aircraft carrier sailed into Hong Kong on Saturday. The ship’ visit is part of efforts to raise the profile of China’ military and inspire patriotism in the semiautonomous city. [The New York Times]

•n annual exercise involving the Indian, American and Japanese navies will commence today in the Bay of Bengal, despite growing naval tensions with China. [The Economic Times]

•haltmaa Battulga, a populist real-estate tycoon and former martial arts star, won the presidential runoff in Mongolia. [BBC]

•he Australian cyclist Richie Porte, one of the top contenders in the Tour de France, suffered a terrifying high-speed crash on Sunday. [ABC News]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•orking out in the hot weather? Try a hot bath beforehand.

•ake a batch of the Ritz-Carlton’ blueberry muffins and enjoy them in the morning with coffee.

Noteworthy

•hor Province in Afghanistan, plagued by an absence of the rule of law and a complete sense of impunity, has become a hotbed of gender-based violence.

•n Hong Kong, restrictive zoning and performance rules are impeding artistic expression and cultural development, especially for the “ive house”ndie music scene.

•est your knowledge of this week’ international affairs with our global news quiz.

Back Story

Like music? Then you might want to check out the Montreux Jazz Festival.

It’ underway on the shores of Lake Geneva in Switzerland. If you happen to be —ike us —lsewhere, you can stream the concerts live on the festival’ website.

Once devoted almost entirely to European jazz, it has evolved into something far more inclusive. Its founder, Claude Nobs, was criticized for continuing to use the term “azz”o describe the event even after other styles of music were introduced.

“ontreux Jazz is a brand name, and most of the people know what to expect,”r. Nobs, who died in 2013, said in a 2006 interview with Billboard magazine.

This year, the festival’ eclectic program included sold-out concerts by the British pop stars The Pet Shop Boys and the American R&B singer Lauryn Hill. The Senegalese singer Youssou N’our is scheduled to perform on the final day, next Saturday.

The festival has also been a prolific venue for recording. The pianist Bill Evans recorded a Grammy-winning album there in the second year, kicking off a series that comprises what is now an extensive audio archive recognized by Unesco.

Palko Karasz contributed reporting.

_____

We have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian, European and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.

Felipe Dana/Associated Press | Al Drago for The New York Times | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | Lefteris Pitarakis/Associated Press | Alex Hofford/European Pressphoto Agency | Fabrizio Bensch/Reuters | Andrew Testa for The New York Times | Craig Lee for The New York Times | Said Maruf Saidy for the New York Times | Valentin Flauraud/European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170709ed79002xl



360 VIEW
Real Estate Desk; SECTRE
Bronx Tenants Pressured by Rising Rents

By RONDA KAYSEN 
1,347 words
9 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The tenement at 700 East 134th Street in Port Morris shares the block with a stand of clapboard row houses, a metalworker and a document shredding facility. Tenants, many of whom have lived on this quiet, gritty block in the South Bronx for the better part of a decade, pay around $1,000 a month for their apartments.

Soon, they could pay much more.

In many ways, this little building exemplifies the anxiety echoed throughout the South Bronx as middle-class New Yorkers priced out of Manhattan stream across the Harlem and East Rivers in search of more affordable apartments. Tenants fear that the wave of wealthier newcomers is pushing rents up and poorer residents out.

In early January, the 21-unit building containing mostly studios sold for $4 million to a limited liability company after the previous owner filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Soon after the sale, James Giddings, the head officer of the limited liability company, began telling tenants to expect rent increases of around $500 a month, according to tenants.

Mr. Giddings has spoken with tenants in the hallways, in their apartments, on the phone and via texts and emails. For years, the previous owner did not sign leases with tenants, meaning the residents essentially have only 30-day agreements. Without a lease, they are vulnerable to sudden rent hikes or losing their apartment.

Mr. Giddings insists that the building is free market, allowing him to raise rents as he pleases. Yet he has not actually offered tenants leases at higher rents. Tenants say their new landlord is treading lightly because the building is instead rent-stabilized, making the proposed increases illegal. Until a decade ago, the building was officially rent-stabilized. But around 2006, when the property was vacant, the previous owner renovated the building and gave new tenants what he considered ''free-market'' leases, but did not renew those leases when they expired.

A property, in fact, can be deregulated following a substantial rehabilitation, but it must meet certain specific requirements under the law. Just handing out a so-called free-market lease does not make an apartment market rate.

Mr. Giddings told me in an email that ''the previous owner filed'' an application with the Division of Housing and Community Renewal, the state agency that oversees rent-stabilized properties. But he did not say if the state ever responded. Tenants requested their rental histories from the state, which showed that the building is rent-stabilized, said Courtland Hankins, one of the tenants.

''Something fishy happened a long time ago,'' said Stephanie Rudolph, a staff attorney with the Urban Justice Center, who reviewed details of the property with me but does not represent the tenants. A 2005 permit for renovations to bathrooms and kitchens filed with the city Department of Buildings, for example, ''doesn't look like it was enough'' to meet state requirements for deregulation. ''My assumption would be that they never did any of the paperwork'' with the Division of Housing and Community Renewal, she said.

This spring, the state housing agency informed tenants that it was reviewing an application from the new owner to determine if the property was exempt from rent-stabilization. Tenants plan to challenge the landlord's claim.

Despite earlier improvements, some apartments have pipes and windows that leak, broken floorboards and missing bathroom tiles, crumbling paint and plaster, kitchens with no cabinets and faulty electrical wiring, according to dozens of photographs of seven apartments provided by tenants.

In emails, Mr. Giddings described the building as a well-maintained property that had been gut renovated. He said he had no immediate plans to raise rents and dismissed complaints from tenants as overblown. ''We have mentioned to some tenants that there will be legal rent increases at some point,'' he wrote. ''But we have not pushed that issue.''

Tenants, however, are anxious.

A $500 rent hike could undo the lives of tenants like TaraMarie Capozello, 37, a single mother of two daughters who moved into the building from a homeless shelter in 2007. She pays $962 a month, with rental assistance from the city, and still struggles to make her payments. She has not had a lease renewal in years. Last January, Mr. Giddings approached her in the hallway, telling her that her rent could jump to $1,500 a month. If that happened, ''I'd be done. It's over,'' she said. ''I'd be back in the shelter system or out on the street.''

Claudia Waterton, 36, a print production artist who pays $1,050 a month for her studio, commutes an hour and 20 minutes to Brooklyn for work. A substantial rent hike could send her deeper into the Bronx -- and farther from her job. ''A lot of people are scared to move,'' she said. ''How are we going to find a place that's affordable?''

These days, whenever a building in the Bronx changes hands, fears of gentrification ripple through the area. Between 2006 and 2015, the median rent rose almost 18 percent, to $860 a month, in Mott Haven and Melrose, an area that includes Port Morris, according to the New York University Furman Center.

In 2016, as asking rents stagnated in other parts of the city, they soared in the South Bronx, rising in Mott Haven by nearly 16 percent from the previous year, to $2,050 a month, according to StreetEasy.

Indeed, after decades of blight and abandonment, developers are now pouring money into speculative investments in the Bronx. The city has taken steps to rezone neighborhoods to spur more residential development, causing angst among some residents who fear that the revitalization of their neighborhoods could spell displacement. The median income in Port Morris and Mott Haven was $20,334 a year between 2010 and 2014, according to U.S. census data. Yet many of the people moving to the borough make considerably more money than that. So if a studio at 700 East 134th Street could fetch $1,500 a month, a sum that a newer tenant would eagerly pay, where can people of more modest means who have lived here for years go?

''In a moment where entire boroughs are no longer options, people are moving to the Bronx,'' said Susanna Blankley, the director of Community Action for Safe Apartments, a tenant-organizing group. ''People fear that we are facing displacement pressures like never before.''

This block of East 134th Street, a spartan stretch opposite the Bruckner Expressway, has no residential amenities. Yet, it is within a five-minute walk from the Bronx Brewery, the Port Morris Distillery and Gun Hill Tavern, all relatively new businesses in Port Morris, a triangular swath at the southern tip of the Bronx.

''The neighborhood has changed, the complexion has changed. It's SoBro now,'' said Mr. Hankins, 46, a middle school hip-hop teacher who lives in a fourth-floor studio in the East 134th Street building. In two conversations last March, Mr. Giddings told him that his rent could jump from $1,039 a month to $1,650 a month. ''In the next four to five years, it's definitely going to be a little Williamsburg.''

For now, tenants are hastily gathering information about their building's history, hoping to prove that the building should remain rent-stabilized. Should the state rule in Mr. Giddings's favor, they worry that overtures about rent hikes will turn into forceful demands, leaving them with few options. If management is ''able to get some firmer footing, they're not going to be soft with us at all,'' said Mr. Hankins. ''Not one little bit.''

Courtland Hankins, top left, said gentrification has turned South Bronx into ''SoBro''; TaraMarie Capozello, top right, with her daughter Isis, would not be able to afford her apartment if her rent increases; 700 East 134th Street in Port Morris, above, was sold in January 2017, and the tenants are scrambling to prove the building is rent-stabilized. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JONATHAN SANTIAGO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170709ed790009a



EDITORIAL
Editorial Desk; SECTSR
The Real Threat to Election Integrity

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
743 words
9 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Russia's meddling in the 2016 election may not have altered the outcome of any races, but it showed that America's voting system is far more vulnerable to attack than most people realized. Whether the attackers are hostile nations like Russia (which could well try it again even though President Trump has raised the issue with President Vladimir Putin of Russia) or hostile groups like ISIS, the threat is very real.

The question is this: Can the system be strengthened against cyberattacks in time for the 2018 midterms and the 2020 presidential race? The answer, encouragingly, is that there are concrete steps state and local governments can take right now to improve the security and integrity of their elections. A new study by the Brennan Center for Justice identifies two critical pieces of election infrastructure -- aging voting machines and voter registration databases relying on outdated software -- that present appealing targets for hackers and yet can be shored up at a reasonable cost.

Last year, Russian hackers tried to break into voter databases in at least 39 states, aiming to alter or delete voter data, and also attempted to take over the computers of more than 100 local election officials before Election Day. There is no evidence that they infiltrated voting machines, but they have succeeded in doing so in other countries, and it's only a matter of time before they figure it out here. R. James Woolsey, the former C.I.A. director, wrote in an introduction to the Brennan Center report, ''I am confident the Russians will be back, and that they will take what they have learned last year to attempt to inflict even more damage in future elections.''

The report identifies three immediate steps states and localities can take to counter the threat.

First, conduct regular threat assessments of voter registration systems, and upgrade them if necessary. Forty-two states now use systems that are at least a decade old and rely on outdated software like Windows XP, for which Microsoft stopped providing security updates in 2014. This makes them especially susceptible to hacks, like the global ransomware attack in May that devastated Britain's national health service. The annual cost of performing these assessments throughout the country would be just $1 million to $5 million; the upgrades would cost more.

Second, replace old electronic voting machines that produce no paper trail. Fourteen states still use these machines, meaning there's no independent way to confirm the accuracy of one in five votes cast nationwide. New, auditable machines for everyone would cost between $130 million and $400 million, according to the report -- a pittance considering the stakes.

Third, audit the votes. This is generally done by comparing a random sample of paper records to voting machine totals and looking for discrepancies -- intentional or not. About half the states perform postelection audits, but many don't examine enough ballots to ensure that errors will be caught.

The good news in all of this is that voting in America is decentralized by design -- states and localities run elections in 8,000 jurisdictions and operate about 100,000 polling places -- making it very hard for any single attack to have a broad impact. The bad news is that voting systems, including the machinery, are never a high budget priority. As a result, necessary upgrades don't happen, leading to widely varying levels of security around the country.

Congress needs to allocate more money now to help states upgrade their equipment and computer systems, and to perform threat assessments. A key player is the federal Election Assistance Commission, which sets certification standards that almost every state relies on in buying new machines. The commission, established after the 2000 election debacle, has a tiny staff and a budget smaller than a rounding error. Its work has never been more urgently needed, and yet congressional Republicans are perpetually trying to kill it.

Meanwhile, the Trump administration's election-integrity commission is focused like a laser on the phantom fear of in-person voter fraud, a pet project of Republican politicians for more than a decade. That election security has become just another partisan battleground is sad but not surprising in these toxic political times.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY SAM'S MYTH) 

Document NYTF000020170709ed790008s



Foreign Desk; SECT
Hand-Held Journalism in Harrowing Times

By CARA BUCKLEY, JOLIE RUBEN and MEKADO MURPHY 
881 words
9 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Some of the most harrowing and urgent reporting these days comes from everyday citizens armed with smartphones, and three new documentaries explore the breadth of their reach. ''City of Ghosts'' (the only one so far scheduled for release, on Friday, July 7) follows members of the Syrian watchdog group Raqqa Is Being Slaughtered Silently as they chronicle the Islamic State's atrocities. ''Cambodian Spring'' tells of a Buddhist monk who defies the authorities by standing with the poor, and ''Copwatch'' looks at American activists training others to monitor the police. All of these citizen journalists are driven by the conviction that the camera is often mightier than the sword. The following are edited excerpts from conversations with a number of them.

Hamoud Almousa, 25

Undisclosed location in Germany

''Having a baby hasn't kept me from doing this work, because my son is no better than other Syrian children. But he is outside of Syria, and safer than millions of children. Every member of my family is supportive of this work, and I'm 100 percent sure even my son will grow up to be. The main thing to solve in Syria is defeating Assad. Asking whether the bigger problem is Assad or ISIS, it's like asking me to pick one of two hells. Both are bad, both are criminal, but way more Syrians have been killed by Assad than by ISIS.''

Abdalaziz Alhamza, 25

Undisclosed location in Germany

''This year the U.S. and international coalition airstrikes have killed civilians much more than what ISIS has killed. And now the U.S.-supported militia is committing human rights violations. ISIS is not losing power. We've seen them everywhere, in Europe, in Iraq, they're able to recruit thousands of fighters in more than 84 countries. They keep spreading their propaganda online. My colleagues and I are afraid if ISIS is defeated in Raqqa and Iraq, no one will focus on their ideology, and we will end up in five or 10 years with a new generation of extremists, something worse than ISIS.''

Hussam Eesa, 28

Undisclosed location in Germany

''For us, there are tensions. ISIS is everywhere, and if anyone wants to attack us, we can't stop it. This is not like work. It's a dream for us to defeat ISIS, to defeat the Syrian regime. We can't stop, we can't sit out and just watch. The risk of our work will be continued even if ISIS is defeated in Raqqa and other territories, because ISIS is an idea. Like any other terrorist extremist group, they use religion as a tool to do whatever they want, to take people as slaves.''

Mohamad Almusari, 36

Undisclosed location in Germany

''Focusing on what's happening in Syria and Raqqa means you can't focus on anything else. The risk to us didn't start with this movie. We lost colleagues who were assassinated before, not only in Syria, but also in Turkey. But we have a duty we have to do.ISIS has long arms, but ISIS won't be able to stop us from sending out our message.''

Venerable Luon Sovath, 38

Phnom Penh

The Buddhist authorities in Cambodia have repeatedly threatened to defrock the Venerable Luon Sovath for his advocacy work with poor families forcibly evicted from their land. Armed with a camera, he records their protests, the destruction of their homes and his multiple near-arrests. ''The problem in Cambodia is the ruling party controls everything -- the money, the courts, the monks,'' Luon Sovath said. But as a Buddhist, he says it is his imperative to defend human rights, to educate and to try to stop violence. ''This is the rule of the Buddha,'' he said. ''Except I use a smartphone and Facebook. This is modern monk technology.''

David Whitt, 37

Ferguson, Mo.

''On a day-to-day basis, we deal with people who get stopped by the cops, in neighborhoods where people say, 'Yes, the police jumped all over me, and laid me on the ground.' If we can bring down harassment, we can curb those interactions where people get shot. What does keep me inspired is when I do go to a cop stop, and cops let people go. We act as a deterrent. We changed conditions in our community just by being concerned. We're not waiting on police or politicians to come up with new laws. There are laws on the books we're not utilizing because of people not knowing their rights.''

Jacob Crawford, 39

Oakland, Calif.

''While [We] Copwatch is a police accountability group, we consider ourselves journalists, because we're fact-finders. It's on us to bring information to people; so often it gets convoluted through police narratives. The concept of being a good witness is nothing new. We can't stop just because the police murders someone and gets away with it -- they've been doing that for years. You still have people jacked up and harassed, families being broken up. There's no way to give up. Especially if we know we can make a difference. It behooves us to train as many people as possible.''

Document NYTF000020170709ed790005h



World; Asia Pacific
No Justice, ‘o Value’or Women in a Lawless Afghan Province

By MUJIB MASHAL and ZAHRA NADER 
1,506 words
8 July 2017
16:45
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

There are three versions of how Tabaruk, a mother of six, died this spring during a journey through treacherous snow-covered mountains in Afghanistan .

She and her family had been expelled from their village in Ghor Province because her teenage daughter, Mah Yamsar, was said to have brought dishonor by becoming pregnant out of wedlock.

The police in Ghor say Tabaruk fell off her horse and died.

Members of the provincial council and human rights activists say she was pushed off a cliff, and then tied to a horse and dragged around until dead.

A third version of the story was told to Mah Yamsar by her 8-year-old brother, who was traveling with Tabaruk at the time. “hey killed my mother with the bullets of a gun,”he brother recounted.

If Afghanistan is one of the worst places to be a woman, then Ghor, a province so lawless that people often wonder if there is a government there at all, may be the country’ capital of gender-based violence and abuse. Week after week there are reports of women killed in Ghor by men who never face justice.

“here have been 118 registered cases of violence against women in Ghor in the past year, and those are only cases that have been reported,”aid Fawzia Koofi, head of the women’ rights commission in the Afghan Parliament, who recently visited Ghor to raise awareness about the lack of justice. “nd not a single suspect in these 118 cases has been arrested.”

“here is no value for women there,”s. Koofi added. “t is as if she deserves to die.”

With a population of over 700,000 and located in west-central Afghanistan, Ghor is considered one of the most deprived provinces of the country. It has received little government attention over the years, and the rule of law is almost nonexistent in certain parts of the territory. Ghor also shares borders with some of the most violent provinces with strong Taliban presence, making it vulnerable to the insurgency.

Some of the cases in Ghor briefly shock the nation before fading into its long history of abuse.

A teenage girl, Rukhshana, who was forced into an arranged marriage, was later caught fleeing with a lover. She was buried waist deep in dirt and stoned to death in October 2015  by a gang of men the government said were Taliban . The male lover was flogged and set free.

“rom her waist up, the rocks had ripped her body and some piece of stones had made it inside her ribs,”aid Hanifa, Rukhshana’ mother. “he blood would not stop. There were 12 other women in the room helping me wash her”n preparation for burial, she said.

Aziz Gul, 19, was shot at night and buried before her parents could even see her body.

Police records said she was also fleeing with a man, reportedly a lover, to avoid a forced marriage, when she was caught by a mob and killed on the spot last June. But her parents said she was abducted from her uncle’ house, and after she was recovered villagers accused her of adultery and then shot her.

“hey killed her around night prayer, and I heard the news at dawn prayer,”er mother said. “y that time they had buried the body already.”

In the most recent case, a woman named Suraya was trying to flee what she said was an abusive forced marriage of four years. She left in March with her lover and an elderly aunt, who accompanied them to help them avoid suspicion. All three were chased by heavily armed villagers and killed. Their charred bodies remained in the open for days; villagers threatened anyone who would come to pick them up.

Ms. Koofi, the lawmaker, said the violence had its roots in tribal feuds and the pervasive practice of marrying off girls at a very young age for large dowries. By the time the husband-to-be comes up with the money, often after years of labor in Iran, the girl has grown up and developed feelings for someone else.

Also playing a crucial role in the violence, Ms. Koofi said, is the absence of the rule of law and a complete sense of impunity.

When security officials are pressed on the situation in Ghor, Ms. Koofi said, they say they have to balance justice with security —nd that if they go after the perpetrators, they will side with the Taliban who are already gaining ground in the province.

This sense that the province’ misogyny and injustice would be tolerated as a compromise for stability was underscored when President Ashraf Ghani decided not to support a female governor he sent to the province after she faced resistance. The governor, Seema Joyenda, was ousted at the end of 2015, within six months of her arrival, and that move may have further cemented a feeling of impunity among fundamentalists.

There are other episodes that raise questions about the government’ commitment to trying to stop, or at least punish, the killing of women in the province.

Mullah Saadyar, one of the militant leaders listed on police documents as ordering the stoning of Rukhshana, recently came for treatment for an illness in Ghor’ provincial capital, Chaghcharan, but the government did not arrest him.

No one has yet been prosecuted for the death of Tabaruk, either.

In the months before she died, Tabaruk, who, like many Afghans used only one name, was focused on protecting her daughter from her own almost certain death.

The daughter, Mah Yamsar, says she was at home last year when a neighbor, Sayed Ahmad, raped her. She hid the episode from everyone, until her body started changing, and she realized she was pregnant. Her mother become her secret-bearer and helper. In rural Afghanistan, it is common for such pregnancies to end in honor killings.

Mr. Ahmad had pills delivered to Mah Yamsar that would help her have an abortion, which occurred in the seventh month of her pregnancy.

Mah Yamsar went to the hospital and stayed there for eight nights, needing two blood transfusions.

When she was discharged and returned to her village in the Dawlat Yar district of Ghor, elders gathered for a council to decide the family’ fate. Tabaruk and her husband were in attendance, as was Mr. Ahmad, the accused rapist, but Mah Yamsar was not.

“e said, ‘ won’ swear on the Quran, but I did not rape her,’”ah Yamsar said her mother told her about Mr. Ahmad’ words at the meeting.

The village council, swayed by Mr. Ahmad’ powerful relatives, said Mah Yamsar’ family had brought dishonor on the village. “oad up, and leave this place,”he family was told.

Mah Yamsar, still recovering from the abortion, was put on a motorcycle. Her mother rode a horse, while her father, her brother and two village elders, both men, followed behind.

Mah Yamsar arrived ahead of her family in Kharsang, also in Ghor, where the family planned to start a new life. Her mother never made it.

At first, her father said Tabaruk would come. Then he said she had fallen off the horse and died.

But her brother said their father was lying. His father and the two village elders took Tabaruk off into the distance, telling him to stay behind. When they returned, his father said Tabaruk had fallen off the horse.

But the child told Mah Yamsar he heard gunshots.

* \b ISIS\b0 , Aided by Ex-Taliban Groups, Makes Inroads in Northern Afghanistan 

* Killing of 8 Afghan Guards Shows Bitter Change at Bagram 

* Afghan Government Quietly Aids Breakaway Taliban Faction 

* Blown Up by \b ISIS\b0  While Feeding the Poor in Afghanistan 

Khanawda e Aziz gol Belqis, Aziz Gul’ mother, 50, and her father, Emam Qul, 60, at their home in Ghor province. Aziz Gul was slain by villagers who had accused her of adultery. | Said Maruf Saidy for The New York Times | An ID photo of Aziz Gul, provided to The New York Times by her family. | An image from a video that recorded the stoning of an Afghan teenager in Ghor province in October 2015. The girl, Rukhshana, who was forced into an arranged marriage, was caught fleeing with her lover. She was buried in the dirt to her waist and stoned to death; her lover was flogged then released. | Radio Liberty, via Radio Free Europe | Rukshana’ family during an interview in Ghor province. (From right: Muhammad Ibrahim Rukshana’ brother; Abdul Karim, her father; Bas Bibi, her sister; Hanifa, her mother; and Aftab, her sister.) “rom her waist up, the rocks had ripped her body and some piece of stones had made it inside her ribs,”anifa said of her daughter’ death by stoning. “he blood would not stop.” Said Maruf Saidy for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170708ed78003bh



world
No Justice, ‘o Value’or Women in a Lawless Afghan Province

By MUJIB MASHAL and ZAHRA NADER 
1,430 words
8 July 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

There are three versions of how Tabaruk, a mother of six, died this spring during a journey through treacherous snow-covered mountains in Afghanistan .

She and her family had been expelled from their village in Ghor Province because her teenage daughter, Mah Yamsar, was said to have brought dishonor by becoming pregnant out of wedlock.

The police in Ghor say Tabaruk fell off her horse and died.

Members of the provincial council and human rights activists say she was pushed off a cliff, and then tied to a horse and dragged around until dead.

A third version of the story was told to Mah Yamsar by her 8-year-old brother, who was traveling with Tabaruk at the time. “hey killed my mother with the bullets of a gun,”he brother recounted.

If Afghanistan is one of the worst places to be a woman, then Ghor, a province so lawless that people often wonder if there is a government there at all, may be the country’ capital of gender-based violence and abuse. Week after week there are reports of women abused or killed in Ghor by men who never face justice.

“here have been 118 registered cases of violence against women in Ghor in the past year, and those are only cases that have been reported,”aid Fawzia Koofi , head of the women’ rights commission in the Afghan Parliament, who recently visited Ghor to raise awareness about the lack of justice. “nd not a single suspect in these 118 cases has been arrested.”

“here is no value for women there,”s. Koofi added. “t is as if she deserves to die.”

With a population of over 700,000 and located in west-central Afghanistan, Ghor is considered one of the most deprived provinces of the country. It has received little government attention over the years, and the rule of law is almost nonexistent in certain parts of the territory. Ghor also shares borders with some of the most violent provinces with strong Taliban presence, making it vulnerable to the insurgency.

Some of the cases in Ghor briefly shock the nation before fading into its long history of abuse.

A teenage girl, Rukhshana, who was forced into an arranged marriage, was later caught fleeing with a lover. She was buried waist deep in dirt and stoned to death in October 2015  by a gang of men the government said were Taliban . The male lover was flogged and set free.

“rom her waist up, the rocks had ripped her body and some piece of stones had made it inside her ribs,”aid Hanifa, Rukhshana’ mother. “he blood would not stop. There were 12 other women in the room helping me wash her”n preparation for burial, she said.

Aziz Gul, 19, was shot at night and buried before her parents could even see her body.

Police records said she was also fleeing with a man, reportedly a lover, to avoid a forced marriage, when she was caught by a mob and killed on the spot last June. But her parents said she was abducted from her uncle’ house, and after she was recovered villagers accused her of adultery and then shot her.

“hey killed her around night prayer, and I heard the news at dawn prayer,”er mother, Belqis, said. “y that time they had buried the body already.”

In the most recent case, a woman named Suraya was trying to flee what she said was an abusive forced marriage of four years. She left in March with her lover and an elderly aunt, who accompanied them to help them avoid suspicion. All three were chased by heavily armed villagers and killed. Their charred bodies remained in the open for days; villagers threatened anyone who would come to pick them up.

Ms. Koofi, the lawmaker, said the violence had its roots in tribal feuds and the pervasive practice of marrying off girls at a very young age for large dowries. By the time the husband-to-be comes up with the money, often after years of labor in Iran, the girl has grown up and developed feelings for someone else.

Also playing a crucial role in the violence, Ms. Koofi said, is the absence of the rule of law and a complete sense of impunity.

When security officials are pressed on the situation in Ghor, Ms. Koofi said, they say they have to balance justice with security —nd that if they go after the perpetrators, they will side with the Taliban who are already gaining ground in the province.

This sense that the province’ misogyny and injustice would be tolerated as a compromise for stability was underscored when President Ashraf Ghani decided not to support a female governor he sent to the province after she faced resistance. The governor, Seema Joyenda, was ousted at the end of 2015, within six months of her arrival, and that move may have further cemented a feeling of impunity among fundamentalists.

There are other episodes that raise questions about the government’ commitment to trying to stop, or at least punish, the killing of women in the province.

Mullah Saadyar, one of the militant leaders listed on police documents as ordering the stoning of Rukhshana, recently came for treatment for an illness in Ghor’ provincial capital, Chaghcharan, but the government did not arrest him.

No one has yet been prosecuted for the death of Tabaruk, either.

In the months before she died, Tabaruk, who, like many Afghans used only one name, was focused on protecting her daughter from her own almost certain death.

The daughter, Mah Yamsar, says she was at home last year when a neighbor, Sayed Ahmad, raped her. She hid the episode from everyone, until her body started changing, and she realized she was pregnant. Her mother become her secret-bearer and helper. In rural Afghanistan, it is common for such pregnancies to end in honor killings.

Mr. Ahmad had pills delivered to Mah Yamsar that would help her have an abortion, which occurred in the seventh month of her pregnancy.

Mah Yamsar went to the hospital and stayed there for eight nights, needing two blood transfusions.

When she was discharged and returned to her village in the Dawlat Yar district of Ghor, elders gathered for a council to decide the family’ fate. Tabaruk and her husband were in attendance, as was Mr. Ahmad, the accused rapist, but Mah Yamsar was not.

“e said, ‘ won’ swear on the Quran, but I did not rape her,’”ah Yamsar said her mother told her about Mr. Ahmad’ words at the meeting.

The village council, swayed by Mr. Ahmad’ powerful relatives, said Mah Yamsar’ family had brought dishonor on the village. “oad up, and leave this place,”he family was told.

Mah Yamsar, still recovering from the abortion, was put on a motorcycle. Her mother rode a horse, while her father, her brother and two village elders, both men, followed behind.

Mah Yamsar arrived ahead of her family in Kharsang, also in Ghor, where the family planned to start a new life. Her mother never made it.

At first, her father said Tabaruk would come. Then he said she had fallen off the horse and died.

But her brother said their father was lying. His father and the two village elders took Tabaruk off into the distance, telling him to stay behind. When they returned, his father said Tabaruk had fallen off the horse.

But the child told Mah Yamsar he heard gunshots.

PHOTOS: Belqis, left, and Emam Qul in Ghor Province. Their daughter, Aziz Gul, was killed by villagers who accused her of adultery, and buried before her parents could see her body. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAID MARUF SAIDY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES ); Above, an image from a video of the stoning of Rukhshana, an Afghan teenager, in 2015. “he blood would not stop,”aid her mother, Hanifa, second from left with Rukhshana’ family. Rukhshana’ lover was flogged and freed. Afghan women, below left, protested the stoning. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RADIO LIBERTY, VIA RADIO FREE EUROPE ; SAID MARUF SAIDY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES ; HEDAYATULLAH AMID/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY); Aziz Gul was shot to death.

* \b ISIS\b0 , Aided by Ex-Taliban Groups, Makes Inroads in Northern Afghanistan 

* Killing of 8 Afghan Guards Shows Bitter Change at Bagram 

* Afghan Government Quietly Aids Breakaway Taliban Faction 

* Blown Up by \b ISIS\b0  While Feeding the Poor in Afghanistan 

Document INHT000020170709ed7800002



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S., Russia and Jordan Reach Agreement to Facilitate a Cease-Fire in Part of Syria

By GARDINER HARRIS 
714 words
8 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The United States, Russia and Jordan have agreed to foster a cease-fire in a limited area of southwestern Syria that will begin at noon on Sunday, Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson said on Friday after the first face-to-face meeting between President Trump and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.

The agreement came after months of negotiations among the three countries. A senior State Department official who was involved in the talks said important pieces of the deal remained to be hammered out in the coming days, including who would monitor and enforce the pause in violence.

''I think this is our first indication of the U.S. and Russia being able to work together in Syria,'' Mr. Tillerson told reporters on Friday night in Hamburg, Germany, after the more than two-hour meeting between Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin. ''And as a result of that, we had a very lengthy discussion regarding other areas in Syria that we can continue to work together on to de-escalate the areas and violence once we defeat ISIS, and to work together toward a political process that will secure the future of the Syrian people.''

The agreement hinges on a boundary line -- as set by the United States, Russia and Jordan -- between areas of control for the warring forces and state proxies, the State Department official said. But outlawed factions -- including Al Qaeda -- could refuse to abide by the agreement and even actively work to undermine it, the official said.

Moscow has assured the United States that the government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria will abide by the agreement, the official said. The assent of the government in Damascus came even though the United States continues to insist that neither Mr. Assad, nor any member of his family, can have a long-term role in the country's leadership.

News of the agreement was first reported by The Associated Press.

The United States and Russia agreed to similar cease-fires last year, all of which quickly disintegrated. But Mr. Tillerson said there were reasons to believe that this latest attempt would not only hold, but could serve as a model for cease-fires elsewhere in Syria.

He said the defeat of the Islamic State was within sight, and negotiators were discussing what comes next. Mr. Tillerson also said war fatigue -- after six years of conflict -- was helping speed potential agreements.

''In many respects, people are getting tired. They're getting weary of the conflict,'' Mr. Tillerson said.

Sergey V. Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, later said the cease-fire would take effect from midnight to noon local time on Sunday in the areas of Daraa, Quneitra and Sweida in Syria along the Jordanian border. ''At first, security around this de-escalation zone will be guaranteed by the forces and means of the Russian military police, in coordination with the Americans and Jordanians,'' he said.

But the senior State Department official disputed that, saying the parties had yet to agree on monitoring. The official said the cease-fire was, at best, a modest advance in ending the conflict. Still, southwestern Syria has experienced far less violence than in other parts of the country during the war, so the areas the cease-fire will cover is by no means at the heart of the conflict.

Mr. Tillerson said that Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin spent much of their more than two hour meeting discussing the Syrian conflict.

''And I would tell you that, by and large, our objectives are exactly the same. How we get there, we each have a view,'' Mr. Tillerson said. ''But there's a lot more commonality to that than there are differences. So we want to build on the commonality, and we spent a lot of time talking about next steps.''

Mr. Tillerson conceded that the United States may not have all the answers.

''Maybe they've got the right approach and we've got the wrong approach,'' he said in an extraordinary concession, considering previous statements by Mr. Trump that Russia likely had prior knowledge of a Syrian chemical attack on its own people.

Document NYTF000020170708ed7800042



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Women Look for Empathy, Not Love, at 'Speed Date a Muslim'

By TACEY RYCHTER 
1,217 words
7 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MELBOURNE -- The all-female, all-Muslim staff at a cafe in Melbourne's inner north scrambled to find extra seating. It was not a late lunch rush on a typical Sunday afternoon in June, but rather the most well-attended session of Speed Date a Muslim since it began at the end of 2015.

The free monthly event, in which the public is invited to ask frank questions of Muslim women, does not involve any actual dating, but it is meant to be informal and informative -- a forum for confronting fear, opening conversations and breaking down stereotypes while breaking bread.

''Nothing is off topic,'' said Hana Assafiri, the founder of Speed Date a Muslim and the owner of the cafe, Moroccan Deli-cacy, where the event takes place. ''Nothing is off the table.''

Across the Western world, Muslim communities are exploring new ways to engage with non-Muslims who are questioning the role of Islam. In the United States, Muslim leaders seeking to distance their faith from the violence of the Islamic State have held question-and-answer sessions at public libraries and in the classrooms of Christian universities. In Europe, secular Muslims are also increasingly speaking out, reminding critics of the diversity within their ranks.

Here in Melbourne, Ms. Assafiri, 53, started Speed Date a Muslim with the idea, she said, that ''most people are decent, and that when we do humanize one another's issues, we do all walk away a little more changed and accepting.''

It was after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, that Ms. Assafiri, a Muslim woman of Moroccan and Lebanese parents, said she first became aware of anti-Islamic sentiment in Australia. But in the last two and a half years, as high-profile terrorist attacks by Muslims have increased distrust of the group, she said she had felt fear and prejudice shift further into mainstream Australian discourse.

She pointed to Sonia Kruger, the co-host of a popular morning television program who, on air last July, suggested a total ban on Muslim immigration into Australia. Last month Pauline Hanson, the leader of the right-wing One Nation Party, wrote an open letter to Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull calling for migrants and refugees on terrorist watch lists to be deported or interned.

On a more personal note, Ms. Assafiri, her staff and their female Muslim friends openly recount stories of abuse, of men trying to run them over in their cars, or of their adolescent daughters receiving death threats on the street. Ms. Assafiri believes these threats are largely directed at Muslim women rather than Muslim men, because, she said, they're the ''softer target.''

Speed Date a Muslim is in many ways an effort to combat the dehumanization that lies at the core of these threats, she said. It is about highlighting the nuance of the individual, and female, Muslim experience.

Some of those attending the event in June seemed to be there mainly to lend support. Others were sincere and candid about their concerns -- including Maureen Colman, 64, who came to the event with her sister, Mary Dykes, 69. Both said they had a Catholic background.

Just before sitting down, Ms. Colman said some Muslim clothing was a point of discomfort for her, particularly the full-body or face coverings like the burqa or the niqab, which she worries is uncomfortable and ''cruel.'' She compared the full covering to the heavy clothing of Orthodox Jews in Melbourne's southeast, which she said she also found ''extreme.''

As the one-hour event kicked off, silver trays of powdered Turkish delight and squares of syrup-soaked basbousa appeared. Some people started eating. Others hesitated. It was nearing the end of Ramadan, during which many of the world's 1.8 billion Muslims -- including some women here -- were fasting during daylight hours.

A number of the conversations began with questions about Ramadan (''Do you just pig out?''). Then it drifted to the hijab (''Do you have beautiful, long hair under there?'') and to whether the women had been coerced into wearing it.

Topics of racism arose (''What can I do to be more welcoming to you, if I saw you on the street?''), as did terrorism (''Why do they say they're doing this for Allah?'') and domestic violence.

The Muslim women meandered through their answers politely, with occasional surprises. Manal Shehab, 50, the only woman in the room wearing a niqab, said she wore it for 24 years previously and only recently stopped, although she still wears it to Speed Date a Muslim events to represent that group of women.

The moment of greatest tension emerged when one woman wanted to discuss Ayaan Hirsi Ali, the Somali-born, Dutch-American author and advocate of overhauling Islam who once called the faith ''a destructive, nihilistic cult of death.'' She ''speaks a lot of sense,'' the woman said.

''We love her,'' Ms. Assafiri said dryly, to knowing laughter in the room. She led a video petition against Ms. Hirsi Ali's planned speaking tour to Australia earlier this year. The visit was canceled, although it's unclear if that was because of the petition.

She ''has no regard for how her discourse impacts the very women she's claiming to want to empower,'' Ms. Assafiri says of Ms. Hirsi Ali, cutting off the woman's question.

With that, the conversation moved on. A few minutes later, Ms. Assafiri talked about her personal experience with domestic abuse and being ''disempowered by all cultural expressions called Islam.''

''I'm talking about all sorts of violence Ayaan Hirsi Ali can't even imagine -- ''

''I doubt it,'' the woman said.

''I don't think you know me, respectfully,'' Ms. Assafiri replied.

While the event strives for openness and candor, sore points are hit from time to time.

Saara Sabbagh, 45, for example, has been answering questions at Speed Date since its inception. She said found the events ''enriching,'' but admitted they could be emotionally taxing.

''There are times I've had to hold back tears, you know, when you constantly hear the stereotypes and the assumptions made about you,'' Ms. Sabbagh said over the phone after the event.

Near the end of the session last month, a woman asked if negative media portrayals of Islam were genuinely felt by Muslim women in Australia.

Ms. Sabbagh, wrapped in a purple head scarf, immediately spoke up, addressing the entire room.

''My 10-year-old daughter gets harassed,'' she said. ''Somebody calls her a terrorist and says to her: 'We saw which house you came out of. We're going to kill you.'''

''I'm from Syria,'' she added. ''People don't need to tell us what ISIS is doing. We are at the receiving end of ISIS. We're in this together. There's no us and them.''

The next Speed Date a Muslim will take place at Moroccan Deli-cacy in Melbourne on July 16 at 3 p.m. More details here .

Hana Assafiri, above, founder of Speed Date a Muslim, last month at her cafe in Melbourne, Australia. At left, Manal Shehab answers questions at the monthly events. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ASANKA BRENDON RATNAYAKE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170707ed7700066



Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; SECTC
Fighting  ISIS  With Journalism

By MANOHLA DARGIS 
923 words
7 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDIn 796, the caliph Harun al-Rashid moved the seat of the Muslim Empire to the northern Syrian city of Raqqa, on the banks of the Euphrates. There, Harun -- the inspiration for a caliph in ''One Thousand and One Nights'' -- is said to have played polo and perfumed the air with garments worn by female slaves. Raqqa's later history largely registers as more mundane, a tale of declines and revivals that turned catastrophic when the Islamic State, or ISIS, seized it in 2014, making the city its effective capital. American-backed forces are currently battling ISIS for control of a city in ruins.

''City of Ghosts,'' a blunt instrument of a documentary, is an urgent and heart-heavy account of Syrian resistance from the ground up. Specifically, it recounts the story and activism of Raqqa Is Being Slaughtered Silently, or R.B.S.S., a citizen-journalist initiative that emerged in April 2014 to secretly record the atrocities committed by ISIS in Raqqa. (R.B.S.S.'s website states that the group is nonpartisan and explains that it is ''a campaign launched by a group of nonviolent activists in Raqqa to expose the atrocities committed by the regime of Bashar al-Assad and terrorist extremist group the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria'' toward civilians in that city.)

Directed by Matthew Heineman, ''City of Ghosts'' primarily focuses on three R.B.S.S. activists identified by their first names -- Aziz, Hamoud and Mohamad -- who, even after being forced to flee Raqqa, intently work to get images and information about the city out into the world. Mr. Heineman, who is also the movie's cinematographer, more or less opens and closes the documentary in 2015 with some of the activists in New York, where R.B.S.S. received an award from the nonprofit group the Committee to Protect Journalists. It's a distracting framing device that suggests Mr. Heineman believed that he first needed to give his audience reassuringly recognizable faces. Cut to David Remnick, editor of The New Yorker, at the podium.

''City of Ghosts'' is best when it lets the activists tell their own stories, which they do in smoothly edited tag-team voice-over, in on-camera scenes from their life abroad and in ghastly underground images recorded in Raqqa. It's an account of heroic resistance that essentially begins in 2011 when the Arab Spring reached Syria (''we started to scream for freedom''), and peaceful demonstrations against President Assad were met with state violence followed by power grabs. Along the way, Mr. Heineman furnishes a sketchy look at the various players and geopolitical stakes, glossing over Syria's historical complexities and the role that the United States has played in the rise of ISIS.

The activists come across as ordinary men made extraordinary by circumstance; some seem almost surprised at where life and war have taken them. Aziz was a student who became a spokesman, and Mohamad was a teacher turned reporter, but not much else about the group's origins comes through. Mr. Heineman glides over the nuts and bolts of its operational beginning. He may not have thought it germane, or maybe thought covering it might have endangered lives. Or perhaps Mr. Heineman, an excitingly visceral director -- his last documentary was ''Cartel Land'' -- thought it might slow this fast-paced feature down. Like the Arab Spring represented in the movie, R.B.S.S. almost seems to have spontaneously erupted.

That's unfortunate because more information and in-depth analysis, as well as greater restraint in the use of atrocity images, might have deepened a movie that leans on shortcuts and visual shocks. In ''City of Ghosts,'' Mr. Heineman marshals some incredible material -- including on-the-run undercover cellphone imagery -- into a moving record of extraordinary individual and collective heroism, one that eventually emphasizes the personal over the political. You admire Aziz, Hamoud, Mohamad and their partisan compatriots. And soon you fear for them too, worrying over their every move as they fight an enemy that is scarily near. Yet as these men come into the focus, Raqqa and the region recede.

As the activists struggle to keep Raqqa alive for the world, funneling news to outside agencies, the dead in this movie -- decapitated, crucified, shot -- come close to overwhelming the living. In a few instances, Mr. Heineman shows men being shot point blank in the head; elsewhere, he cuts way before the fatal moment, which turns these murders into appalling cinematic cliffhangers. He seems to believe that it's crucial to include numerous unfiltered ISIS atrocities, but raw and blurred versions of savagery prove this false. Mr. Heineman is clearly passionate and sincere, but he doesn't fully grasp the power of suggestion or the audience's capacity for empathy. You don't need to watch a man die to understand the horror of his death.

City of Ghosts

Rated R for graphic atrocity imagery. Running time: 1 hour 32 minutes.

Correction: July 11, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: A picture credit on Friday with a film review of the documentary ''City of Ghosts'' omitted a source of the image. The photograph, of a scene from the movie, is from Amazon Studios/A&E Indie Films, IFC Films, not just IFC Films.

A scene from the documentary ''City of Ghosts,'' opening on Friday, which primarily follows three Syrian activists. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IFC FILMS) 

Document NYTF000020170711ed770000l



U.S.; Politics
Administration Officials, Including Sessions, Tour Guantáamo

By CHARLIE SAVAGE and ADAM GOLDMAN 
1,248 words
7 July 2017
14:56
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections Appended

WASHINGTON —ttorney General Jeff Sessions and his deputy, Rod J. Rosenstein, visited the American wartime prison at Guantáamo Bay, Cuba, on Friday in a gesture of support for continuing to detain terrorism suspects without trial there and to prosecute some before a military commission.

In a statement, Ian Prior, a spokesman for the Justice Department, said the two officials would be “eeting with the people on the ground who are leading our governmentwide efforts”t the prison. He said it was important for Justice Department officials “o have an up-to-date understanding of current operations”here.

“eeping this country safe from terrorists is the highest priority of the Trump administration,”r. Prior said. “ecent attacks in Europe and elsewhere confirm that the threat to our nation is immediate and real, and it remains essential that we use every lawful tool available to prevent as many attacks as possible.”

Dan Coats, the director of national intelligence, and Thomas Bossert, the White House Homeland Security and counterterrorism adviser, also went on the brief trip, spokesmen for the two officials later said.

Mr. Sessions has been an outspoken supporter of continuing to use the Guantáamo prison and military commissions, dating back to his years as a senator from Alabama. This year, soon after becoming attorney general, he called the prison “ very fine place”o hold, interrogate and prosecute terrorism suspects.

Still, the Trump administration has yet to bring any newly captured detainees to the prison. And while the administration circulated drafts of an executive order in January and February that would explicitly affirm that the prison would stay open and should be used to hold future terrorism suspects, President Trump has yet to sign any such order.

During his confirmation to be deputy attorney general, Mr. Rosenstein —ho was a United States attorney in Maryland under both the Bush and Obama administrations —old Congress that he expected terrorism cases to continue to be prosecuted in civilian trials, also known as Article III courts.

“umerous terrorism-related cases have progressed through Article III courts, and I expect that to continue,”Mr. Rosenstein wrote in answer to a question posed by a Democratic senator. “etermining the appropriate strategy in a particular national security investigation is a fact-based inquiry based on the individual circumstances.”

For months, law enforcement officials have wanted to bring a Qaeda suspect known as Abu Khaybar, who is being held in Yemen, to the Eastern District of New York to face charges there before a civilian court. But it is not clear whether the Trump administration has made a decision about whether to take custody of him and, if so, what to do with him.

F.B.I. agents are also hoping to bring back and try a pair of American terrorism suspects being held in Turkey, according to former and current United States officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations. Under current law, the Guantáamo military tribunals may not be used to prosecute American citizens, although Mr. Trump said during the campaign that he was “ine”ith expanding their use to encompass citizens.

President George W. Bush opened the prison in January 2002 as a place to bring captives from the fighting in Afghanistan in the months after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, and nearly 800 prisoners were eventually brought there. After the prison’ image became toxic around the world and the Supreme Court ruled that federal civilian courts had jurisdiction to review habeas corpus lawsuits by detainees there, the Bush administration began trying to close it, reducing its population to 242 men by the time Mr. Bush left office.

President Barack Obama continued that policy, ordering the prison closed within a year as one of his first acts upon taking office in 2009. But, as political winds shifted, that proved easier said than done, and he failed to complete the task. Still, by the time he left office in January, the detainee population had been reduced to 41 men.

By contrast, Mr. Trump vowed during the campaign to keep the prison open and fill it again, an aspiration that was echoed in the early draft executive orders. Some legal specialists have warned that it is not clear that the government’ wartime authority to fight the perpetrators of the Sept. 11 attacks —hat is, Al Qaeda —overs the Islamic State, and so bringing in a detainee tied to that group could create legal risks.

In April, American military officials had hoped to capture a top Islamic State terrorist in Syria. But the man, Abdurakhmon Uzbeki, was killed in a firefight with American commandos. Officials said that federal prosecutors had been preparing civilian criminal charges against him for possible prosecution in the United States.

This year, Mr. Sessions expressed frustration at the pace of military commissions. Two major death-penalty cases —ne over the 2000 bombing of the naval destroyer Cole, and one against Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and four other detainees accused of playing a role in the Sept. 11 attacks —ave languished in pretrial hearings for years. Mr. Sessions said then that it was time to figure out how use the system in an effective way.

Last month, military commission prosecutors charged a longtime detainee best known as Hambali with two deadly bombings in Indonesia in 2002 and 2003, setting in motion what could be the first new tribunal case of the Trump era. The chief defense counsel said that prosecutors had informed him that they would not seek the death penalty if the so-called convening authority, which oversees the system, permitted the case to proceed.

The 41 detainees at Guantáamo include five who are on a list of those recommended for transfer to stable countries, and about two dozen who are recommended for continued indefinite wartime detention without trial.

Although the Trump administration has continued to operate parole-like boards that periodically review the status of indefinite detainees, it has given no sign that it intends to transfer anybody. The State Department office that negotiates transfers —nd monitors former detainees who were previously resettled or repatriated —ow has just one full-time official, down from half a dozen during the Obama administration.

Follow Charlie Savage @charlie_savage and Adam Goldman @adamgoldmanNYT on Twitter.

Correction: July 7, 2017, Friday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misidentified the Justice Department spokesperson who issued a statement about Mr. Sessions’rip to Guantáamo. It was Ian Prior, not Sarah Isgur Flores.

Correction: July 11, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Saturday about the visit of four senior Trump administration officials to the American wartime prison at Guantáamo Bay, Cuba, misidentified the location of two deadly terror bombings in 2002 and 2003. They were in Indonesia, not Malaysia.

* Guantáamo Detainee May Get Military Trial Over Bombings in Indonesia

* Sessions Says Guantáamo Is a ‘ery Fine Place’or New Suspects

* \b ISIS\b0  Detainees May Be Held at Guantáamo, Document Shows

* The Fight Over Guantáamo’ Parole Board, Explained

* Fact-Check: Trump Is Wrong About Guantáamo Detainees

* Obama Transfers 4 From Guantáamo, Leaving 41 There as Term Ends

Guantáamo Bay in 2014. Attorney General Jeff Sessions has been an outspoken supporter of continuing to use the Guantáamo prison and military commissions. | Damon Winter/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170707ed77003e9



Briefing
G-20, Penn Station, Tesla: Your Friday Briefing

By MARK A. WALSH 
1,277 words
7 July 2017
11:32
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•-20 leaders gather in Germany …

The long-awaited first meeting between President Trump and President Vladimir Putin of Russia took place this morning on the sidelines of the Group of 20 summit meeting in Hamburg, and in Moscow’ view, the U.S. was likely to come out looking weaker.

We have a team of reporters and a photographer on the ground. Get the latest updates in our live briefing.

Mr. Trump and Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany held a low-key meeting Thursday night, and the handshakes, at least, went well. Ms. Merkel knows she has to deal with the American leader, the question is: How?

Protests in Hamburg turned violent Thursday night, and up to 100,000 people are expected to participate in further demonstrations today. New York City’ mayor, Bill de Blasio, is there.

•…fter Trump’ warm welcome in Poland .

President Trump  said in Warsaw on Thursday that Western civilization was at risk of decline, and under threat from “adical Islamic terrorism”nd “he creep of government bureaucracy.”

He also held up Poland as a beacon of freedom, but international rights groups disagree.

• new approach on North Korea .

As the country’ missile program progresses, small civilian satellites in the U.S. could help track missiles that Pyongyang launches. The devices were developed to count cars in Target parking lots and to monitor crops.

Amid the posturing on the Korean Peninsula, the South has made a conciliatory gesture, calling for cross-border family reunions.

•ore transportation troubles.

A New Jersey Transit train derailed as it entered Pennsylvania Station on Thursday night, causing another round of delays but no major injuries.

The episode came just days before major repairs begin at the transit hub. Here are our suggestions for alternative routes.

•n agreement in Illinois.

After more than two years of political sparring, missed payments and plunging credit ratings, the state finally did what most do every year: It finished a budget.

•o escape, and little chance of surrender.

Our correspondent went with the Iraq counterterrorism force to the old city of Mosul, where Islamic State fighters are hemmed in and civilians are trapped.

The resistance was fierce and fanatical, even by ISIS standards.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

Donald Trump’ life and career have been defined by his legal battles. But what will they mean for his presidency?

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•.S. employers added 222,000 jobs in June, more than expected. The jobless rate edged up to 4.4 percent.

• he European Union’ trade agreement with Japan is a rebuke of President Trump’ policies. Here’ what’ in it, and why it matters.

•rance has pledged to phase out the sale of cars that use fossil fuels by 2040. Tesla, though, has lost its spot as the most valuable U.S. automaker.

•ean Baquet, The Times’ executive editor, answered readers’uestions about plans to eliminate a stand-alone copy desk.

•.S. stocks were down on Thursday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•Instagram can harm body image —ut it can also inspire us.

•ong-term travel requires letting go of expectations and plans. Here are our tips.

• Sicilian cook shares a recipe for baked eggplant with ricotta, mozzarella and anchovy.

Noteworthy

•eaming up.

In today’ 360 video, admire a project in which 12 pairs of artists communicated with each other for five months using only visual tools.

• culture of brutality.

The death of a Muslim recruit at Parris Island has raised questions about severe hazing at the U.S. military boot camp.

• iny building blocks.

Researchers at CERN have spotted a particle that could provide insight into how quarks interact.

•eady for the weekend.

At the movies, we have reviews of “The House,”“The Beguiled”nd the documentary “City of Ghosts.”e also spoke with Oscar Isaac, who is returning to the theater to play Hamlet.

For book lovers, we have a piece in praise of Daphne du Maurier, and take a look at a thriller, “The Sisters Chase.”

On the music scene, our writer spent time with Haim, a rock band very much devoted to being a rock band.

•uotation of the day.

“here isn’ much more I could accomplish at the Office of Government Ethics, given the current situation.”

Walter M. Shaub Jr., the director of the agency, who is stepping down to take a job with an advocacy group.

•est of late-night TV .

This feature will be back on Tuesday. The hosts are taking a break.

Back Story

In the U.S. Supreme Court’ 227-year history, only four women have served on its bench (three of them currently). On this day in 1981, President Ronald Reagan followed up on a campaign promise to appoint the first, announcing that he would nominate Sandra Day O’onnor.

Reaction was swift. “lready the flack is starting & from my own supporters,”r. Reagan wrote in his diary. “ think she’l make a good Justice.”

Viewed as a centrist and moderate conservative, she became a swing vote in decisions upholding voting rights, environmental protection, affirmative action and religious liberty.

Justice O’onnor, born in 1930, graduated third in her class from Stanford Law School. Yet the only position offered to her was legal secretary. She declined.

“t wasn’ until the ’0s that women began to bring to the forefront the continuing concerns that they had about equal opportunity,”she told The Saturday Evening Post in 1985, adding, “ am sure that but for that effort, I would not be serving in this job.”

While she never marched for women’ rights, that didn’ stop scholars from analyzing her feminist credentials.

Does she call herself a feminist? No. She prefers to be called “ fair judge and a hard worker.”

Danielle Belopotosky contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany welcomed President Trump to the Group of 20 summit meeting in Hamburg, Germany, this morning. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | Travelers at Pennsylvania Station on Thursday, after a derailment caused delays. | Caitlin Ochs for The New York Times | Members of the Iraqi counterterrorism service in Mosul on Thursday. They have to be especially vigilant because some Islamic State militants have gotten a hold of Iraqi soldiers’niforms. | Ahmad Al-Rubaye/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Marine Corps recruits pausing between drills at Parris Island, S.C. There have been reports of severe hazing at the base, far more than at other U.S. military boot camps. | Robert Clark for The New York Times | Sandra Day O’onnor in 1981. | George Tames/The New York Times | The Metropolitan Museum of Art commissioned 12 artists, paired together, to communicate using visuals for five months. Two paired artists discuss their experiences in this 360 video. | By JEAN YVES CHAINON, TIM CHAFFEE and SAMANTHA QUICK 

Document NYTFEED020170707ed77002bd



Op-Ed Columnist
Opinion
Why the G-20 Matters

By DAVID LEONHARDT 
578 words
7 July 2017
15:45
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

This article is part of the Opinion Today newsletter. You can sign up here to receive more briefings and a guide to the section daily in your inbox.

Even if you’e not paying much attention to this week’ Group of 20 summit, it’ a good reminder of the major themes in geopolitics right now. And those themes are worth some attention. They include:

Renewed U.S.-Russia rivalry. When President Trump and Vladimir Putin meet today at the G-20, Putin will have a major advantage: a clear vision of what he wants, compared with Trump’ vague desire “o come home with something,”s Slate’ Fred Kaplan writes.

In The Washington Post, former C.I.A. deputy director Michael Morell and former National Security Council staff member Samantha Vinograd, write a mock pre-meeting briefing to Putin from his advisers. “ussia is in its strongest position since the end of the Cold War; the United States, our great adversary, is the weakest it has been,”he memo states. “ur policies are working. We need only to keep going.”

China, emboldened. The chaotic foreign policy of the Trump administration has given Beijing an opening to play more of a global leadership role. As Stratfor explained: “he Chinese president will attend the event having recently returned from state visits to Russia and Germany showcasing China’ role as a champion of free trade and global cooperation when the United States is emphasizing its national interests.”

But shadowing China —nd almost everything else —t the summit is North Korea.

U.S.-Europe tensions. In Poland yesterday, Trump spoke about “he West” in terms straight out of the alt-right playbook. “uch rhetoric is meant to conjure blood-and-soil nationalism,”wrote The New Republic’ Jeet Heer, “efining the West not based on ideals like democracy and liberty, but atavistic loyalties to territory and shared kinship.”

In doing so, Trump cast his lot with the European political opponents of Emmanuel Macron and Angela Merkel, including some prominent Poles. “oland’ defense minister, Antoni Macierewicz, said that his government is on the same page as Trump when it comes to being attacked by ‘iberals, postcommunists, lefties and genderists,’”s Masha Lipman writes in The New Yorker.

Finally, a bit of news about The Times’ Opinion report:

We have a new team that will be creating opinion videos —risk pieces with a strong point of view (not to be confused with our short-documentary unit, Op-Docs). As Adam B. Ellick, the team’ executive producer, explains, “he department will produce its own Opinion video, but will also provide a video op-ed platform by collaborating with and curating outside voices, from experts to do-it-yourself vloggers to comedians.”

The team published its first video op-ed yesterday, “ombs Will Not Defeat \b ISIS\b0  (but Maybe the Internet Will).” In it, Abdalaziz Alhamza, a Syrian activist, tells of risking his life to expose the horror of life under ISIS.

Also, we’e still hiring to complete the video team.

You can join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook. I am also writing a daily email newsletter and invite you to subscribe.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).

Leaders at the Group of 20 summit meeting in Hamburg, Germany, after posing for a group photograph. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170707ed77003pd



World; Australia
Looking for Empathy, Not Love, at ‘peed Date a Muslim’

By TACEY RYCHTER 
1,349 words
6 July 2017
21:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MELBOURNE —he all-female, all-Muslim staff at a cafe in Melbourne’ inner north scrambled to find extra seating. It was not a late lunch rush on a typical Sunday afternoon in June, but rather the most well-attended session of Speed Date a Muslim since it began at the end of 2015.

The free monthly event, in which the public is invited to ask frank questions of Muslim women, does not involve any actual dating, but it is meant to be informal and informative — forum for confronting fear, opening conversations and breaking down stereotypes while breaking bread.

“othing is off topic,”aid Hana Assafiri, the founder of Speed Date a Muslim and the owner of the cafe, Moroccan Deli-cacy, where the event takes place. “othing is off the table.”

Across the Western world, Muslim communities are exploring new ways to engage with non-Muslims who are questioning the role of Islam. In the United States, Muslim leaders seeking to distance their faith from the violence of the Islamic State have held question - and-answer sessions  at public libraries and in the classrooms of Christian universities. In Europe, secular Muslims are also increasingly speaking out , reminding critics of the diversity within their ranks.

Here in Melbourne, Ms. Assafiri, 53, started Speed Date a Muslim with the idea, she said, that “ost people are decent, and that when we do humanize one another’ issues, we do all walk away a little more changed and accepting.”

It was after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, that Ms. Assafiri, a Muslim woman of Moroccan and Lebanese parents, said she first became aware of anti-Islamic sentiment in Australia. But in the last two and a half years, as high-profile terrorist attacks by Muslims have increased distrust of the group, she said she had felt fear and prejudice shift further into mainstream Australian discourse.

She pointed to Sonia Kruger , the co-host of a popular morning television program who, on air in July 2016, suggested a total ban on Muslim immigration into Australia. Last month Pauline Hanson, the leader of the right-wing One Nation Party, wrote an open letter  to Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull calling for migrants and refugees on terrorist watch lists to be deported or interned.

On a more personal note, Ms. Assafiri, her staff and their female Muslim friends openly recount stories of abuse, of men trying to run them over in their cars, or of their adolescent daughters receiving death threats on the street. Ms. Assafiri believes these threats are largely directed at Muslim women rather than Muslim men, because, she said, they’e the “ofter target.”

Speed Date a Muslim is in many ways an effort to combat the dehumanization that lies at the core of these threats, she said. It is about highlighting the nuance of the individual, and female, Muslim experience.

Some of those attending the event in June seemed to be there mainly to lend support. Others were sincere and candid about their concerns —ncluding Maureen Colman, 64, who came to the event with her sister, Mary Dykes, 69. Both said they had a Catholic background.

Just before sitting down, Ms. Colman said some Muslim clothing was a point of discomfort for her, particularly the full-body or face coverings such as the burqa or the niqab, which she worries is uncomfortable and “ruel.”he compared the full covering to the heavy clothing of Orthodox Jews in Melbourne’ southeast, which she said she also found “xtreme.”

As the one-hour event kicked off, silver trays of powdered Turkish delight and squares of syrup-soaked basbousa appeared. Some people started eating. Others hesitated. It was nearing the end of Ramadan , during which many of the world’ 1.8 billion Muslims —ncluding some women here —ere fasting during daylight hours.

A number of the conversations began with questions about Ramadan (“o you just pig out?”. Then it drifted to the hijab (“o you have beautiful, long hair under there?” and to whether the women had been coerced into wearing it.

Topics of racism arose (“hat can I do to be more welcoming to you, if I saw you on the street?”, as did terrorism (“hy do they say they’e doing this for Allah?” and domestic violence.

The Muslim women meandered through their answers politely, with occasional surprises. Manal Shehab, 50, the only woman in the room wearing a niqab, said she wore it for 24 years previously and only recently stopped, although she still wears it to Speed Date a Muslim events to represent that group of women.

The moment of greatest tension emerged when one woman wanted to discuss Ayaan Hirsi Ali, the Somali-born, Dutch-American author and advocate of overhauling Islam who once called the faith “ destructive, nihilistic cult of death.”he “peaks a lot of sense,”he woman said.

“e love her,”s. Assafiri said dryly, to knowing laughter in the room. She led a video petition  against Ms. Hirsi Ali’ planned speaking tour to Australia earlier this year. The visit was canceled, although it’ unclear if that was because of the petition.

She “as no regard for how her discourse impacts the very women she’ claiming to want to empower,”s. Assafiri says of Ms. Hirsi Ali, cutting off the woman’ question.

With that, the conversation moved on. A few minutes later, Ms. Assafiri talked about her personal experience with domestic abuse and being “isempowered by all cultural expressions called Islam.”

“’ talking about all sorts of violence Ayaan Hirsi Ali can’ even imagine —”

“ doubt it,”he woman said.

“ don’ think you know me, respectfully,”s. Assafiri replied.

While the event strives for openness and candor, sore points are hit from time to time.

Saara Sabbagh, 45, for example, has been answering questions at Speed Date since its inception. She said found the events “nriching,”ut admitted they could be emotionally taxing.

“here are times I’e had to hold back tears, you know, when you constantly hear the stereotypes and the assumptions made about you,”s. Sabbagh said over the phone after the event.

Near the end of the session in June, a woman asked if negative media portrayals of Islam were genuinely felt by Muslim women in Australia.

Ms. Sabbagh, wrapped in a purple head scarf, immediately spoke up, addressing the entire room.

“y 10-year-old daughter gets harassed,”he said. “omebody calls her a terrorist and says to her: ‘e saw which house you came out of. We’e going to kill you.’”

“’ from Syria,”he added. “eople don’ need to tell us what ISIS is doing. We are at the receiving end of ISIS. We’e in this together. There’ no us and them.”

The next Speed Date a Muslim will take place at Moroccan Deli-cacy in Melbourne on July 16 at 3 p.m. More details here.

* Border Advice for Muslims Alarms Australian Official —ut It Came From His Department 

* For Australia’ Muslims, Relief Is Shadowed by Fear 

* Australian Muslims Go for Surf, Lifesaving and Burqinis 

Hana Assafiri, restaurateur and founder of Speed Date a Muslim at the Moroccan Deli-cacy cafe in East Brunswick, Melbourne, in June. “othing is off topic,”he said. | Asanka Brendon Ratnayake for The New York Times | Manal Shehab speaks with non-Muslim attendees of Speed Date a Muslim about her life and experiences as a Muslim woman. | Asanka Brendon Ratnayake for The New York Times | The free monthly event invites the public to come and ask questions of Muslim women in the spirit of opening conversations and breaking down stereotypes. | Asanka Brendon Ratnayake for The New York Times | Munise Kurkcu, left, part of the cafe’ all-female, all-Muslim staff, served sweets at the event in June. It was the most well-attended session since it began in late 2015. | Asanka Brendon Ratnayake for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170706ed76006k5



Op-Ed Contributors
Opinion
Hobby Lobby’ Black-Market Buys Did Real Damage

By CANDIDA MOSS and JOEL BADEN 
1,029 words
7 July 2017
00:05
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The Justice Department announced on Wednesday that the crafting giant Hobby Lobby, Inc. has agreed to forfeit thousands of ancient Mesopotamian artifacts that it had illegally imported from Iraq. Along with a hefty $3 million payment, this concludes a federal investigation that has been going on since 2011, when United States customs agents seized an incoming shipment of cuneiform tablets, labeled “and made clay tiles”nd headed for the Hobby Lobby headquarters in Oklahoma City.

It may not be obvious why Hobby Lobby would be interested in 3,000-year-old Mesopotamian antiquities. These tablets formed part of the private collection of biblical artifacts purchased by Hobby Lobby —40,000 items strong —estined for eventual display at the Museum of the Bible, scheduled to open this November in Washington, D.C., just steps from the National Mall. The Museum of the Bible was founded and funded by the Green family, the owners of Hobby Lobby, and they continue to play a central role in its administration, fundraising, and mission.

When we first broke the story of this investigation in 2015, it was suggested to us that this was merely a matter of “ncomplete paperwork.”t is now abundantly clear that this was untrue. Yesterday, Steve Green, the president of Hobby Lobby, said in a statement, “e should have exercised more oversight and carefully questioned how the acquisitions were handled.”ut even before these purchases, Green and his partners had been given clear guidelines by the antiquities law expert Patty Gerstenblith: “ read them the riot act,”she said. Nevertheless, they proceeded to purchase artifacts of dubious origin from unscrupulous sellers and then import them from Israel and the United Arab Emirates with falsified documentation designed to avoid customs inspection.

The particular legal issue of falsified import papers is merely the tip of a much larger ethical iceberg. The real issue here is the black market in looted antiquities, a market that has loomed beneath the surface of storied museum collections and private holdings for many years, but that became especially visible during the first Iraq War and the period of regional destabilization that followed.

It is not the case, as some have alleged, that Hobby Lobby bought artifacts from ISIS. Though it is true that ISIS profits by looting artifacts and passing them on to dealers and collectors in the West, the shipments for which Hobby Lobby was scrutinized predate the rise of ISIS.

But Hobby Lobby did participate in and perpetuate the same market from which ISIS profits. If collectors like the Green family were unwilling to purchase unprovenanced antiquities —tems that do not have a clear and clean history of discovery and purchase —he black market would dry up. As long as there are buyers, there will be sellers. It is because collectors like Hobby Lobby are willing to pay a premium and look the other way that looting continues. They dramatically expanded the market for biblical antiquities in the late 2000s.

And what of the much-hyped Museum of the Bible, which will be displaying items from Hobby Lobby’ collection?

Hobby Lobby and the Museum of the Bible are not identical, though Steve Green is president of the former and chairman of the board of the latter. The federal charges have to do with Hobby Lobby—he Museum of the Bible appears nowhere in any of the documents. “he artifacts that were referred to were never in our collection,”aid one Museum of the Bible administrator in response to yesterday’ news.

But in 2015, the person who confirmed the investigation’ existence to us was not a representative of Hobby Lobby, but the president of the Museum of the Bible, Cary Summers. He was the one who used the phrase “ncomplete paperwork.”hat it was Mr. Summers who spoke with us about the investigation —requently using the word “e,”s in “e’l have to see if we can get it worked out”—erves as a reminder that the divide between the two is not especially sharp. (The corporate office for the Museum of the Bible is, perhaps unsurprisingly, Hobby Lobby’ headquarters in Oklahoma City.)

The Museum of the Bible will contain more than just artifacts purchased by Hobby Lobby. But the core of the museum’ displays will still come from the Green family’ collection, and those artifacts come with ethical baggage.

Although we can now point to a large number of items in the collection that were illicitly acquired, there remain thousands and thousands more about which we can say nothing: not because their provenance is clean, but because it is unknown. Though scholars have been pleading for years with the Greens and the Museum of the Bible to provide all of the information for all of their artifacts, there has been no transparency whatsoever.

If the Museum of the Bible truly wants to distance itself from the illicit antiquities dealings of Hobby Lobby, it should make available to the public the full provenance of every item it displays, and of all those that are not visible to the public. If there are more artifacts that were purchased from the black market, they should be forfeited or repatriated—oluntarily.

The issue here goes beyond Hobby Lobby. The black market in illicit antiquities from the Middle East can be traced back to real-world violence and wholesale destruction of cultural heritage. Museums may think that the damage associated with illegal antiquities is in the past by the time an artifact reaches their hands, but this is untrue. As long as the market continues, the damage remains.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Joel Baden and Candida Moss are the authors of “ible Nation: The United States of Hobby Lobby.”

* Hobby Lobby Agrees to Forfeit 5,500 Artifacts Smuggled Out of Iraq

Steve Green, the board chairman of the Museum of the Bible, at the museum’ site in Washington D.C., in 2015. | Mandel Ngan/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170706ed76008hl



World; Middle East
A Libyan Commander Says His Forces Have Taken Benghazi

By NOUR YOUSSEF and DECLAN WALSH 
607 words
6 July 2017
22:43
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

CAIRO —fter three years of sporadic combat, the fighting is over in the eastern Libyan city of Benghazi, at least for now.

The city erupted in jubilation late Wednesday after the commander of a militia in the area, Gen. Khalifa Hifter, announced on television that his forces had vanquished the Islamist fighters they had been battling in Benghazi for the past three years. Wearing military-style regalia, General Hifter said that all that remained was to clear battle-scarred neighborhoods of land mines and unexploded ordnance.

Forces loyal to General Hifter, a brash and ambitious former Libyan Army officer, have prematurely claimed victory in Benghazi before. But this time residents said they believed that the news was genuine, with thousands of people streaming into the streets after his televised address to celebrate amid sounds of honking horns and triumphant gunfire.

If the peace holds this time it will be a milestone for General Hifter, who has emerged as the dominant commander in eastern Libya, with strong support from neighboring Egypt. It strengthens his hand in Libya’ chaotic power struggle, particularly against  the rival  government that is backed by the United Nations and based in Tripoli, the capital.

That administration, led by Prime Minister Fayez Serraj, has struggled to unite Libya, or even achieve control over Tripoli, since it was formed last year. It is opposed by another government, led by Islamists and other militia groups, that also claims authority over the divided Libyan capital.

Local media reported that a family of six was killed in the latest factional fighting near Tripoli’ only functioning airport this week.

General Hifter, at least, can claim unrivaled control over Benghazi, the main city in eastern Libya, where four Americans, including Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens, were killed by a mob in 2012. General Hifter has been battling Islamist militants, including the Islamic State, for control of Benghazi since 2014, and he now appears to have won.

Still, General Hifter’ forces have been accused of human rights abuses, and some critics accuse him of seeking to emulate the strongman rule of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, who was ousted and killed in a bloody uprising in 2011.

General Hifter has made little secret of his ambition to become a national leader in Libya. In a televised address about two weeks ago, he told tribal leaders that if Libya’ conflict was not peacefully resolved by December, his forces would “ake action.”

On Thursday, Libyans who oppose General Hifter seized on images from his latest address, showing him in a sparkling white uniform adorned with medals, and which bore a strong resemblance to images of Colonel Qaddafi while in power.

“ow can you say ‘iberated’hen it fell into the hands of a new Qaddafi called Hifter?”ber Sabeel, a Twitter user, wrote about the events in Benghazi.

But General Hifter appears to enjoy broad support in the eastern part of the country, where after six years of turmoil Libyans crave stability. Last year his forces seized control of several of Libya’ major oil terminals. Oil is the country’ primary source of wealth, and since the seizures, production has increased to almost one million barrels a day.

Nour Youssef reported from Cairo, and Declan Walsh from Doha, Qatar.

* Jubilant Libyan Militias Declare Victory Over \b ISIS\b0  in Surt

* Militia Seizes Libyan Oil Terminals in Challenge to Government

* Libya: Unified Against \b ISIS\b0 , Fragmented After

Members of the Libyan National Army, loyal to Gen. Khalifa Hifter, in Benghazi on Wednesday. | Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170706ed76007eq



Op-Ed Contributor
Opinion
Bombs Will Not Defeat  ISIS  (but Maybe the Internet Will)

By ABDALAZIZ ALHAMZA 
509 words
6 July 2017
15:56
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

I grew up in Raqqa, a small Syrian city on the banks of the Euphrates. The city of my childhood was little known. They didn’ even include Raqqa in the weather forecasts on local news.

In January 2014, Islamic State militants took control of Raqqa and cut it off from the world, submitting its citizens to abuse and horror. The Islamic State claimed Raqqa as the capital of their caliphate and began to publish slick videos calling the city a paradise and seducing new jihadists into joining their cause.

Even though we had no formal training, my friends and I became citizen journalists to expose the atrocities committed by the Islamic State. We called the group Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently (RBSS).

We started inside Raqqa, plastering walls with anti-ISIS graffiti and posters. We even created a local magazine called Dabaq, a name similar to that of the ISIS magazine Dabeeq. We would go out at night and place copies of Dabaq at cafes, shops, and mosques. The cover of our magazine was the same as the Islamic State magazine, but inside we published information to discourage residents from joining the terrorist group.

But we also wanted the rest of the world to know what was happening in our home town, so we snuck covert footage and photos out of the city, publishing them on social media and ultimately sending to various news organizations to show that Raqqa was not the utopia that ISIS claimed. Now, when people search for Raqqa on the Internet, instead of finding ISIS propaganda, they find our website listing the abuses carried out by ISIS.

Last week, the U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic Forces seized the final road into Raqqa, tightening a siege on the militant de-facto capital. But reclaiming the city will not be enough; we must continue to fight against the ideology of ISIS. Our group works diligently to point out the hypocrisy and the lies of ISIS’edia campaign––n act of resistance that the terror group does not like. They have killed several members of our group and continue to track us down and threaten us online. In the three years since leaving Raqqa, several members of RBSS have come out of the shadows to put a human face to the campaign. We continue our mission in the hope that one day our words and images will defeat their weapons.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Abdalaziz Alhamza (@3z0ooz), a co-founder of Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently, is featured in Matthew Heineman’ documentary CITY OF GHOSTS, which will be released July 7 in New York City and July 14 in theaters around the country.

A Syrian activist and journalist risks his life to expose ISIS atrocities. He’ now asking governments and Silicon Valley to do more to help. | By ABDALAZIZ ALHAMZA and MATTHEW HEINEMAN 

Document NYTFEED020170706ed76003pd



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Britain Debates Saudis' Ties to Extremism, Putting May in an Uneasy Spot

By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK 
1,037 words
6 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON -- As Saudi Arabia accuses Qatar, a Persian Gulf neighbor, of spreading Islamist extremism, British politicians are debating whether the Saudis themselves may deserve more of the blame.

The government of Prime Minister Theresa May has acknowledged in recent days that it is withholding a study on the Saudi role in fostering extremism in Britain, and opponents have accused her of pandering to the Saudi royals to protect British trade deals.

On Wednesday, a report from a hawkish think tank in London called new attention to the debate by arguing that Saudi Arabia had, in fact, played a singularly important role in promoting extremist strains of Islam in British mosques and religious schools -- including the training of British preachers who have advocated jihadist violence.

Over the last 30 years, ''Saudi Arabia has spent at least £7 billion,'' or about $87 billion, on this endeavor around the world, said the think tank, the Henry Jackson Society, named for a United States senator from the Cold War era.

At the same time, Saudi Arabia has led an international campaign to primarily blame its neighbor Qatar for the surge in extremist violence in recent years. Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and several Arab allies have cut off travel, trade and diplomatic relations with Qatar as punishment, and they set a deadline of Wednesday night for Qatar to comply with a sweeping list of demands aimed at curtailing its influence and independence, including shutting down its pioneering Arab news network, Al Jazeera.

''It is complete, utter hypocrisy,'' said Tom Wilson, the author of the Henry Jackson Society report.

The report set off new debate here only in part because of its implications for the feud in the Persian Gulf, which threatens to divide the Western-backed alliance against the militants of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. Britain is also reeling from a string of deadly terrorist attacks by Islamist extremists in recent weeks, including a suicide bombing in May at an Ariana Grande concert in Manchester and an attack last month on and around London Bridge.

The attention to Saudi Arabia also comes at a time when Ms. May's political opponents are ratcheting up their denunciations of her Conservative government's support for the two-year Saudi-led war in Yemen, which has plunged that impoverished country into a humanitarian catastrophe of disease and famine with no end in sight. (Saudi Arabia says the campaign there is essential to keep power away from the Houthis, a Yemeni faction aligned with Iran.)

The study of Saudi extremism was initiated more than a year ago by Ms. May's predecessor, Prime Minister David Cameron, also a Conservative. He agreed to it partly to win the support of another party, the Liberal Democrats, for airstrikes against the Islamic State in Syria, and on Wednesday the Liberal Democrats accused Ms. May of putting Saudi business deals ahead of public safety by declining to disclose the study's findings.

''We hear regularly about the Saudi arms deals or ministers going to Riyadh to kowtow before their royal family, but yet our government won't release a report that will clearly criticize Saudi Arabia,'' Timothy Farron, the leader of the Liberal Democrats, said in a statement.

Britain is ''cozying up to one of the most extreme, nasty and oppressive regimes in the world,'' he said. ''You would think our security would be more important, but it appears not.''

The Home Office, which conducted the study, denied that the government had withheld it to avoid offending or embarrassing the Saudis. But a spokesman declined to comment on whether the findings of the study had highlighted a Saudi role in spreading extremism. ''Ministers are considering advice on what is able to be published in the report and will update Parliament in due course,'' the office said in a statement.

The Saudi Embassy in London did not respond to telephone calls.

The debates pointed to what Mr. Wilson called ''two different, competing ideas about what is extremism.''

British policy defines extremism as an ideology opposed to liberal democracy, and the government has kept the definition loose in part to avoid disputes with disparate Arab allies, said Jane Kinninmont, a scholar at Chatham House, another think tank, who has written about the definition of extremism in the Persian Gulf as ''a moving target.''

For the monarchs of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, for example, ''the Muslim Brotherhood are extremists because they seek the overthrow of monarchies,'' Ms. Kinninmont said. An alliance with the Muslim Brotherhood is the main reason Qatar's neighbors accuse it of extremism, ''but that is not a definition of extremism that the U.K. or the U.S. or France can share.''

Critics of Saudi Arabia, on the other hand, denounce its promulgation of a more austere, conservative and intolerant version of Islam, even though the Saudi religious establishment preaches obedience to rulers and discourages insurrection. Mr. Wilson, the author of the report about Saudi extremism, acknowledged in an interview that he meant mainly nonviolent extremism.

''They are not jihadists,'' he said. ''It is the usual illiberal, hard-line conservative, rather than radical, in that respect.'' Still, he said, individual clerics who studied in Saudi Arabia have gone on to call for jihad or to ''glorify violence'' from British mosques.

After the Egyptian military overthrew an elected president from the Muslim Brotherhood in 2013, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates pressed the British to designate the Brotherhood a terrorist organization, and Mr. Cameron agreed to commission a study by the Foreign Office.

Officials familiar with the resulting report said it read like a prosecutor's brief against the Brotherhood, but it nonetheless concluded that the organization did not meet the criteria for a terrorist designation. Such a move would have angered both the Gulf monarchs and the Brotherhood's sympathizers. That study, too, has remained withheld.

The British government ''finds it very difficult to make public statements about the Persian Gulf,'' Ms. Kinninmont said, without offending the monarchs of the region or risking its credibility with citizens at home.

Document NYTF000020170706ed7600060



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Profit Motive Fortifies Russia's Arsenal in Syria

By ANDREW E. KRAMER; Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon, and Ivan Nechepurenko from Moscow. 
980 words
6 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MOSCOW -- The Kremlin is bringing a new weapon to the fight against the Islamic State militant group in Syria, using market-based incentives tied to oil and mining rights to reward private security contractors who secure territory from the extremists, Russian news outlets have reported.

So far, two Russian companies are known to have received contracts under the new policy, according to the reports: Evro Polis, which is set to receive profits from oil and gas wells it seizes from the Islamic State using contract soldiers, and Stroytransgaz, which signed a phosphate-mining deal for a site that was under militant control at the time.

The agreements, made with the Syrian government, are seen as incentives for companies affiliated with Russian security contractors, who reportedly employ about 2,500 soldiers in the country, to push the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, out of territory near Palmyra, in central Syria.

Most Middle Eastern wars are suspected of having some variant of this deal, but it is seldom made as explicit as in the Russian contracts.

''It's all very simple,'' Ivan P. Konovalov, director of the Center for Strategic Trends Studies, said by telephone of the deals, struck in December but just recently reported. ''If a company provides security, then the country getting that service should pay. It doesn't matter how the payment is made.''

In the petroleum deal, Evro Polis, a corporation formed last summer, will receive a 25 percent share of oil and natural gas produced on territory it captures from the Islamic State, the news site Fontanka.ru reported.

The website has a record of accurately reporting about private security companies in Russia, and just last month Washington appeared to corroborate one of its earlier reports by imposing sanctions on a Russian whose activities first came to light in the publication.

Fontanka's latest article on the topic, published last week, detailed how Evro Polis was cooperating with a shadowy Russian private security group called Wagner, which American sanctions suggest has also provided contract soldiers to the war in Ukraine.

The deal is distinct from the common practice of oil majors and other corporations outsourcing security in hot spots in the Middle East and elsewhere. Under the contract, the wells are not just to be guarded, but to be captured first, the article said.

''The arrangement returns to the times of Francis Drake and Cecil Rhodes,'' it noted, referring to two figures from British history whose careers mixed warfare and private profit.

Evro Polis, according to Fontanka and public company records in Russia, is part of a network of companies owned by Evgeniy Prigozhin, a St. Petersburg businessman close to President Vladimir V. Putin and known as ''the Kremlin's chef'' for his exclusive catering contracts with the administration. His company, Concord Catering, also supplies food to many of Moscow's public schools, according to Russian news reports.

Journalists have reported that Mr. Prigozhin engaged in another recent Russian experiment in restoring influence abroad while keeping costs down: He set up a factory of so-called internet trolls in St. Petersburg, an office packed with low-paid people posting online under assumed identities to influence public opinion in foreign countries, including the United States.

Last month, the Treasury Department in Washington imposed sanctions on Dmitri Utkin, the founder of Wagner, the private security group the report said would capture the Syrian oil and gas wells for Evro Polis. Fontanka first linked Mr. Utkin to Wagner in an article in 2015.

In the other deal, the Russian energy company Stroytransgaz won rights to mine phosphate in central Syria under the condition it secure the mine site, the Russian news outlet RBC reported.

Stroytransgaz, which is majority owned by another Russian under United States sanctions, Gennady Timchenko, signed a deal with the Syrian government to resume mining at the Sharqiya phosphate deposit, which was under Islamic State control at the time, RBC reported. Under the agreement, an unidentified Russian private military contractor would guard the site.

In this instance, however, Russian, Iranian and Syrian soldiers -- rather than private contractors -- conducted the operations in May that expelled Islamic State militants from the mining site, RBC reported.

In anticipation of the commercial payoff, the report said, a Russian ship laden with mining equipment docked at the Syrian port city of Tartus, where Russia has a naval base, even before the military operation began.

Russian officials have not commented publicly on either deal.

The Russian Energy Ministry did not respond to written questions about the reported oil and gas deal. The owner of Evro Polis did not reply to an email sent to an address listed on company records.

Asked on a conference call with journalists about the Syrian oil deal, the Kremlin press secretary, Dmitri S. Peskov, said, ''We do not monitor some entrepreneurial activity'' of Russian companies abroad.

Mr. Konovalov, the military analyst, said the Syrian government was more than willing to strike such deals, trading natural resources for security.

''They get the better side of this contract,'' he said. ''They get our participation in the security sector in Syria, which is very valuable.''

The Fontanka report suggested that Russian security contractors had already put the agreement to work, fighting to expel the Islamic State from natural gas fields near Palmyra.

The Russians are training and fighting alongside a unit of the Syrian Army called ISIS Hunters, whose exploits are widely promoted in the Russian state news media. The Fontanka report linked to a video filmed from a body camera worn by a Russian-speaking soldier with ISIS Hunters during a firefight in the desert.

''Friendly, don't shoot!'' the soldier yelled in Russian, apparently to other Russian soldiers nearby.

Document NYTF000020170706ed760005q

