 


World; Europe
In Turkey, U.S. Hand Is Seen in Nearly Every Crisis

By TIM ARANGO 
1,447 words
4 January 2017
09:45
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ISTANBUL —urkish officials accused the United States of abetting a failed coup last summer. When the Russian ambassador to Turkey was assassinated last month, the Turkish press said the United States was behind the attack.

And once again, after a gunman walked into an Istanbul nightclub early on New Year’ Day and killed dozens, the pro-government news media pointed a finger at the United States.

“merica Chief Suspect,”ne headline blared after the attack. On Twitter, a Turkish lawmaker, referring to the name of the nightclub, wrote: “hoever the triggerman is, Reina attack is an act of CIA. Period.”

Turkey has been confronted with a cascade of crises that seem to have only accelerated as the Syrian civil war has spilled across the border. But the events have not pushed Turkey closer to its NATO allies. Conversely, they have drifted further apart as the nation lashes out at Washington and moves closer to Moscow, working with the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, to secure a cease-fire in Syria.

One story in the Turkish press, based on a routine travel warning issued by the American Embassy in Turkey, was that the United States had advance knowledge of the nightclub attack, which the Islamic State later claimed responsibility for. Another suggested that stun grenades used by the gunman had come from stocks held by the American military. Still another claimed the assault was a plot by the United States to sow divisions in Turkey between the secular and the religious.

Rather than bringing the United States and Turkey together in the common fight against terrorism, the nightclub attack, even with the gunman still on the run, appears to have only accelerated Turkey’ shift away from the West, at a time when its democracy is eroding amid a growing crackdown on civil society.

All of this is a reflection, many critics say, of what they call the paranoia and authoritarianism of Turkey’ president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, whose leadership has so deeply divided the country that, instead of unifying to confront terrorism, Turkish society is fracturing further with each attack.

The West, symbolized by the United States, is the perennial boogeyman.

While seeming to pile on the Obama administration in its waning days —y accusing it of supporting Turkey’ enemies, including the Islamic State; Kurdish militants; and supporters of an outlawed Muslim cleric, Fethullah Gulen, whom Mr. Erdogan blamed for directing the coup —urkish officials are also telegraphing something else: that they are willing to open the door and improve relations with the United States once President-elect Donald J. Trump takes office.

“ur expectation from the new administration is to end this shame,”urkey’ prime minister, Binali Yildirim, said this week while accusing the United States of providing weapons to Kurdish militants in Syria who are fighting the Islamic State, but are also an enemy of Turkey. “e are not holding the new administration responsible for this,”r. Yildirim said. “ecause this is the work of the Obama administration.”

Meanwhile, the nightclub assailant is on the loose.

The Turkish authorities said on Wednesday that they had identified the killer, but refused to release any other details, although photographs of the man, from surveillance cameras, have been released. Also, a video surfaced that appeared to show the assailant recording himself in Istanbul’ Taksim Square.

A senior United States official, who has been briefed on the investigation and spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss confidential details, said the Turks had recovered the video from a raid on a house in Istanbul. The official said the Turks now believed the killer was from Uzbekistan, not Kyrgyzstan, as many reports this week had first suggested.

The official expressed alarm at the growing anti-Americanism in Turkey, which seems to accumulate after each crisis here, and said it put the lives of Americans in the country in jeopardy.

The chaotic investigation has added to the anxiety on Istanbul’ streets, with vehicle checkpoints, night raids on houses and low-flying helicopters.

“here is significant fear in ordinary people,”aid Aydin Engin, a columnist at the daily newspaper Cumhuriyet, who was detained last year as part of the government’ crackdown on the news media. “ear prevails when it comes to going to an entertainment place, being in a crowd, going to a shopping mall, getting on the metro.”

With each passing day, public life descends deeper into what many Turks concede is a mix of darkness and seeming absurdity, with growing fears of violence and expressions of xenophobia set next to repressions on civic life.

In the days before and after the nightclub massacre on the shores of the Bosporus, nationalists staged a mock execution of Santa Claus in the name of defending Islam; a reporter for The Wall Street Journal was detained, strip searched and placed in solitary confinement —or, according to the newspaper’ account, “iolating a government ban on publication of images from an Islamic State video” and a well-known fashion designer was beaten up at the Istanbul airport and arrested for his social media posts.

“n a way, it’ basically a breakdown of order,”aid Soli Ozel, a Turkish columnist and academic, seeking to explain the tumult in society. “veryone feels entitled to do whatever they want to do and how they want to do it.”

Tugrul Eryilmaz, another longtime Turkish journalist, recalled the country’ military coup in 1980 and the crackdown on civil society that followed, and said, “ have never been in such a situation like today.”

He brought up the Spanish filmmaker Luis Buñel, who was known for surreal and absurd themes. “ feel like I am in his movies,”e said.

While Turkey faces a growing terror threat, the country is also largely at war with itself, with deep divisions along many lines —eligion, class, ethnicity —hat make unity difficult even in a time of crisis. Perhaps the greatest source of division is between supporters of Mr. Erdogan, about half the country, and opponents who assert that he has become too powerful.

“urkey is so deeply polarized around the powerful persona of Erdogan that, instead of asking why terror attacks are happening and how they can be stopped, the pro- and anti-Erdogan blocks in the country are blaming each other,”aid Soner Cagaptay, a specialist on Turkey at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. “his is why I am deeply worried about Turkey and the country’ ability to stymie further terror attacks.”

Parliament voted overnight to extend by three months the state of emergency that went into effect last summer after the failed coup. The emergency grants Mr. Erdogan’ government extraordinary powers to detain perceived opponents and hold them in pretrial detention. Tens of thousands of people have either been arrested or been purged from their jobs, on suspicion of having links to Mr. Gulen, who lives in exile in Pennsylvania.

Mr. Erdogan on Wednesday made his first public remarks since the attack on Sunday morning, a striking period of silence for a man who is normally ubiquitous in the public sphere, often giving speeches daily.

Mr. Erdogan, an Islamist, rejected criticism that his government, in pushing an Islamist agenda, had deepened divisions between the secular and the pious. Many on social media, in the aftermath of the nightclub attack, noted that the Turkish government’ religious authorities had denounced New Year’ celebrations as un-Islamic.

“s the president of all 79 million citizens,”r. Erdogan said, “t is my duty to protect everyone’ rights, law and spaces of freedom.”

Mr. Erdogan, who spoke this week with President Obama in a condolence call, also told his audience what he believed Turkey, in facing so many terrorist attacks, was really up against: a plot by the West.

Invoking the collapse of the Ottoman Empire after World War I and the subsequent Turkish war against Western armies and their proxies, he said, “oday Turkey is in a new struggle for independence.”

Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington, and Michael Wolgelenter from London.

* Nightclub Massacre in Istanbul Exposes Turkey’ Deepening Fault Lines

* \b ISIS\b0  Claims Responsibility for Istanbul Nightclub Attack

* Terrorist Attack at Nightclub in Istanbul Kills Dozens

* In Turkey, a Capstone to a Violent Year. In Germany, a Realization of Fears.

A security officer outside the Reina nightclub in Istanbul on Wednesday. | Ozan Kose/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Turkish officials have released few details about the gunman who killed 39 people at a crowded nightclub on New Year’ Day. | By MEGAN SPECIA 

Document NYTFEED020170104ed14002gy



World; Africa
Hymn of Peace by Nigerian Leaders Strikes Some as Off Key

By DAN BILEFSKY 
609 words
4 January 2017
20:48
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

As boy bands go, it was an unlikely crew.

In a five-minute video posted online this week, a band of seven aging Nigerian leaders —ll but one of them retired —ang a New Year’ hymn of peace for their country.

[Video: Gowon, Obasanjo, Shonekan, Ekwueme, Osinbajo form choir, sing for greater Nigeria Watch on YouTube.]

But the amateur choir was mocked by some Nigerians, who expressed dismay at a gathering that included several former military rulers, and leaders they partly blame for corruption, misrule and instability in Nigeria, the most populous African nation.

While one observer on social media lauded the gathering as “epic,”nother called it a “ogues’allery”nd lamented that a hymn was insufficient to undo the damage that misgovernance had caused the country. Still others complained that the performance was, however well-intentioned, tone-deaf.

Among the men were Yakubu Gowon, who took power in a coup and was the head of state from 1966 to 1975, and Oladipo Diya, a key figure during a military dictatorship in the 1990s.

In a continent known for strongmen, some of the leaders showed striking contrition.

“n spite of the mess we try to make of the country, He manages always to rescue us when we get to the edge of the precipice,”Alex Ekwueme, a former vice president, said on the video, referring to God, after the hymn finished.

O. Ebitu Ukiwe, another former vice president, echoed that theme. “ am grateful to almighty God for accepting us, despite the mess we have made of ourselves and the country,”e said.

Olusegun Obasanjo, a former general who was president from 1999 to 2007, was perhaps less repentant. “od created Nigeria as we are,”e said, “nd God doesn’ make any mistake. We should thank God for that.”

The other leaders in the video were Yemi Osinbajo, the current vice president, and Ernest Shonekan, a former interim president.

Dressed variously in traditional and modern attire, the men sang “ God, Our Help in Ages Past,”n 18th-century staple of Anglican music and an expression of faith in God’ steadfastness. Among the languages in which they sang were English, Yoruba and Hausa. The video shows a montage of settings, including the National Theater in Lagos and the presidential palace in Abuja.

“t is comic but also despairing, as these men are the guys who should have sorted out Nigeria’ problems and singularly failed to do so,”aid Michela Wrong, who has written several books on Africa. “he fact that they are appealing to God to save Nigeria shows that they failed to deliver the goods.”

(She added: “ am appalled they don’ hold a tune better, coming from a nation of amazing singers. They are almost all off tune.”

Bisi Alimi, a Nigerian human rights activist, wrote on Twitter: “aha... Nigeria corrupt leaders singing ‘h God our help in Ages past’hows the disconnect and true irony of religion and stupidity.”

Nigeria, an oil-rich country and Africa’ largest economy, is battling many problems, including a recession, a deadly Islamist insurgency, attacks on energy production by militants and a decades-old separatist movement in the southeast that is once again intensifying.

Commenting on the website of Vanguard, a Nigerian newspaper, one reader wrote: “n Nigeria, even Satan’ favorite demons parade themselves as angels. They should return their loot and keep their religiosity to themselves.”

* Boko Haram Attacks Signal Resilience of \b ISIS\b0  and Its Branches

* Nigeria Finds a National Crisis in Every Direction It Turns

Document NYTFEED020170104ed14006v9



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS  Member in Germany Is Accused in Murders

By RICK GLADSTONE; Franziska Reymann contributed reporting. 
539 words
4 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

German prosecutors have added six counts of murder and war crimes to the charges against an imprisoned Islamic State member from Germany who attracted global attention after claiming disillusionment and disgust with the terrorist group.

The new accusations, announced by the prosecutors on Tuesday, were brought three months after a video surfaced suggesting that the recruit, Harry Sarfo, 28, had taken part in a Syrian mass killing. But in previous interviews, he told the authorities and reporters that he had never killed anyone.

Mr. Sarfo, a German of Ghanaian descent, was convicted last year in a Hamburg court of membership in a terrorist organization after his arrest upon returning to Germany in July 2015 from Syria, where he traveled three months earlier to join the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

Described by German judicial officials as a model prisoner who had avidly cooperated in providing information about the Islamic State, Mr. Sarfo was given a reduced prison term of three years and was allowed to provide interviews to a number of news organizations, including The New York Times.

Mr. Sarfo detailed in those interviews how he claimed to have been recruited, as well as what he described as his harsh training, loss of allegiance and his own escape. Mr. Sarfo also spoke about what he described as the Islamic State's ambitions for more attacks on civilian targets in Western nations like the November 2015 killings in Paris, which relied on collaborators based in Europe.

His accounts generally correlated with interrogation records and briefings from other captured Islamic State recruits.

But Mr. Sarfo's credibility was undercut in October when The Washington Post published what it described as a leaked video clip from Syria's ancient city of Palmyra that showed Mr. Sarfo appearing to participate in prisoner killings. In his interviews, Mr. Sarfo said he had only witnessed them.

''In the middle of June 2015, members of the Islamic State publicly shot six prisoners in the market square in the Syrian city Palmyra,'' the German prosecutors said in a statement. ''The suspect, armed with a gun, led one of the prisoners personally to the place of execution and prevented the others from fleeing.''

The new accusations against Mr. Sarfo came against a backdrop of increased fear in Europe of attacks orchestrated or inspired by the Islamic State, despite its loss of territory in Syria and Iraq.

Germany is still dealing with the aftermath of a deadly Dec. 19 truck rampage through a Berlin market, for which the Islamic State has claimed responsibility. Officials have linked the attack to a Tunisian ex-convict who was killed days later in a shootout with the police in Italy.

In a report released a month ago, the European Police Office of the European Union, known as Europol, said the Islamic State had already adopted new tactics to assault the West, including ''carefully prepared attacks alongside those that seem to be carried out spontaneously.''

Harry Sarfo, convicted of belonging to a terrorist group, had described his recruitment and training but denied killing anyone. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GORDON WELTERS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170104ed140005g



World; Middle East
Suicide Bombing in Baghdad Kills at Least 36

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS 
640 words
3 January 2017
02:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD — suicide bomber detonated a pickup truck loaded with explosives on Monday in a busy Baghdad market, killing at least 36 people hours after President Françis Hollande of France arrived in the Iraqi capital.

The Islamic State later claimed responsibility for the attack.

The bomb went off in a produce market that was packed with day laborers, a police officer said, adding that another 52 people were wounded.

During a news conference with Mr. Hollande, Haider al-Abadi, Iraq ’ prime minister, said the suicide bomber had pretended to be a man seeking to hire day laborers. Once the workers gathered around, he detonated the vehicle.

The Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL, claimed the attack in a statement circulated on a website that is often used by the group. It was the third such attack in three days in or near Baghdad, underscoring the lingering threat posed by the extremist group despite a string of setbacks for it elsewhere in the country over the past year, including in and around the northern city of Mosul.

The attack took place in Sadr City, a vast Shiite district in eastern Baghdad that has been repeatedly targeted by Sunni extremists since the 2003 American-led invasion.

Militiamen loyal to the Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr  were seen evacuating bodies in their trucks before ambulances arrived. Bodies were scattered across the bloody pavement alongside fruit, vegetables and laborers’hovels and axes. A minibus filled with dead passengers was on fire.

Asaad Hashim, 28, an owner of a nearby cellphone store, described how the laborers had pushed and shoved around the bomber’ vehicle, trying to get hired.

“hen a big boom came, sending them up into the air,”aid Mr. Hashim, who suffered shrapnel wounds to his right hand. He blamed “he most ineffective security forces in the world”or failing to prevent the attack.

An angry crowd cursed the government, even after a representative of Mr. Sadr tried to calm them. Late last month, the Iraqi authorities started removing some of the security checkpoints in Baghdad in a bid to ease traffic for the capital’ six million residents.

“e have no idea who will kill at any moment and who’ supposed to protect us,”aid Ali Abbas, a 40-year-old father of four who was hurled over his vegetable stand by the blast. “f the securities forces can’ protect us, then allow us to do the job.”

Several smaller bombings elsewhere in the city on Monday killed at least 20 civilians and wounded at least 70, according to medics and police officials. All officials spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak to reporters.

The United States State Department condemned the attacks.

Separately, the American military announced on Monday the death of a coalition service member in Iraq  in a “oncombat-related incident,”ithout providing further details.

Mr. Hollande met with Mr. Abadi and President Fuad Masum, and later traveled to the self-governing northern Kurdish region to meet with French troops and local officials. He pledged to help displaced Iraqis return to Mosul , where Iraqi forces are waging a large offensive against the Islamic State.

France is part of the American-led coalition formed in 2014 to fight the Islamic State after the extremist group seized large areas in Iraq and neighboring Syria. France has suffered multiple attacks claimed by the extremist group.

* \b ISIS\b0  Bomb Aimed at Shiite Pilgrims in Iraq Kills at Least 80 

* Iraq Told Civilians to Stay in Mosul. Now They’e Paying With Their Lives. 

The remains of a suicide car bombing on Monday in a bustling outdoor market in Baghdad’ eastern Sadr City district. | Karim Kadim/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170103ed13000gp



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Suicide Bombing Kills at Least 36 in Baghdad

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS 
589 words
3 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- A suicide bomber detonated a pickup truck loaded with explosives on Monday in a busy Baghdad market, killing at least 36 people hours after President Françis Hollande of France arrived in the Iraqi capital.

The Islamic State later claimed responsibility for the attack.

The bomb went off in a produce market that was packed with day laborers, a police officer said, adding that another 52 people were wounded.

During a news conference with Mr. Hollande, Haider al-Abadi, Iraq's prime minister, said the suicide bomber had pretended to be a man seeking to hire day laborers. Once the workers gathered around, he detonated the vehicle.

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, claimed the attack in a statement circulated on a website that is often used by the group. It was the third such attack in three days in or near Baghdad, underscoring the lingering threat posed by the extremist group despite a string of setbacks for it elsewhere in the country over the past year, including in and around the northern city of Mosul.

The attack took place in Sadr City, a vast Shiite district in eastern Baghdad that has been repeatedly targeted by Sunni extremists since the 2003 American-led invasion.

Militiamen loyal to the Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr were seen evacuating bodies in their trucks before ambulances arrived. Bodies were scattered across the bloody pavement alongside fruit, vegetables and laborers' shovels and axes. A minibus filled with dead passengers was on fire.

Asaad Hashim, 28, an owner of a nearby cellphone store, described how the laborers had pushed and shoved around the bomber's vehicle, trying to get hired.

''Then a big boom came, sending them up into the air,'' said Mr. Hashim, who suffered shrapnel wounds to his right hand. He blamed ''the most ineffective security forces in the world'' for failing to prevent the attack.

An angry crowd cursed the government, even after a representative of Mr. Sadr tried to calm them. Late last month, the Iraqi authorities started removing some of the security checkpoints in Baghdad in a bid to ease traffic for the capital's six million residents.

''We have no idea who will kill at any moment and who's supposed to protect us,'' said Ali Abbas, a 40-year-old father of four who was hurled over his vegetable stand by the blast. ''If the securities forces can't protect us, then allow us to do the job.''

Several smaller bombings elsewhere in the city on Monday killed at least 20 civilians and wounded at least 70, according to medics and police officials. All officials spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak to reporters.

The United States State Department condemned the attacks.

Separately, the American military announced on Monday the death of a coalition service member in Iraq in a ''noncombat-related incident,'' without providing further details.

Mr. Hollande met with Mr. Abadi and President Fuad Masum, and later traveled to the self-governing northern Kurdish region to meet with French troops and local officials. He pledged to help displaced Iraqis return to Mosul, where Iraqi forces are waging a large offensive against the Islamic State.

France is part of the American-led coalition formed in 2014 to fight the Islamic State after the extremist group seized large areas in Iraq and neighboring Syria. France has suffered multiple attacks claimed by the extremist group.

Document NYTF000020170103ed1300047



Foreign Desk; SECTA
 ISIS , Praising Its 'Hero Soldier,' Claims Responsibility for Istanbul Attack

By TIM ARANGO; Ben Hubbard contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon, and Safak Timur from Istanbul. 
983 words
3 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ISTANBUL -- The Islamic State on Monday issued a rare claim of responsibility for an attack in Turkey after a New Year's Day shooting at an Istanbul nightclub that killed at least 39 people, describing the gunman who carried out the assault -- and who has not been identified or captured -- as ''a hero soldier of the caliphate.''

The Turkish authorities are still searching for the gunman, who killed a police officer guarding the Reina nightclub before going on a shooting rampage with a rapid-fire rifle, but the state news media reported that eight suspects had been detained in connection with the attack.

The authorities on Monday released two photographs of the person suspected of being the gunman, captured by security cameras, that showed a dark-haired, cleanshaven man in a dark winter coat. The government's spokesman, Numan Kurtulmus, said at a news conference that investigators believed they found the assailant's fingerprints and that they were close to identifying him.

Mr. Kurtulmus did not mention the Islamic State specifically, but he said Turkey would press the fight against terrorism.

Referring to the attack, which happened just after midnight on Sunday morning, Mr. Kurtulmus said: ''The fact that it was done during the first minutes of 2017 gives an important message. The message is, 'We will go on to menace Turkey in 2017.' And we say to them, we will break into your caves wherever you are.''

The Turkish newspaper Hurriyet reported on Monday that the gunman might be from Kyrgyzstan or elsewhere in Central Asia. The Russian news agency Interfax quoted Aiymkan Kulukeyeva, a spokeswoman for the Foreign Ministry in Kyrgyzstan, as saying, ''According to preliminary information, this information is doubtful, but we are checking all the same.''

The Islamic State asserted in a statement that the attack had been carried out ''in continuation of the blessed operations that the Islamic State is conducting against Turkey, the protector of the cross.''

''A hero soldier of the caliphate attacked one of the most famous nightclubs, where Christians celebrated their pagan holiday,'' read the statement from the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. ''They used hand grenades and a machine gun and transformed their celebration to mourning.''

In an apparent reference to Turkey's role in the conflict in Syria, the statement warned that ''the government of Turkey should know that the blood of Muslims, which it is targeting with its planes and its guns, will cause a fire in its home by God's will.''

The statement did not name the assailant, and it was not clear whether the Islamic State had organized the attack or had merely inspired the gunman. But the shooting came just days after a pro-Islamic State group, the Nashir Media Foundation, published the latest in a series of messages calling for attacks on clubs, markets and movie theaters.

The Islamic State's claim of responsibility came after years of complex relations between the Turkish state and the jihadist group operating across its southern border. Several terrorist attacks in Turkey over the last year have been attributed to the Islamic State, but the militant group rarely claims responsibility for major attacks in the country.

A rare exception came in November, when the group claimed to be behind a deadly car bombing in southeastern Turkey.

Analysts said that the Islamic State has walked a fine line in Turkey, trying to balance its goal of destabilizing the country without antagonizing the government to the extent that it would crack down heavily.

For years, Turkey looked the other way, according to analysts and regional diplomats, as jihadist groups moved fighters and supplies across the border, establishing deep networks in Turkish border towns.

Committed to supporting the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, Turkey felt the jihadists could be managed while they fought with forces loyal to the Syrian government.

But that policy ultimately changed, as Turkey worked to secure its borders, under pressure from its allies as it took in millions of Syrian refugees and as terrorist attacks rocked the country.

Turkey began a military intervention in northern Syria in August that put its forces on the front lines against Kurdish militants as well as Islamic State fighters. This turned the jihadists decidedly against Turkey, prompting their leaders to call for attacks there.

The Turkish military said on Monday that it had struck Islamic State targets in Syria, killing at least 22 militants.

American intelligence officials had recently expressed concern about a possible attack in Turkey, warning in a statement on Dec. 22 that extremist groups were ''continuing aggressive efforts to conduct attacks throughout Turkey'' in areas where American citizens and expatriates lived or visited.

That warning came three days after a gunman, described by Turkish officials as a 22-year-old off-duty police officer, assassinated Andrey G. Karlov, the Russian ambassador to Turkey, at an art gallery in the capital, Ankara. The gunman shouted ''God is great!'' and ''Don't forget Aleppo, don't forget Syria!'' during the attack, which was captured on video.

The state-run Anadolu news agency said that 38 of the 39 people who died in the attack on Sunday had been identified, The Associated Press reported. At least two dozen of the people killed were said to be foreigners.

Follow Tim Arango on Twitter @tarangoNYT .

The funeral in Istanbul on Monday of a victim of the Istanbul nightclub attack, 23-year-old Yunus Gormek. The attack on Sunday killed at least 39 people.; Relatives of Fatih Cakmak, a security guard killed in the attack, at his funeral in Istanbul on Monday. At least two dozen victims were said to be foreigners. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BULENT KILIC/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170103ed130005b



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Fractured World Tested the Hope of a Young President

By MARK LANDLER 
3,101 words
2 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Obama's advisers wrestled with an intractable problem in the spring and summer of 2015: How could they stabilize Afghanistan while preserving Mr. Obama's longtime goal of pulling out the last American troops before he left office?

As it happened, the president solved the problem for them. In early August of that year, when Mr. Obama convened a meeting of the National Security Council, he looked around the table and acknowledged a stark new reality.

''The fever in this room has finally broken,'' the president told the group, according to a person in the meeting. ''We're no longer in nation-building mode.''

What Mr. Obama meant was that no one in the Situation Room that day, himself included, thought that the United States -- after 14 years of war, billions of dollars spent and more than 2,000 American lives lost -- would ever transform Afghanistan into a semblance of a democracy able to defend itself.

At the same time, he added, ''the counterterrorism challenges are real.'' As bleak as Afghanistan's prospects were, the United States could not afford to walk away and allow the country to become a seedbed for extremists again.

A few weeks later, the president halted the withdrawal and announced that he would leave thousands of American troops in the country indefinitely.

It was a crucial turning point in the evolution of Barack Obama. The antiwar candidate of 2008 who had pledged to turn around Afghanistan -- the ''good war'' to George W. Bush's ''bad war'' in Iraq -- had conceded that the longest military operation in American history would not end on his watch. The optimistic president who once thought Afghanistan was winnable had, through bitter experience, become the commander in chief of a forever war.

He remains defensive about the lessons of that journey. ''We shouldn't assume that every time a country has problems that it reflects a failure of American policy,'' the president said in an interview in September.

Now, as Mr. Obama prepares to turn the war over to Donald J. Trump, a leader even more skeptical than he is about the value of American engagement in foreign conflicts, Afghanistan captures the disillusionment of a man who believed, as he put it in his 2009 Nobel Peace Prize acceptance speech, ''that war is sometimes necessary, and war at some level is an expression of human folly.''

More than any other conflict, Afghanistan shaped Mr. Obama's thinking on the basic questions of war, peace and the use of military power. It is where he discovered his affinity for drones, sharpened his belief in the limits of American intervention, battled his generals and hardened his disdain for unreliable foreign leaders. It reaffirmed his suspicions about sending American troops into foreign conflicts and made him reluctant to use more force in Iraq, Syria, Libya and other war zones.

It also chastened him about his own hopes.

''When it comes to helping these societies stabilize and create a more secure environment and a better life for their people, we have to understand,'' he said in the interview, ''that this is a long slog.''

'A War That We Have to Win'

Mr. Obama was a state senator from Illinois in October 2002 when he famously condemned Iraq as a ''dumb war.'' But in the same speech he also said, ''I don't oppose all wars.'' He was referring to Afghanistan, which he viewed as a just war to hunt down the perpetrators of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.

''I would willingly take up arms myself to prevent such tragedy from happening again,'' he told the crowd that day in Chicago's Federal Plaza.

By July 2008, as the Democratic nominee for president, Mr. Obama had embraced Afghanistan as a priority over Iraq -- the ''good war,'' in a phrase that he never actually used himself but that became so associated with his approach it was sometimes wrongly attributed to him.

Mr. Obama praised the Bush administration's troop surge in Iraq that year not because he believed that the United States could transform Iraqi society, but because he thought that reducing the violence there would allow the nation to turn its attention to Afghanistan.

''This is a war that we have to win,'' he declared. He promised to send at least two more combat brigades, or roughly 10,000 soldiers, to Afghanistan.

The United States was hardly on course for victory. Although there were already close to 50,000 American troops in Afghanistan as Mr. Obama campaigned that summer, the Taliban were gaining momentum. In a bloody debacle, nine American soldiers were killed in what became known as the Battle of Wanat when the Taliban brazenly overran a remote Army outpost in the far eastern province of Nuristan.

Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, echoed Mr. Obama in calling the situation in the country ''precarious and urgent.'' More than 100 Americans would die in Afghanistan by the end of 2008, a larger number than in any other prior year.

When Mr. Obama took office in January 2009, he ordered a quick policy review on Afghanistan by a former intelligence analyst, Bruce Riedel. But even before it was completed, he accepted a Pentagon recommendation to send 17,000 additional troops to Afghanistan, bringing the total to nearly 70,000 American troops on the ground.

By the fall of 2009, with the Taliban showing increased strength, Mr. Obama's military commanders, backed by the elders on his war council, including Hillary Clinton, then his secretary of state, were pressing him to go much farther.

They urged on him an ambitious counterinsurgency strategy that had helped turn around the war in Iraq -- a troop-heavy, time-consuming, expensive doctrine of trying to win over the locals by building roads, bridges, schools and a well-functioning government.

The strategy, known by its acronym COIN, would require as many as 40,000 additional American men and women in uniform in Afghanistan, his advisers told him.

''There was still the afterglow of the surge in Iraq, and the counterinsurgency narrative that had made the military the savior of the Iraq war,'' said Vali R. Nasr, a former State Department adviser on Afghanistan and Pakistan. ''I don't believe Obama was in a position to pick a debate with the military on Afghanistan, and to assert what would be his worldview.''

''In many ways, I think, he deferred,'' said Mr. Nasr, now the dean of the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.

Although Mr. Obama agreed after months of internal debate to send 30,000 additional troops to Afghanistan, he placed a strict timetable on the mission, saying they would have to be withdrawn again, starting in July 2011. His aides later said he felt hijacked by a military that had presented him with a narrow band of options rather than a real choice.

Even some former military commanders agreed, saying that the troop deployments were framed in a way that made choosing a smaller number -- 20,000, for example -- look like a path to certain defeat.

''President Obama was asking the military for broad options,'' said Karl W. Eikenberry, a retired general who served as the commander in Afghanistan from 2005 to 2007 and was later Mr. Obama's ambassador to Kabul. But, he said, the military gave Mr. Obama only ''variations'' on ''the more robust counterinsurgency model.''

Mr. Eikenberry, who wrote a politically explosive but prescient cable in late 2009 raising doubts about the wisdom of the surge, diagnosed a deeper problem with the policy. Was it simply to prevent Afghanistan from being a safe haven for Al Qaeda? Or was it to turn Afghanistan into another Denmark? ''When he came in, everyone knew we were going to do more,'' Mr. Eikenberry said. ''But what we were trying to achieve was difficult to define.''

Given Mr. Obama's innate wariness of nation-building, it didn't take long for him to grow disenchanted with the Denmark option. A few months into the surge, in the spring of 2010, David H. Petraeus, the commander of the Pentagon's Central Command and an architect of the strategy, was briefing him on the state of the counterinsurgency campaign.

Drawing on anthropology theory from the University of Chicago, General Petraeus explained to his commander in chief how neighborhoods in Kandahar related to one another. Mr. Obama listened for a while, then cut him off. ''We can't worry about how neighborhoods relate to each other in Kandahar,'' he curtly told General Petraeus, according to people in the room.

''Obama believes the military can do enormous things,'' said Benjamin J. Rhodes, the deputy national security adviser. ''It can win wars and stabilize conflicts. But a military can't create a political culture or build a society.''

'Afghan Good Enough'

By the end of his first term, Mr. Obama had evolved to the point that he fully embraced the concept ''Afghan good enough.'' The phrase, which had been kicked around the White House since 2010, referred to the shift away from nation-building to a policy that was content with taking out the terrorists, preventing the Taliban from overrunning the country and putting a premium on getting the troops out.

By that new standard, things had improved in Afghanistan. By August 2010, 100,000 American troops were on the ground in Afghanistan and were pushing back the Taliban in some critical areas. Despite uneven progress in the military campaign, Ryan Crocker, a diplomat who had reopened the American Embassy in Kabul in 2002 and served there again as ambassador in 2011, recalled thinking, ''Wow, this place looks great!''

The Navy SEAL raid that killed Osama bin Laden in Pakistan in May 2011 added to Mr. Obama's conviction that he was on the way to closing the books on the war.

At midnight on May 1, 2012, Air Force One rolled out from behind a hangar at Joint Base Andrews to pick up the president for a secret trip to Afghanistan. He was going to sign a strategic partnership agreement with President Hamid Karzai that set the terms for relations after 2014, when the United States was scheduled to withdraw its combat troops and turn over Afghanistan's security to the Afghans.

Aides to Mr. Obama had advised him not to go for security reasons, but he saw it as an important milestone.

The agreement promised an ''enduring partnership'' between the United States and Afghanistan, with pledges of American help in developing the Afghan economy and public institutions. Yet the promises obscured a starker reality: Mr. Obama had accelerated the timetable for drawing down American troops, and he was looking beyond the war.

Speaking to a national TV audience from Bagram Air Base, he suggested that America's experience in Afghanistan had come full circle. ''One year ago, from a base here in Afghanistan, our troops launched the operation that killed Osama bin Laden,'' he said. ''The goal I set -- to defeat Al Qaeda, and deny it a chance to rebuild -- is now within our reach.''

Earlier, Mr. Obama had met for an hour with Mr. Karzai. The two had long had a rocky relationship -- on an earlier trip, Mr. Obama excoriated Mr. Karzai for the rampant corruption in the Afghan government -- and this session did little to improve their rapport. Mr. Crocker recalled that the president was ''very aloof, almost cold, which bothered me a bit because I'd worked a solid damn year to get Karzai in a better place with us.''

Things never warmed up between them. When Mr. Karzai refused to sign a long-term security agreement with Washington, Mr. Obama gave up on him to focus on his successor, Ashraf Ghani. The experience left a lasting imprint on the president, his aides said. He concluded that without the right partner, it was impossible for the United States to succeed, no matter how much blood and treasure it poured into a country.

It was an insight that Mr. Obama applied to his relations with other countries, from Pakistan to Israel, where his poor relationships with the leaders impeded progress. ''The most underappreciated part of foreign policy,'' Mr. Rhodes said, ''is dealing with flawed partners.''

ISIS, a New, Radiating Threat

When Mr. Obama convened his National Security Council that day in August 2015, the Taliban were regrouping again. They had carried out audacious terrorist attacks in the center of Kabul and had mounted a military offensive in the provinces of Kunduz and Oruzgan.

Worse, there was a new threat in the form of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, which sprouted in the poisonous soil of Iraq after the United States left and was finding recruits in the Hindu Kush.

Mr. Obama had rejected a chorus of calls in Washington to delay the drawdown, under which the residual force of American troops was to leave Afghanistan by the end of 2016.

''The mantra I heard was that the president does not want to hand off to his successor the mess he inherited,'' said Daniel F. Feldman, who served as the special representative to Afghanistan and Pakistan in 2014 and 2015.

But as the Islamic State became a dire enough threat to return American troops to Iraq, Mr. Obama felt compelled to change course on Afghanistan. ''ISIL thrived in a vacuum in Iraq and it pointed to a similar vacuum in Afghanistan,'' Mr. Rhodes said.

Mr. Obama, he said, was prodded by more than fear. After a long stretch of political paralysis, Afghanistan formed a government with Mr. Ghani in the presidency. For the first time since taking office, Mr. Obama felt like he had a partner with whom he could do business. The American-trained Afghan Army was taking heavy casualties fighting the Taliban, and the president believed that the United States had an obligation to help them.

But as Mr. Obama's war council met that August morning, the level of American support remained the subject of intense debate.

Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., a skeptic about Afghanistan going back to 2009, argued that the country would revert to chaos, regardless of how long the United States stayed there. ''It doesn't matter if we leave tomorrow or 10 years from now,'' he declared, according to those in the room. He was, he conceded, a ''broken record'' on this issue.

Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, who had succeeded Admiral Mullen as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, recommended that the United States maintain a military presence in Kabul, and at Bagram and a scattering of bases in the east and south. The 10,000 soldiers in the country would carry out a singular, ruthless mission of killing suspected terrorists and keeping the country from spiraling out of control.

The imperative, General Dempsey told Mr. Obama, was that Afghanistan fit into a broader counterterrorism policy from Central Asia to North Africa to extend ''well beyond your presidency,'' according to several officials.

Mr. Obama liked that idea. It was in line, he said, with the principles he had laid out in a 2014 speech at the United States Military Academy in West Point, N.Y., where he said America would train and equip foreign armies but leave the front-line fighting to them. He acknowledged that it would mean handing off Afghanistan to his successor as unfinished business.

''This goes to the politics of what I'm leaving for the next president,'' he told the group, according to one of the participants. ''My interest is not to sign them up for 10 years of X,'' he added, referring to troop numbers, ''but to lay out a vision and to put stakes in the ground for that vision.''

Mr. Obama now seems at an uneasy peace. In the interview in September, he disputed the suggestion that his policy had failed. He had, after all, reduced the number of American troops to fewer than 10,000 from more than 100,000. They were training and assisting Afghan troops, even if the line between that and actual combat was sometimes blurry.

The country had been broken to begin with, he said, and America was never going to fix it. ''Afghanistan was one of the poorest countries in the world with the lowest literacy rates in the world before we got there. It continues to be,'' Mr. Obama said. The country ''was riven with all kinds of ethnic and tribal divisions before we got there. It's still there.''

In the end, Afghanistan became the template for a new kind of warfare -- a chronic conflict, across an arc of unstable states, in which the United States is a participant, if not the principal actor.

At a NATO summit meeting in Warsaw in July, Mr. Obama acknowledged that this prospect would disappoint an American public still suffering from combat fatigue. ''It's very hard for us ever to get the satisfaction of MacArthur and the emperor meeting, and a war being officially over,'' he said.

''As commander in chief of the most powerful military in the world,'' he went on, ''I spend a lot of time brooding over these issues. And I'm not satisfied we've got it perfect yet.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

President Obama on Veterans Day in 2009, visiting a section of Arlington National Cemetery where many Americans killed in Afghanistan and Iraq are buried. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LUKE SHARRETT/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A1); Members of the United States military watched as President Obama addressed the nation in May 2012 from Afghanistan. He promised an ''enduring partnership'' between the countries, even as he was accelerating the timetable for drawing down troops and was looking beyond the war. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES); Left, leaving the 2008 funeral in Burlington, N.C., for Cpl. Pruitt A. Rainey, killed in Afghanistan. Right, Marines patrolling a ridge overlooking the country's border with Pakistan. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PETER SCHUMACHER/THE BURLINGTON TIMES-NEWS, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS; TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A5) CHART: The Obama Era: In the coming weeks, The Obama Era will explore the sweeping change that President Obama has brought to the nation, and how the presidency has changed him. PART 1 The Regulator in Chief PART 2 The Threat to the Planet PART 3 The ''Good War'' PART 4 The Health Care Revolution PART 5 Breaking the Racial Barrier PART 6 A Changed Man (A5) 

Document NYTF000020170102ed120004d



World; Asia Pacific
The Afghan War and the Evolution of Obama

By MARK LANDLER 
3,189 words
1 January 2017
21:33
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —President Obama’ advisers wrestled with an intractable problem in the spring and summer of 2015: How could they stabilize Afghanistan while preserving Mr. Obama’ longtime goal of pulling out the last American troops before he left office?

As it happened, the president solved the problem for them. In early August of that year, when Mr. Obama convened a meeting of the National Security Council, he looked around the table and acknowledged a stark new reality.

“he fever in this room has finally broken,”he president told the group, according to a person in the meeting. “e’e no longer in nation-building mode.”

What Mr. Obama meant was that no one in the Situation Room that day, himself included, thought that the United States —fter 14 years of war, billions of dollars spent and more than 2,000 American lives lost —ould ever transform Afghanistan into a semblance of a democracy able to defend itself.

At the same time, he added, “he counterterrorism challenges are real.”s bleak as Afghanistan’ prospects were, the United States could not afford to walk away and allow the country to become a seedbed for extremists again.

A few weeks later, the president halted the withdrawal and announced that he would leave thousands of American troops in the country indefinitely.

It was a crucial turning point in the evolution of Barack Obama. The antiwar candidate of 2008 who had pledged to turn around Afghanistan —he “ood war”o George W. Bush’ “ad war”n Iraq —ad conceded that the longest military operation in American history would not end on his watch. The optimistic president who once thought Afghanistan was winnable had, through bitter experience, become the commander in chief of a forever war.

He remains defensive about the lessons of that journey. “e shouldn’ assume that every time a country has problems that it reflects a failure of American policy,”he president said in an interview in September.

Now, as Mr. Obama prepares to turn the war over to Donald J. Trump, a leader even more skeptical than he is about the value of American engagement in foreign conflicts, Afghanistan captures the disillusionment of a man who believed, as he put it in his 2009 Nobel Peace Prize acceptance speech, “hat war is sometimes necessary, and war at some level is an expression of human folly.”

More than any other conflict, Afghanistan shaped Mr. Obama’ thinking on the basic questions of war, peace and the use of military power. It is where he discovered his affinity for drones, sharpened his belief in the limits of American intervention, battled his generals and hardened his disdain for unreliable foreign leaders. It reaffirmed his suspicions about sending American troops into foreign conflicts and made him reluctant to use more force in Iraq, Syria, Libya and other war zones.

It also chastened him about his own hopes.

“hen it comes to helping these societies stabilize and create a more secure environment and a better life for their people, we have to understand,”e said in the interview, “hat this is a long slog.”

‘ War That We Have to Win’

Mr. Obama was a state senator from Illinois in October 2002 when he famously condemned Iraq as a “umb war.”ut in the same speech he also said, “ don’ oppose all wars.”e was referring to Afghanistan, which he viewed as a just war to hunt down the perpetrators of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.

“ would willingly take up arms myself to prevent such tragedy from happening again,”e told the crowd that day in Chicago’ Federal Plaza.

By July 2008, as the Democratic nominee for president, Mr. Obama had embraced Afghanistan as a priority over Iraq —he “ood war,”n a phrase that he never actually used himself but that became so associated with his approach it was sometimes wrongly attributed to him.

Mr. Obama praised the Bush administration’ troop surge in Iraq that year not because he believed that the United States could transform Iraqi society, but because he thought that reducing the violence there would allow the nation to turn its attention to Afghanistan.

“his is a war that we have to win,”e declared. He promised to send at least two more combat brigades, or roughly 10,000 soldiers, to Afghanistan.

The United States was hardly on course for victory. Although there were already close to 50,000 American troops in Afghanistan as Mr. Obama campaigned that summer, the Taliban were gaining momentum. In a bloody debacle, nine American soldiers were killed in what became known as the Battle of Wanat when the Taliban brazenly overran a remote Army outpost in the far eastern province of Nuristan.

Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, echoed Mr. Obama in calling the situation in the country “recarious and urgent.”ore than 100 Americans would die in Afghanistan by the end of 2008, a larger number than in any other prior year.

When Mr. Obama took office in January 2009, he ordered a quick policy review on Afghanistan by a former intelligence analyst, Bruce Riedel. But even before it was completed, he accepted a Pentagon recommendation to send 17,000 additional troops to Afghanistan, bringing the total to nearly 70,000 American troops on the ground.

By the fall of 2009, with the Taliban showing increased strength, Mr. Obama’ military commanders, backed by the elders on his war council, including Hillary Clinton, then his secretary of state, were pressing him to go much farther.

They urged on him an ambitious counterinsurgency strategy that had helped turn around the war in Iraq — troop-heavy, time-consuming, expensive doctrine of trying to win over the locals by building roads, bridges, schools and a well-functioning government.

The strategy, known by its acronym COIN, would require as many as 40,000 additional American men and women in uniform in Afghanistan, his advisers told him.

“here was still the afterglow of the surge in Iraq, and the counterinsurgency narrative that had made the military the savior of the Iraq war,”aid Vali R. Nasr, a former State Department adviser on Afghanistan and Pakistan. “ don’ believe Obama was in a position to pick a debate with the military on Afghanistan, and to assert what would be his worldview.”

“n many ways, I think, he deferred,”aid Mr. Nasr, now the dean of the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.

Although Mr. Obama agreed after months of internal debate to send 30,000 additional troops to Afghanistan, he placed a strict timetable on the mission, saying they would have to be withdrawn again, starting in July 2011. His aides later said he felt hijacked by a military that had presented him with a narrow band of options rather than a real choice.

Even some former military commanders agreed, saying that the troop deployments were framed in a way that made choosing a smaller number —0,000, for example —ook like a path to certain defeat.

“resident Obama was asking the military for broad options,”aid Karl W. Eikenberry, a retired general who served as the commander in Afghanistan from 2005 to 2007 and was later Mr. Obama’ ambassador to Kabul. But, he said, the military gave Mr. Obama only “ariations”n “he more robust counterinsurgency model.”

Mr. Eikenberry, who wrote a politically explosive but prescient cable in late 2009 raising doubts about the wisdom of the surge, diagnosed a deeper problem with the policy. Was it simply to prevent Afghanistan from being a safe haven for Al Qaeda? Or was it to turn Afghanistan into another Denmark? “hen he came in, everyone knew we were going to do more,”r. Eikenberry said. “ut what we were trying to achieve was difficult to define.”

Given Mr. Obama’ innate wariness of nation-building, it didn’ take long for him to grow disenchanted with the Denmark option. A few months into the surge, in the spring of 2010, David H. Petraeus, the commander of the Pentagon’ Central Command and an architect of the strategy, was briefing him on the state of the counterinsurgency campaign.

Drawing on anthropology theory from the University of Chicago, General Petraeus explained to his commander in chief how neighborhoods in Kandahar related to one another. Mr. Obama listened for a while, then cut him off. “e can’ worry about how neighborhoods relate to each other in Kandahar,”e curtly told General Petraeus, according to people in the room.

“bama believes the military can do enormous things,”aid Benjamin J. Rhodes, the deputy national security adviser. “t can win wars and stabilize conflicts. But a military can’ create a political culture or build a society.”

‘fghan Good Enough’

By the end of his first term, Mr. Obama had evolved to the point that he fully embraced the concept “fghan good enough.”he phrase, which had been kicked around the White House since 2010, referred to the shift away from nation-building to a policy that was content with taking out the terrorists, preventing the Taliban from overrunning the country and putting a premium on getting the troops out.

By that new standard, things had improved in Afghanistan. By August 2010, 100,000 American troops were on the ground in Afghanistan and were pushing back the Taliban in some critical areas. Despite uneven progress in the military campaign, Ryan Crocker, a diplomat who had reopened the American Embassy in Kabul in 2002 and served there again as ambassador in 2011, recalled thinking, “ow, this place looks great!”

The Navy SEAL raid that killed Osama bin Laden in Pakistan in May 2011 added to Mr. Obama’ conviction that he was on the way to closing the books on the war.

At midnight on May 1, 2012, Air Force One rolled out from behind a hangar at Joint Base Andrews to pick up the president for a secret trip to Afghanistan. He was going to sign a strategic partnership agreement with President Hamid Karzai that set the terms for relations after 2014, when the United States was scheduled to withdraw its combat troops and turn over Afghanistan’ security to the Afghans.

Aides to Mr. Obama had advised him not to go for security reasons, but he saw it as an important milestone.

The agreement promised an “nduring partnership”etween the United States and Afghanistan, with pledges of American help in developing the Afghan economy and public institutions. Yet the promises obscured a starker reality: Mr. Obama had accelerated the timetable for drawing down American troops, and he was looking beyond the war.

Speaking to a national TV audience from Bagram Air Base, he suggested that America’ experience in Afghanistan had come full circle. “ne year ago, from a base here in Afghanistan, our troops launched the operation that killed Osama bin Laden,”e said. “he goal I set —o defeat Al Qaeda, and deny it a chance to rebuild —s now within our reach.”

Earlier, Mr. Obama had met for an hour with Mr. Karzai. The two had long had a rocky relationship —n an earlier trip, Mr. Obama excoriated Mr. Karzai for the rampant corruption in the Afghan government —nd this session did little to improve their rapport. Mr. Crocker recalled that the president was “ery aloof, almost cold, which bothered me a bit because I’ worked a solid damn year to get Karzai in a better place with us.”

Things never warmed up between them. When Mr. Karzai refused to sign a long-term security agreement with Washington, Mr. Obama gave up on him to focus on his successor, Ashraf Ghani. The experience left a lasting imprint on the president, his aides said. He concluded that without the right partner, it was impossible for the United States to succeed, no matter how much blood and treasure it poured into a country.

It was an insight that Mr. Obama applied to his relations with other countries, from Pakistan to Israel, where his poor relationships with the leaders impeded progress. “he most underappreciated part of foreign policy,”r. Rhodes said, “s dealing with flawed partners.”

ISIS, a New, Radiating Threat

When Mr. Obama convened his National Security Council that day in August 2015, the Taliban were regrouping again. They had carried out audacious terrorist attacks in the center of Kabul and had mounted a military offensive in the provinces of Kunduz and Oruzgan.

Worse, there was a new threat in the form of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, which sprouted in the poisonous soil of Iraq after the United States left and was finding recruits in the Hindu Kush.

Mr. Obama had rejected a chorus of calls in Washington to delay the drawdown, under which the residual force of American troops were to leave Afghanistan by the end of 2016.

“he mantra I heard was that the president does not want to hand off to his successor the mess he inherited,”aid Daniel F. Feldman, who served as the special representative to Afghanistan and Pakistan in 2014 and 2015.

But as the Islamic State became a dire enough threat to return American troops to Iraq, Mr. Obama felt compelled to change course on Afghanistan. “SIL thrived in a vacuum in Iraq and it pointed to a similar vacuum in Afghanistan,”r. Rhodes said.

Mr. Obama, he said, was prodded by more than fear. After a long stretch of political paralysis, Afghanistan formed a government with Mr. Ghani in the presidency. For the first time since taking office, Mr. Obama felt like he had a partner with whom he could do business. The American-trained Afghan Army was taking heavy casualties fighting the Taliban, and the president believed that the United States had an obligation to help them.

But as Mr. Obama’ war council met that August morning, the level of American support remained the subject of intense debate.

Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., a skeptic about Afghanistan going back to 2009, argued that the country would revert to chaos, regardless of how long the United States stayed there. “t doesn’ matter if we leave tomorrow or 10 years from now,”e declared, according to those in the room. He was, he conceded, a “roken record”n this issue.

Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, who had succeeded Admiral Mullen as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, recommended that the United States maintain a military presence in Kabul, and at Bagram and a scattering of bases in the east and south. The 10,000 soldiers in the country would carry out a singular, ruthless mission of killing suspected terrorists and keeping the country from spiraling out of control.

The imperative, General Dempsey told Mr. Obama, was that Afghanistan fit into a broader counterterrorism policy from Central Asia to North Africa to extend “ell beyond your presidency,”ccording to several officials.

Mr. Obama liked that idea. It was in line, he said, with the principles he had laid out in a 2014 speech at the United States Military Academy in West Point, N.Y., where he said America would train and equip foreign armies but leave the front-line fighting to them. He acknowledged that it would mean handing off Afghanistan to his successor as unfinished business.

“his goes to the politics of what I’ leaving for the next president,”he told the group, according to one of the participants. “y interest is not to sign them up for 10 years of X,”e added, referring to troop numbers, “ut to lay out a vision and to put stakes in the ground for that vision.”

Mr. Obama now seems at an uneasy peace. In the interview in September, he disputed the suggestion that his policy had failed. He had, after all, reduced the number of American troops to fewer than 10,000 from more than 100,000. They were training and assisting Afghan troops, even if the line between that and actual combat was sometimes blurry.

The country had been broken to begin with, he said, and America was never going to fix it. “fghanistan was one of the poorest countries in the world with the lowest literacy rates in the world before we got there. It continues to be,”r. Obama said. The country “as riven with all kinds of ethnic and tribal divisions before we got there. It’ still there.”

In the end, Afghanistan became the template for a new kind of warfare — chronic conflict, across an arc of unstable states, in which the United States is a participant, if not the principal actor.

At a NATO summit meeting in Warsaw in July, Mr. Obama acknowledged that this prospect would disappoint an American public still suffering from combat fatigue. “t’ very hard for us ever to get the satisfaction of MacArthur and the emperor meeting, and a war being officially over,”e said.

“s commander in chief of the most powerful military in the world,”e went on, “ spend a lot of time brooding over these issues. And I’ not satisfied we’e got it perfect yet.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* Afghan Security Crisis Sets Stage for Terrorists’esurgence

* Afghanistan Fires 7 From Cabinet in Intensifying Political Crisis

* 2 U.S. Soldiers and 30 Afghans Killed in Kunduz Battle

* Taliban Gain Ground in Afghanistan as Soldiers Surrender Their Posts

* Attack in Afghanistan by Afghan Soldier Kills 2 Americans

President Obama visited Section 60 of Arlington National Cemetery on Veterans Day in 2009. Section 60 is where many American soldiers killed in Afghanistan and Iraq are buried. | Luke Sharrett/The New York Times | Two Marines on a mountain ridge overlooking the Pakistani border near Kamu, Afghanistan, in 2008. The Taliban often attacked an American outpost in the area from firing positions on the mountain ridge. | Tyler Hicks/The New York Times | Cpl. Pruitt A. Rainey’ coffin was carried from the Glen Hope Baptist Church in Burlington, N.C., in July 2008. Corporal Rainey, 22, was one of nine American soldiers killed in the Battle of Wanat that month. | Peter Schumacher/The Burlington Times-News, via Associated Press | Mr. Obama and President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan signed a strategic partnership agreement in Kabul in May 2012. The two had long had a rocky relationship. | Doug Mills/The New York Times | A bomb blast targeted NATO forces in Kabul in July 2015. | Shah Marai/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | President Obama addressed graduates at the United States Military Academy in West Point, N.Y., in May 2014. In his speech, he said the United States would train and equip foreign armies but leave the front-line fighting to them. | Gabriella Demczuk/The New York Times | President Obama's shifting approach to the conflict is a lens through which to judge his legacy as a wartime leader. | By A.J. CHAVAR 

Document NYTFEED020170101ed1100335



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Recent Attacks Across Turkey

208 words
1 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
12
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

OCT. 10, 2015 Suicide bombers hit a lunchtime peace rally in Ankara, killing about 100 people. No one has claimed responsibility.

JAN. 12, 2016 A suicide bomber blew himself up and killed 10 tourists, all foreigners, in an attack in Istanbul's central historic district.

FEB. 17, 2016 A blast in Ankara hit a convoy of buses filled with soldiers at a traffic light, killing 28 and wounding more than 60.

MARCH 13, 2016 A car rigged with explosives blew up in a public square in Ankara, killing more than 30. A Kurdish militant group claimed responsibility.

MARCH 19, 2016 A suicide bomber struck a main avenue in Istanbul, killing at least four, including two Americans. Turkey said ISIS carried out the attack.

JUNE 7, 2016 A car bomb destroyed a police vehicle near an Istanbul tourist district, killing 11 people and wounding dozens.

JUNE 28, 2016 Three suicide attackers killed 45 people and wounded dozens more at Istanbul's main airport.

DEC. 10, 2016 A double bombing in Istanbul outside a soccer stadium killed at least 38 people, and wounded 136.

DEC. 19, 2016 Russia's ambassador to Turkey was assassinated by a gunman at an art exhibit in Ankara.

Document NYTF000020170101ed110009z



SpecialSections; SECTF
Most Read / Terror

187 words
1 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Strikes Claimed by ISIS Shut Brussels And Shake European Security

The Islamic State militant group claimed responsibility for the blasts, which occurred four days after the capture of a suspect in the Paris attacks. March 23

Orlando Gunman Was 'Cool and Calm' After Massacre, Police Say

The Orlando police chief offered new details on the worst shooting in United States history, and other officials said that all but one of the 49 victims had been identified. June 14

Fractured Lands: How the Arab World Came Apart

The story of more than a decade of war, terror and revolution in the Middle East, seen through the eyes of six people whose lives were changed forever. Aug. 14

Powerful Blast Injures at Least 29 In Manhattan; Second Device Found

An explosion caused by what the authorities believe was a homemade bomb injured at least 29 people in the Chelsea neighborhood. A second explosive device was later found four blocks away. Sept. 18

A memorial in the Place de la Bourse in Brussels after terrorist bombings. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DANIEL BEREHULAK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170101ed110007r



STATE OF TERROR
SpecialSections; SECTF
 ISIS ' System of Rape Relies on Birth Control

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
2,371 words
1 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

DOHUK, Iraq -- Locked inside a room where the only furniture was a bed, the 16-year-old learned to fear the sunset, because nightfall started the countdown to her next rape.

During the year she was held by the Islamic State, she spent her days dreading the smell of the ISIS fighter's breath, the disgusting sounds he made and the pain he inflicted on her body. More than anything, she was tormented by the thought she might become pregnant with her rapist's child.

It was the one thing she needn't have worried about.

Soon after buying her, the fighter brought the teenage girl a round box containing four strips of pills, one of them colored red.

''Every day, I had to swallow one in front of him. He gave me one box per month. When I ran out, he replaced it. When I was sold from one man to another, the box of pills came with me,'' explained the girl, who learned only months later that she was being given birth control.

It is a particularly modern solution to a medieval injunction: According to an obscure ruling in Islamic law cited by the Islamic State, a man must ensure that the woman he enslaves is free of child before having intercourse with her.

Islamic State leaders have made sexual slavery as they believe it was practiced during the Prophet Muhammad's time integral to the group's operations, preying on the women and girls the group captured from the Yazidi religious minority almost two years ago. To keep the sex trade running, the fighters have aggressively pushed birth control on their victims so they can continue the abuse unabated while the women are passed among them.

More than three dozen Yazidi women who recently escaped the Islamic State and who agreed to be interviewed for this article described the numerous methods the fighters used to avoid pregnancy, including oral and injectable contraception, and sometimes both. In at least one case, a woman was forced to have an abortion in order to make her available for sex, and others were pressured to do so.

Some described how they knew they were about to be sold when they were driven to a hospital to give a urine sample to be tested for the hCG hormone, whose presence indicates pregnancy. They awaited their results with apprehension: A positive test would mean they were carrying their abuser's child; a negative result would allow Islamic State fighters to continue raping them.

The rules have not been universally followed, with many women describing being assaulted by men who were either ignorant of the injunction or defiant of it. But over all, the methodical use of birth control during at least some of the women's captivity explains what doctors caring for recent escapees observed: Of the more than 700 rape victims from the Yazidi ethnic group who have sought treatment so far at a United Nations-backed clinic in northern Iraq, just 5 percent became pregnant during their enslavement, according to Dr. Nagham Nawzat, the gynecologist carrying out the examinations.

It is a stunningly low figure given that the normal fertility rate for a young woman is between 20 percent and 25 percent in any given month, four to five times the rate that has been recorded so far, said Dr. Nezar Ismet Taib, who heads the Ministry of Health Directorate in Dohuk, which oversees the clinic where the victims are being treated.

''We were expecting something much higher,'' he said.

The captured teenage girl, who agreed to be identified by her first initial, M., has the demeanor of a child and wears her hair in a bouncy ponytail. She was sold a total of seven times. When prospective buyers came to inquire about her, she overheard them asking for assurances that she was not pregnant, and her owner provided the box of birth control as proof.

That was not enough for the third man who bought her, she said. He quizzed her on the date of her last menstrual cycle and, unnerved by what he perceived as a delay, gave her a version of the so-called morning-after pill, causing her to start bleeding.

Even then, he seemed unsatisfied.

Finally he came into her room, closed the door and ordered her to lower her pants. The teenager feared she was about to be raped. Instead he pulled out a syringe and gave her a shot on her upper thigh. It was a 150-milligram dose of Depo-Provera, an injectable contraceptive, a box of which she showed to a reporter.

''To make sure you don't get pregnant,'' she recalled him saying.

When he had finished, he pushed her back onto the bed and raped her for the first time.

Thousands of women and girls from the Yazidi minority remain captives of the Islamic State, after the jihadists overran their ancestral homeland on Mount Sinjar on Aug. 3, 2014. In the months since then, hundreds have managed to escape, returning to a community now living in tents in the plains of the yellow massif, hours from their former homes.

Many of the women interviewed for this article were initially reached through Yazidi community leaders, and gave their consent. All the underage rape victims who agreed to speak were interviewed alongside members of their family.

In its official publications, the Islamic State has said that it is legal for a man to rape the women he enslaves under just about any circumstance. Even sex with a child is permissible, according to a pamphlet published by the group. The injunction against raping a pregnant slave is functionally the only protection for the captured women.

The Islamic State cites centuries-old rulings stating that the owner of a female slave can have sex with her only after she has undergone istibra' -- ''the process of ensuring that the womb is empty,'' according to the Princeton University professor Bernard Haykel, one of several experts on Islamic law consulted on the topic. The purpose of this is to guarantee there is no confusion over a child's paternity.

Most of the Sunni scholars who ruled on the issue argued that the requirement could be met by respecting a period of sexual abstinence whenever the captive changes hands, proposing a duration of at least one menstrual cycle, according to Brill's Encyclopedia of Islam.

In its own manual, the Islamic State outlines the abstinence method as one option. But it also quotes the minority opinion of a Tunisian cleric who in the 1100s argued that it was enough to fulfill merely the spirit of the law. That opens the way for other means, including modern medicine, to circumvent the waiting period.

A total of 37 women abducted by the Islamic State who agreed to be interviewed over three trips to northern Iraq described an uneven system: Some fighters insisted on double and even triple forms of contraception, while others violated the guidelines entirely. Although it remains unclear why some hewed closely to the regulations while others flouted them, one emerging pattern was that women held by senior commanders were more likely to be given contraception, in contrast to those held by junior fighters, who perhaps were less versed in the rules.

J., an 18-year-old, said she had been sold to the Islamic State's governor of Tal Afar, a city in northern Iraq. ''Each month, he made me get a shot. It was his assistant who took me to the hospital,'' said J., who was interviewed alongside her mother, after escaping this year.

''On top of that he also gave me birth control pills. He told me, 'We don't want you to get pregnant,''' she said.

When she was sold to a more junior fighter in the Syrian city of Tal Barak, it was the man's mother who escorted her to the hospital.

''She told me, 'If you are pregnant, we are going to send you back,''' J. said. ''They took me into the lab. There were machines that looked like centrifuges and other contraptions. They drew three vials of my blood. About 30 or 40 minutes later, they came back to say I wasn't pregnant.''

The fighter's mother triumphantly told her son that the 18-year-old was not pregnant, validating his right to rape her, which he did repeatedly.

When that fighter tired of her, he gave her as a gift to his brother. Yet the brother did not take her back to have another blood test, forcing her to have sex without ascertaining whether she was carrying another man's child. Several other women reported a similar set of circumstances, including being given birth control by some of their owners but not by others.

However, the low pregnancy rate, say medical professionals, is evidence that the rules intended to avoid pregnancy were more likely to have been applied than not.

In his office in Dohuk's Ministry of Health Directorate, Dr. Taib, the physician tasked with overseeing the treatment of the hundreds of victims, was initially puzzled by the low pregnancy rate.

In other conflicts where rape has been used as a weapon of war, it has led to waves of unwanted pregnancies -- either because the attackers did not use birth control or, as was the case in the former Yugoslavia, because they purposefully tried to impregnate their victims. One medical study of 68 Croatian and Bosnian rape victims found that 29 had become pregnant.

With more than 700 cases of rape recorded so far, Dr. Taib's center has treated only 35 pregnancies. He expected to see at least 140. ''Even higher than that, if you consider that these women had multiple partners and were raped every day over many months,'' Dr. Taib said.

''I concluded that either they did an abortion before they came back or they used contraception. And if there were abortions, then there would have been physical signs,'' which would have been noted by the gynecologist treating the returnees, he said. ''There were no signs.''

The prohibition surrounding pregnancy is perhaps the only instance when the codes that the jihadists were applying lined up with the concerns of their victims, who dreaded carrying their rapists' children.

Ahlam, a middle-aged woman who was kidnapped with her six children, said she had been not raped because she had been deemed unattractive. Because she spoke Arabic, the Islamic State used her as an interpreter.

One day, she was asked to chaperone a group of young Yazidi women to the hospital in Tal Afar, where each woman was given 150 milligrams of Depo-Provera.

Over the months that followed, she said, she escorted in all around 30 victims to get the injection both in Tal Afar and later in the Iraqi city of Mosul. Twice she was asked to escort her own teenage daughter, who was raped by multiple fighters.

She explained the conflicted feelings she had at the time. ''ISIS took our girls as slaves, only for sex,'' Ahlam said, but the insistence on birth control brought some relief. ''No one wants to carry the child of their enemy.''

Others described how the fighters so opposed pregnancy that some tried to force young women to abort.

Abdal Ali said his sister, 20, was in her second trimester at the time of her capture in 2014. Still, one commander so urgently wanted her as his slave that he tried to end the pregnancy by giving her pills that would cause her to miscarry.

''She hid them under her tongue, and then when they weren't looking, she spit them out,'' said Mr. Ali, who related the story on behalf of his sister because she is undergoing medical treatment abroad for the injuries she suffered. ''They wanted to get rid of the child so that they could use the woman.''

A 20-year-old who asked to be identified only as H. began to feel nauseated soon after her abduction. ''The smell of rice made me gag,'' she said.

Already pregnant at the time of her capture, she considered herself one of the fortunate ones. For almost two months, H. was moved from location to location and held in locked rooms, but she was spared the abuse that was by then befalling most of the young women held alongside her.

Despite being repeatedly forced to give a urine sample and always testing positive, she, too, was eventually picked.

Her owner took her to a house, shared by another couple. When the couple was present, he did not approach her, suggesting he knew it was illegal. Only when the couple left did he forcibly have sex with her, and when he did he appeared drugged.

''I was telling him: 'I'm pregnant. In your book it says that you can't do this.' He had bloodshot eyes. He acted like he was high,'' she said.

Eventually he drove her to a hospital with the aim of making her have an abortion, and flew into a rage when she refused the surgery, repeatedly punching her in the stomach. Even so, his behavior suggested he was ashamed: He never told the doctors that he wanted H. to abort, instead imploring her to ask for the procedure herself.

When he drove her home, she waited until he left and then threw herself over the property's wall. ''My knees were bleeding. I was dizzy. I almost couldn't walk,'' she said.

Weeks later, with the help of smugglers hired by her family, she was spirited out of Islamic State territory. Her belly was sticking so far out that she could no longer see her toes when she finally crossed to safety.

Her first child, a healthy baby boy, was born two months later.

M., above right, who was raped repeatedly by Islamic State fighters, wept as she prepared to leave her family near Dohuk, Iraq, for resettlement in Germany. J., left, a Yazidi woman at a refugee camp outside Dohuk, escaped sexual slavery at the hands of the Islamic State. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LYNSEY ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170101ed110007j



SpecialSections; SECTF
Most Read / Justice and Rights

150 words
1 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Orlando Gunman Attacks Gay Nightclub, Leaving 50 Dead

Praising ISIS, the gunman, identified as Omar Mateen, opened fire in what emerged as the worst mass shooting in United States history. The massacre early Sunday also left 53 wounded. June 13

Sean Penn Met With 'El Chapo' For Interview in His Hideout

Before he was captured, Joaquí Guzmá Loera met with the actor in his jungle hide-out for seven hours in October and spoke about his empire, Donald Trump and the movie business for Rolling Stone. Jan. 9

Five Dallas Officers Were Killed As Payback, Police Chief Says

The shooting rampage committed by Micah Johnson, 25, was described as the kind of retaliatory violence that people have feared for the last two years. July 8

El Chapo after his recapture in January 2016 following a prison escape. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EDUARDO VERDUGO/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170101ed110007l



SpecialSections; SECTF
Reporter's Note

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
138 words
1 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The article began with a question I could not answer. I was in the midst of writing my first piece on the systematic enslavement of Yazidi women by the Islamic State, and I turned to the scholar Kecia Ali, who studies slavery in early Islam. Citing a ruling in Islamic jurisprudence that requires slave owners to observe a period of abstinence after purchasing a female slave to ensure that she is not carrying someone else's child, Ms. Ali asked me whether the ISIS fighters holding the Yazidi victims were checking for pregnancy.

The question pointed to a phenomenon I had documented but could not explain: Hundreds of women raped by ISIS had escaped by the time I began recording their stories in 2015. Yet almost none had become pregnant.

Document NYTF000020170101ed110007i

