 


Asia and Australia Edition
Briefing
North Korea, Cyberattack, China: Your Morning Briefing

By CHARLES McDERMID 
1,257 words
15 May 2017
21:50
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•resident Trump gave highly classified information on \b ISIS\b0  to Russia in an Oval Office meeting last week, breaking a deal with an ally, officials said.

In Washington, Senate Republicans are showing signs of edging away from Mr. Trump in order to forge a more traditional agenda and protect their political fortunes.

Separately, lawmakers from both parties called on Mr. Trump to turn over any tapes of conversations with James Comey, the recently fired F.B.I. chief.

_____

• global cyberattack continued to ripple through politics and markets, especially in Asia.

China, which reported disruptions at nearly 40,000 organizations, was especially susceptible because of the prevalence of pirated software there.

Affected institutions include two of China’ most prestigious universities and blue-chip companies in Japan like Hitachi and Nissan. Solving cybercrimes like the ransomware attack involves old-school sleuthing.

In Australia, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said the attacks seemed to be limited mostly to small businesses.

Above, a cancer hospital in Jakarta where service was disrupted.

_____

•he U.N. Security Councilunanimously condemned North Korea’ missile test on Sunday.

Pyongyang said the ballistic missile could carry a nuclear warhead, and warned the U.S. that its military bases in the Pacific were within its range.

A survey of more than 1,700 adult Americans found that only 36 percent could place North Korea on a map. Those who could locate it were more likely to favor diplomacy over military action.

Above, a map of respondents’uesses.

_____

•n Iran, the conservative camp appears to be consolidating ahead of Friday’ presidential election.

The hard-line mayor of Tehran withdrew from the race and threw his support behind Ebrahim Raisi, a former top judiciary official, who is seen as the main threat to the moderate incumbent, President Hassan Rouhani.

Few Iranians are optimistic that the election will help end a cycle of poverty and turn around a dysfunctional economy.

_____

•ow did a tsunami in Japan endanger children in Cambodia? By setting off an unexpected shortage of iodine, an element crucial to early brain growth.

Cambodia began iodizing table salt in 1999, with good results. But after the 2011 disaster in Japan, the global price of iodine tripled.

Since then, iodine concentrations in Cambodian children have dropped by 30 percent, and doctors and aid agencies are rushing to prevent permanent damage.

_____

•e traveled to a mountaintop village in the Philippines to meet a tattoo artist with almost mythical status.

Meet Maria Fang-od Oggay, thought to be 100 years old, who uses the traditional tattooing methods of her ethnic group, the Kalinga.

An appearance in a 2009 documentary shot her to fame, and she now attracts clients from all over the world.

Business

•audi Arabia and Russia, the world’ biggest oil exporters, agreed to extend production cuts to shore up global prices.

•eveloping countries are wielding a new weapon: hacking. Vietnam is a case in point, experts say; a group that targets foreign companies appears to be state sponsored.

•ew Zealand’ prime minister travels to Japan, hoping to salvage elements of the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

•yft, the ride-hailing firm, and Waymo, a unit of Google’ parent company,  will collaborate on self-driving cars.

•.S. stocks were up across the board. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•fficials in Papua New Guinea told asylum seekers on Manus Island that they must leave the Australia-funded detention center so it can be shut down. [ABC]

•he U.S. released satellite images from Syria that officials said show a crematory at a military prison outside Damascus. They say it is being used to hide mass executions. [The New York Times]

• court in northern India will decide if a 10-year-old girl who was repeatedly raped and who is now at least five months pregnant, can have an abortion or will be forced to give birth. [The New York Times]

•hilippine l awmakers threw out an impeachment complaint against President Rodrigo Duterte that accused him of mass murder. [The New York Times]

•n Venezuela, economic missteps, power grabs and political opportunism have pushed the country to the brink of collapse. [The New York Times]

•outh Korea’ new president, Moon Jae-in, who pledged to fight air pollution, suspended 10 coal power plants and vowed to eventually shut them down completely. [Quartz]

• ocial media platforms, meanwhile, are abuzz over President Moon’ “andsome brigade,” reference to his attractive entourage led by a good-looking bodyguard. [Korea Times]

•“y life is like a book that’ too sad to read.”n essay by a Chinese domestic helper has gone viral, propelling her to literary stardom. [Caixin]

Smarter Living

•eff, a super grain that is a staple for distance runners from Ethiopia, could make running a marathon (slightly) easier.

•here is a right way to wash your hair. A Parisian colorist has a neat trick or two on how to shampoo for volume and shine.

•ecipe of the day: Weeknight salmon is much better with a parsley sauce.

Noteworthy

•he Louis Vuitton2018 cruise collection showed a passion for Japan’ aesthetic, with references to both classical (Kabuki masks) and contemporary (1970s girl-gang films), our fashion critic writes.

•i Woo Kim, 21, became the youngest golfer to win the Players Championship, which featured 48 of the world’ top 50 players.

•has ing the Kushners. A Times journalist in Beijing tells of being kicked out of an investors’vent held by the family company of Jared Kushner, the son-in-law of President Trump.

Back Story

Put on your party hats: The world is celebrating a series of royal birthdays.

Last week, European royals gathered in Oslo to honor the 80th birthdays of King Harald V and Queen Sonja of Norway. (He actually hit the milestone in February; she will in July.)

A highlight was a cruise on the royal yacht, a fitting setting for the king, an admiral and accomplished sailor who represented Norway in three Olympics.

And King Norodom Sihamoni of Cambodia, above, turned 64 on Sunday. His background as a cultural ambassador and Unesco delegate may have also helped with his royal duties. He is also an accomplished classical dancer and studied filmmaking in North Korea.

A few days before, he presided over the nation’ Royal Plowing Ceremony, in which sacred oxen forecast the year’ crops. (It is predicted to be a good year for corn, beans and rice.)

Back in Europe, Queen Máima of the Netherlands celebrates a birthday on Wednesday.

And arguably the biggest royal birthday comes next month, when Queen Elizabeth II of Britain celebrates her 91st. She is the world’ oldest —nd longest-serving —onarch. Although she was born April 21, her birthday is officially celebrated in June each year.

_____

This briefing was prepared for the Asian morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian, European and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.

Doug Mills/The New York Times | Mast Irham/European Pressphoto Agency | Newsha Tavakolian for The New York Times | Justin Mott for The New York Times | Jes Aznar for The New York Times | Maxim Shemetov/Reuters | Reuters | Getty Images | Tomohiro Ohsumi/Associated Press.. | Samrang Pring/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170515ed5f00796



Briefing
Trump, North Korea, Ransomware: Your Monday Evening Briefing

By KAREN ZRAICK and SANDRA STEVENSON 
921 words
16 May 2017
00:07
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good evening. Here’ the latest.

1. P resident Trump gave highly classified information on \b ISIS\b0  to Russia in an Oval Office meeting last week, breaking a deal with an ally, officials said.

He leaves Friday on his first overseas trip as president. The first stop is Saudi Arabia.

Syria is likely to be at the top of the agenda in his discussions. Also Monday, the State Department released new satellite images from Syria that officials said show a crematory used to hide mass executions at a government prison.

_____

2. The Supreme Court will stay out of a fight over a restrictive North Carolina voter ID law.

That leaves in place a federal appeals court ruling that struck down parts of the law, enacted in 2013.

The lower court called the measure an unconstitutional effort to “arget African-Americans with almost surgical precision.”

Above, an N.A.A.C.P. meeting in Raleigh erupted in cheers when members learned of the news.

_____

3. New digital clues point to North Korean-linked hackers as likely suspects in the sweeping ransomware attacks that have crippled computer systems around the world, experts said.

The cyberattacks continued to ripple through politics and markets, especially in Asia.

China, which reported disruptions at nearly 40,000 organizations, was especially susceptible because of the prevalence of pirated software there.

Solving cybercrimes like the ransomware attacks involves old-school sleuthing. Our animated map shows how the attack spread. Here’ how to protect yourself.

Above, the headquarters of Hitachi in Japan, just one of the major companies affected.

_____

4. Can you identify North Korea on a map?

A survey of 1,700 Americans found only 36 percent could do so. Those who could were more likely to favor diplomacy over military action.

Meanwhile, North Korea said that the ballistic missile it tested over the weekend could carry a nuclear warhead —nd warned that American military bases were within its range.

Above, a Japanese newscast about the crisis.

_____

5. Young black leaders in the Democratic Party are pushing for a more aggressive stance toward President Trump as they eye the 2018 elections.

Many of the potential candidates are looking to shore up their support among minority communities and young voters.

That’ a break from the conventional Democratic strategy of trying to appeal to older white moderates in tough races.

“ Democrat wins an election in Georgia by speaking truth to power,”aid Representative Stacey Abrams, who is considering a run for governor.

_____

6. The 2011 tsunami and nuclear disaster in Japan has endangered children in Cambodia.

The disaster set off an unexpected shortage of iodine, an element crucial to early brain growth.

Cambodia began iodizing table salt in 1999, with good results. But in 2011, the price of iodine skyrocketed.

Since then, iodine concentrations in Cambodian children have dropped by 30 percent, and doctors and aid agencies are rushing to prevent permanent damage.

_____

7. The New York Times documented every homicide last year in a patch of New York City where poverty and crime persist: the 40th Precinct in the South Bronx.

Today we published the final article in the series, about a gang-related shooting that detectives said stemmed from fighting among members of the Bloods.

It remains unsolved. Above, friends and relatives of the victim, Jequan Lawrence.

_____

8. We traveled to a mountaintop village in the Philippines to meet a tattoo artist with practically mythical status.

Maria Fang-od Oggay, above, thought to be 100 years old, uses the traditional tattooing methods of her ethnic group, the Kalinga.

An appearance in a 2009 documentary shot her to fame, and now she attracts clients from all over the world.

_____

9. U2 is touring to celebrate the 30th anniversary of its hit album “he Joshua Tree.”

Our critic was at the first U.S. show, in Seattle, above, and he says the pivotal album is worth revisiting. The songs “ondered 1980s America as both myth and presence,”ut “old eerie resonances”ith the present, he writes.

The band also played one new song, “he Little Things That Give You Away.”hey had been working on another album, but the presidential election sent them back to the studio for rewrites.

_____

10. Finally, President Trump kissed his chief spokesman, Sean Spicer.

Just kidding, that was “aturday Night Live.” Melissa McCarthy got rave reviews for her return as an angry, angst-ridden Mr. Spicer, riding a motorized podium all the way to Trump Tower.

Have a great night.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.

Want to look back? Here’ Friday night’ briefing.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

* James Comey, Donald Trump, San Antonio Spurs: Your Friday Evening Briefing

Doug Mills/The New York Times | Robert Willett/The News & Observer | Shizuo Kambayashi/Associated Press | Shizuo Kambayashi/Associated Press | Kevin D. Liles for The New York Times | Arnaud Laillou/UNICEF Cambodia | Edwin J. Torres for The New York Times | Jes Aznar for The New York Times | Chona Kasinger for The New York Times | Will Heath/NBC 

Document NYTFEED020170515ed5f008et



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
OpEd; SECT
After  ISIS , don't abandon us

By SINAM MOHAMAD 
954 words
13 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The International New York Times
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

AMUDA, Syria -- At long last, those of us struggling to maintain a fledgling democracy in Northern Syria have been buoyed by the announcement from the Trump administration that the American military will begin to directly arm the Kurdish men and women who make up the backbone of the Syrian Democratic Forces. Those forces have been America's most valued and effective allies in the war against the Islamic State.

This is something we've asked for repeatedly during the nearly three years our militias have been fighting the Islamic State and winning, victories achieved despite tough odds and a lack of heavy weapons. We've steadily driven the jihadists back hundreds of miles to the brink of defeat at Raqqa. The Islamic State won't give up its self-styled capital easily. This military aid will be crucial in finishing the job.

But as President Trump prepares to meet next week with President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey -- no friend to the Kurds in Syria or in his own country -- we ask the American president and people to be mindful of the enormous sacrifice the Kurdish people have made in this fight, and the importance of the unique democratic system we have worked hard to build in the area of Northern Syria known as Rojava.

We're fighting the Islamic State because it's the right thing to do, but we've paid dearly for our victories. We have already lost many thousands of our young men and women in battle, and we know many hundreds more will die in Raqqa. Once we win that battle, will America cave in to Turkish pressure and abandon us, despite this sacrifice?

In recent weeks, Turkey has conducted cross-border airstrikes, killing dozens of our fighters whose mission was to resist the Islamic State, and causing American forces who are here to help us to head to the border in a show of solidarity and to keep the peace. But what happens when Raqqa is liberated and the United States moves on? Will America stand silently by if Mr. Erdogan makes good on his threats to overrun the border and decimate Rojava simply because his regime cannot tolerate a pluralistic democracy that includes the Kurds right next door?

Turkey's hostility to Rojava stems from its long-running conflict with its own Kurdish population. Mr. Erdogan claims we aim to create a Kurdish nationalist enclave from which the Kurdistan Workers' Party (P.K.K.), with which Turkey has fought for decades, will be able to threaten Turkey.

But our aim is not a Kurdish state. Our People's and Women's Protection Units, now fighting with the multiethnic Syrian Democratic Forces, are not the P.K.K.; and allowing conflict with Turkey, a powerful foe, is far from our interest of promoting a federated system of local democracy in Syria. We think the best solution is for Turkey to restart peace talks with Kurdish groups there and to accept that a stable neighbor to the south would be better than one dominated by sectarian chaos.

Not only is our aim to fight against the Islamic State -- and not Turkey -- but we are also fighting for democracy, for a just and inclusive society in which Arabs, Kurds, Syriacs, Turkmen and other ethnic groups in our diverse area of Syria govern together, where women and men have an equal voice, protected by law. In city after city that we have liberated, whether majority Kurdish or not, we have given residents the opportunity to form their own democratic local governments.

Our democracy, like any healthy political system, is a work in progress. We do not claim perfection. It takes time for people raised under dictatorship to learn the necessary habits of compromise and collaboration. But we also believe that our system could offer a viable model for a future federated Syria, where inclusive government, kept as local as possible, could start to heal the ethnic and religious divisions that have helped prolong this endless war.

Yet, because of pressure from Turkey, the United States has no official political relations with our representatives and has failed to prevent our exclusion from United Nations talks on the future of Syria, which restart soon in Geneva. Worse, we are suffering from a devastating blockade on the Iraqi and Turkish borders that prevents us from obtaining basic equipment essential for our well-being and for rebuilding.

Every day our fighters put their lives on the line for the values of egalitarianism and democracy. We are grateful for military aid, but it won't be enough to ensure lasting peace. So we call on the Trump administration, Congress and the American people to stand for a federated Syria as a path to peace. We ask for your help in ending the blockade by convincing the Iraqi Kurdish administration that controls the border to allow in the supplies we need to rebuild and to feed the people here, including hundreds of thousands of refugees who have relocated to Rojava.

And we ask you to recognize us diplomatically, to include us in peace negotiations and to give us your word that even after Raqqa's liberation you will prevent attempts by Turkey to destroy what we've built here. In sum, we ask, as a people who have sacrificed a generation of our young to defeat the Islamic State and create a democratic future for Syria: Will you stand by us?

Sinam Mohamad is foreign envoy for the Democratic Federal System of Northern Syria.

A fighter in the Syrian Democratic Forces near a village northeast of Raqqa in February. DELIL SOULEIMAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES 

Document NYTF000020170513ed5d00038



Op-Ed Contributor
Opinion
The Next Front in the U.S. Fight Against  ISIS 

By LISA MONACO 
1,160 words
11 May 2017
21:06
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

More than two years into the American-led campaign against the Islamic State, freeing the cities of Mosul, in Iraq, and Raqqa, in Syria, is within reach. But since the group’ leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, declared  the establishment of its caliphate from the pulpit of a mosque in Mosul in 2014, the Islamic State has claimed at least eight “rovinces” in countries across the globe.

Countries in North Africa account for  some of the largest portions of the nearly  some of the largest portions of the  4  some of the largest portions of the 0,000 foreign fighters  who have flocked to join Mr. Baghdadi’ murderous cult, as well as the Qaeda affiliate in Syria. Recent worrying trends in Egypt, Libya and Tunisia should make the American government focus on countering the Islamic State’ global expansion and asking: What is the United States’trategy for ensuring that the current progress in Iraq and Syria is not simply the opening act of a more far-reaching drama involving the Islamic State?

Egypt and Libya, in particular, could represent tipping points for the Islamic State and its global presence. In Egypt, the group appears to be employing the sectarian playbook used by its predecessor, Al Qaeda, in Iraq. An uptick in attacks against Christian minorities in Egypt, including twin bombing attacks on Coptic churches on Palm Sunday, mirror the Qaeda group’ campaign of terrorism against Shiite communities in Baghdad that was intended to intimidate locals and bolster its own recruiting.

The United States should be especially concerned about a repeat of this approach in Egypt, the Arab world’ most populous country, which is already on edge thanks to President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi’ strongman tactics against journalists, political opponents and human rights groups. For the past few years, the United States’pproach has been to provide carefully calibrated security cooperation while clearly condemning Mr. Sisi’ authoritarian actions. For example, the Obama administration supported Egypt’ fight against insurgents in the strategically vital Sinai region, yet withheld certain military sales and was outspoken about America’ concerns over Egypt’ human rights record.

Arguably, this balance wasn’ perfect; perhaps it might have been more effective to couple the condemnation for Mr. Sisi’ increasing authoritarianism with even greater counterterrorism assistance. In any case, American silence about the Sisi administration’ human rights record is not the answer. After all, Al Qaeda traces its roots to Cairo’ prisons under Egypt’ earlier repressive regimes.

In that context, we must hope that both the threat from the Islamic State and the problem of the Egyptian government’ repressions were part of the conversation in the Oval Office last month when President Trump met Mr. Sisi. An encouraging sign of a more productive relationship was the diplomatic back channel that reportedly resulted in Egypt’ release of an Egyptian-American aid worker .

Across the border in Libya, the Islamic State was able to exploit the chaos that has engulfed that country in the five years since Muammar el-Qaddafi was ousted to establish one of its most dangerous branches. Thanks to American airstrikes in support of government-aligned militias, the group was dislodged  from its safe haven in the coastal city of Surt last year. In the last weeks of the Obama administration, the United States military undertook strikes to keep the extremists from regrouping.

America risks backsliding, though, on this progress if Mr. Trump acts on his recent statement  that the United States has no role in Libya. The country still lacks a unified government, as a mix of the Islamic State, Qaeda affiliates, independent militias and criminal networks vie for advantage. The Government of National Accord, which does have international recognition, controls only part of the country and is buffeted by warring factions on both its eastern and western flanks. The forces in the east, led by Gen. Khalifa Hifter, are receiving support  from Russia, increasingly assertive in the region, as well as from some Gulf countries .

President Barack Obamaacknowledged  that failure to plan for the day after Colonel Qaddafi’ demise was a mistake. But his administration led international efforts to support the Government of National Accord, and studiously avoided favoring one side in Libya’ civil strife. An American tilt now in favor of the warlord General Hifter could push Libya further into becoming a failed state, which would pose a greater threat to the security interests of the United States and Europe. Far from having no role, the United States should be using its influence with European allies and Gulf partners to build up the legitimate government and strengthen the rule of law in Libya. If it does not, Libya could look like Syria by this time next year.

No country is more vulnerable to Libya’ security vacuum than neighboring Tunisia, the birthplace of the Arab spring. While Tunisia has a new Constitution and a thriving civil society, it has also been the greatest contributor  of foreign fighters to the Islamic State, by some estimates  as many as 7,000. Tunisia may be the best hope for stable democracy to emerge in the region, but with a struggling economy and the prospect of thousands of returning jihadist fighters, it sits at a dangerous juncture of potential expansion for the Islamic State. Because of the country’ porous border with Libya, Tunisia is on the receiving end of Libya’ overflow of militants. Terrorists trained at camps in Libya conducted  two of Tunisia’ worst attacks in recent years.

To keep Tunisia from sliding into Libya-like chaos, the Obama administration has since 2011 supplied more than $75 0 million  in economic support, awarded Tunisia favored trading status to spur commerce and declared Tunisia a major non-NATO ally. The United States also consolidated security partnerships by establishing a counterterrorism hub in Tunis and by supplying border control training and surveillance assistance. Tunisia can be a backstop against the Islamic State’ expansion, preventing the group from creating a North African safe haven —ut only if the Trump administration expands on all these efforts, especially by beefing up Tunisia’ border security with the aid of drones.

The Islamic State is losing in Iraq and Syria, but if the United States hopes to cement that success and deal the group a lasting defeat, we must engage now with America’ key partners in North Africa. Otherwise, the conditions will be set for a deadly resurgence of the group.

Lisa Monaco, the homeland security and counterterrorism adviser to President Barack Obama from 2013 to 2017, is a senior fellow at New York University Law School’ Center on Law and Security.

At the funeral for those killed in a Palm Sunday attack by the Islamic State on a Coptic church in Alexandria, Egypt. | Samer Abdallah/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170511ed5b0076d



Op-Ed Contributor
Opinion
Once We Beat  ISIS , Don’ Abandon Us

By SINAM MOHAMAD 
955 words
12 May 2017
01:08
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

AMUDA, Syria —t long last, those of us struggling to maintain a fledgling democracy in Northern Syria have been buoyed by the announcement from the Trump administration that the American military will begin to directly arm the Kurdish men and women who make up the backbone of the Syrian Democratic Forces. Those forces have been America’ most valued and effective allies in the war against the Islamic State.

This is something we’e asked for repeatedly during the nearly three years our militias have been fighting the Islamic State and winning, victories achieved despite tough odds and a lack of heavy weapons. We’e steadily driven the jihadists back hundreds of miles to the brink of defeat at Raqqa. The Islamic State won’ give up its self-styled capital easily. This military aid will be crucial in finishing the job.

But as President Trump prepares to meet next week with President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey —o friend to the Kurds in Syria or in his own country —e ask the American president and people to be mindful of the enormous sacrifice the Kurdish people have made in this fight, and the importance of the unique democratic system we have worked hard to build in the area of Northern Syria known as Rojava.

We’e fighting the Islamic State because it’ the right thing to do, but we’e paid dearly for our victories. We have already lost many thousands of our young men and women in battle, and we know many hundreds more will die in Raqqa. Once we win that battle, will America cave in to Turkish pressure and abandon us, despite this sacrifice?

In recent weeks, Turkey has conducted cross-border airstrikes, killing dozens of our fighters whose mission was to resist the Islamic State, and causing American forces who are here to help us to head to the border in a show of solidarity and to keep the peace. But what happens when Raqqa is liberated and the United States moves on? Will America stand silently by if Mr. Erdogan makes good on his threats to overrun the border and decimate Rojava simply because his regime cannot tolerate a pluralistic democracy that includes the Kurds right next door?

Turkey’ hostility to Rojava stems from its long-running conflict with its own Kurdish population. Mr. Erdogan claims we aim to create a Kurdish nationalist enclave from which the Kurdistan Workers’arty (P.K.K.), with which Turkey has fought for decades, will be able to threaten Turkey.

But our aim is not a Kurdish state. Our People’ and Women’ Protection Units, now fighting with the multiethnic Syrian Democratic Forces, are not the P.K.K.; and allowing conflict with Turkey, a powerful foe, is far from our interest of promoting a federated system of local democracy in Syria. We think the best solution is for Turkey to restart peace talks with Kurdish groups there and to accept that a stable neighbor to the south would be better than one dominated by sectarian chaos.

Not only is our aim to fight against the Islamic State —nd not Turkey —ut we are also fighting for democracy, for a just and inclusive society in which Arabs, Kurds, Syriacs, Turkmen and other ethnic groups in our diverse area of Syria govern together, where women and men have an equal voice, protected by law. In city after city that we have liberated, whether majority Kurdish or not, we have given residents the opportunity to form their own democratic local governments.

Our democracy, like any healthy political system, is a work in progress. We do not claim perfection. It takes time for people raised under dictatorship to learn the necessary habits of compromise and collaboration. But we also believe that our system could offer a viable model for a future federated Syria, where inclusive government, kept as local as possible, could start to heal the ethnic and religious divisions that have helped prolong this endless war.

Yet, because of pressure from Turkey, the United States has no official political relations with our representatives and has failed to prevent our exclusion from United Nations talks on the future of Syria, which restart soon in Geneva. Worse, we are suffering from a devastating blockade on the Iraqi and Turkish borders that prevents us from obtaining basic equipment essential for our well-being and for rebuilding.

Every day our fighters put their lives on the line for the values of egalitarianism and democracy. We are grateful for military aid, but it won’ be enough to ensure lasting peace. So we call on the Trump administration, Congress and the American people to stand for a federated Syria as a path to peace. We ask for your help in ending the blockade by convincing the Iraqi Kurdish administration that controls the border to allow in the supplies we need to rebuild and to feed the people here, including hundreds of thousands of refugees who have relocated to Rojava.

And we ask you to recognize us diplomatically, to include us in peace negotiations and to give us your word that even after Raqqa’ liberation you will prevent attempts by Turkey to destroy what we’e built here. In sum, we ask, as a people who have sacrificed a generation of our young to defeat the Islamic State and create a democratic future for Syria: Will you stand by us?

Sinam Mohamad is foreign envoy for the Democratic Federal System of Northern Syria.

A fighter in the Syrian Democratic Forces near a village northeast of Raqqa in February. | Delil Souleiman/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170511ed5b00aca



Foreign Desk; SECT
Turkey Assails U.S. Decision to Arm Syrian Kurds

By ANNE BARNARD and PATRICK KINGSLEY; Anne Barnard reported from Antakya, and Patrick Kingsley from Washington. Gardiner Harris contributed reporting from Vilnius, Lithuania, Michael R. Gordon from Washington, and Rick Gladstone from New York. 
927 words
11 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ANTAKYA, Turkey -- Turkey's president and his top aides sharply criticized the Trump administration on Wednesday over its decision to arm a Syrian Kurdish militant group in the battle against the Islamic State, and they urged the White House to reverse it.

The criticism, while not necessarily unexpected, was striking coming from Turkey, a NATO ally of the United States.

The militant group, the People's Protection Units, known by the Kurdish abbreviation Y.P.G., is fighting alongside Syrian Arab forces against the Islamic State and is intending to expel the jihadist organization from its de facto capital in Raqqa, Syria. But Turkey considers the Y.P.G. a terrorist organization and asserts that it is closely linked to the P.K.K., a Kurdish separatist group that has waged an insurgency against the Turkish government.

''I want to believe that Turkey's allies will side with us, not with terrorist organizations,'' President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said in remarks quoted in Turkish news media in reaction to the Trump administration's decision, which was announced on Tuesday.

''I hope this mistake will be reversed as soon as possible,'' Mr. Erdogan said.

The Turkish leader also said he would convey his concern directly to President Trump in a visit to Washington next week.

Mr. Erdogan's prime minister, Binali Yildirim, also denounced the American decision, telling reporters in Ankara, the Turkish capital, ''It is not possible for us to accept an initiative that would mean direct or indirect help to P.K.K.''

The foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, used stronger language, saying that every weapon the group obtains is a threat to Turkey.

Mr. Cavusoglu, speaking in Montenegro, echoed an earlier statement from another minister, who called the decision to arm the group a ''wrong'' move that could harm Turkey.

''Every weapon that goes to Y.P.G. is a threat against Turkey,'' Mr. Cavusoglu said, according to the pro-government newspaper Sabah. ''The United States knows our opinions well. In our Washington visit, we will share those reasons with Trump. Our president will meet Trump himself.''

The first official criticism came from another official, Nurettin Canikli, who is not usually a front-line spokesman on government policy.

''We cannot accept the presence of terrorist organizations that would threaten the future of the Turkish state,'' Mr. Canikli, a deputy prime minister, said in an interview with the private broadcaster A Haber. ''We hope the U.S. administration will put a stop to this wrong and turn back from it. Such a policy will not be beneficial; you can't be in the same sack as terrorist organizations.''

Analysts said there were several reasons the Turkish government might play down the event: It could be looking for concessions from the United States to make up for the decision, or it could be trying to reassure its supporters or to de-emphasize the embarrassment that came from the decision being announced just as Turkish officials were arriving in Washington to lobby against it.

For their part, the Syrian Kurds expressed gratitude over the American move.

''It is a historical decision that came after years of trust and coordination between the Kurdish units and our partners in the coalition,'' said Shervan Darweesh, a Syrian Kurdish official and spokesman for the Syrian Democratic Forces, the umbrella group of Arab and Kurdish fighters in Syria battling the Islamic State, also known as ISIS. ''Now the fight against ISIS will be more effective and swift.''

Asked about the Turkish complaints, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis played down the disagreement.

''We'll work out any of the concerns,'' Mr. Mattis told reporters in Vilnius, Lithuania, where he was meeting with other NATO defense ministers. ''I'm not concerned at all about the NATO alliance and the relations between our nations. It's not always tidy, but we work out the issues.''

American officials said that much of the weapons and equipment that was to be provided to the Syrian Kurds was already in Syria and could be distributed very soon.

''We have a certain amount of supply in the country already,'' Col. John Dorrian, a spokesman for the American-led task force that is fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, said in a briefing for Pentagon reporters. ''Some of that may be distributed very quickly.''

Colonel Dorrian said that the supply would be ''metered out'' for specific operations and that American advisers would monitor the flow to ensure that it was used to fight the Islamic State, and not diverted elsewhere. He said that the Kurdish and Arab members of the Syrian Democratic Forces would receive the same types of weapons.

Explaining the need to provide the arms, Colonel Dorrian said that there are more Islamic State fighters in Raqqa than in any other city or town in Syria and Iraq, including Mosul in Iraq, and that the militants in Raqqa have car bombs and have been fortifying their positions.

Colonel Dorrian did not say when the operation to seize Raqqa would begin. But the American-backed fighters have been closing in on the city, and Colonel Dorrian said that the decision to provide them with heavier arms would enable them to accelerate the operation.

Follow Anne Barnard @ABarnardNYT and Patrick Kingsley @PatrickKingsley on Twitter.

Document NYTF000020170511ed5b0005e



MEMO FROM TURKEY
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Arming Syrian Kurds Could Come at a Cost

By ANNE BARNARD and PATRICK KINGSLEY; Tim Arango contributed reporting from Baghdad, Maher Samaan from Paris and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul. 
1,281 words
11 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ISTANBUL -- President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey lost his first major political battle with the Trump administration, which is arming the Syrian Kurds who the Turks consider enemies. The question now is what Mr. Erdogan, a headstrong leader, will do next.

The White House made the move to arm the Kurdish fighters, despite vociferous objections from Turkey, because it considers them an effective military proxy in the fight against the Islamic State.

But doing so comes at a cost. Angering Turkey risks a rupture with an important NATO ally that is being courted by Russia, and could have an unpredictable impact on the battle against the Islamic State and the wars in Syria and Iraq.

Mr. Erdogan and his aides have warned for months about taking more aggressive, though unspecified, actions against Kurdish militants -- though in a different stronghold, Iraq. And analysts say such a plan would make some strategic sense.

On Wednesday, Mr. Erdogan's prime minister, Binali Yildirim, added another warning: that arming the Kurds could have ''consequences'' for the United States and a ''negative result.'' He did not go into detail, promising only that Mr. Erdogan would elaborate when he meets President Trump at the White House next week.

Mr. Erdogan also sharply criticized the Trump administration's decision in remarks quoted by Turkish news media, and said he hoped it would be ''reversed as soon as possible.''

Analysts believe Mr. Erdogan could now seek a quid pro quo in return for swallowing the American decision to work ever more closely with the Kurds in Syria.

In return, Mr. Erdogan could seek an American green light for a newly forceful intervention against Turkey's Kurdish foes in Iraq, the P.K.K.

Experts said that would mostly consist of Turkey increasing its periodic bombing runs on the militants. But in the most extreme case, the Turks could coordinate a ground operation likely carried out by rival Kurdish forces friendly to Turkey, said Soner Cagaptay, a Turkey expert at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

For decades, the P.K.K. has fought an on-and-off insurgency inside Turkey, aided by its bases in northern Iraq. The group has been coordinating lately with Iraqi militias that are backed by Iran, another power that Turkey views as a threat.

''I tend to take the Turkish president at his word,'' said Aaron Stein, a Turkey specialist at the Atlantic Council, a Washington think tank. ''If he keeps telling everybody that he could do something in Iraq, I tend to think he could do something in Iraq.''

Striking in Iraq would accomplish some Turkish goals, several analysts said. While it would do little to prevent the Kurdish autonomous areas inside northeast Syria from consolidating, it would isolate those cantons from Kurdish areas in Iraq. It could stop the Kurds from expanding their power in the region further and from possibly bolstering the Kurdish nationalist movement inside Turkey -- Mr. Erdogan's ultimate worry.

It would also make it harder for Iran, a rival for power in the region whose proxies are friendly with the P.K.K., to keep a continuous corridor of influence stretching from Tehran through Iraq and northern Syria to the Mediterranean.

Underscoring the complexity of alliances in the region, the P.K.K. is a parent organization of the Americans' newly official Syrian Kurdish partner. The Syrian group, known as the Y.P.G., has used the chaos of war to carve out de facto semiautonomous zones inside Syria.

Mr. Erdogan ''can live with a Y.P.G. statelet in northern Syria,'' said James F. Jeffrey, a former American ambassador to Turkey. ''He can't live with a Y.P.G. statelet that is supported by the U.S. and is linked with Iran.''

Analysts say Turkey could move against the P.K.K. around Mount Sinjar in northern Iraq. Turkish officials worry that the group is trying to establish new headquarters there that could give it control of a strategic route between Syria and Iran. (The group's existing Iraqi headquarters are in the Qandil mountains, in another part of northern Iraq.)

Mr. Erdogan declared just last month that Turkey was obliged to keep attacking the P.K.K. on Mount Sinjar ''until the last terrorist is eliminated.''

''They will do everything they can do to take it out before it becomes P.K.K. headquarters No. 2,'' Mr. Cagaptay said.

''I think this could be the basis of the Trump-Erdogan deal,'' Mr. Cagaptay, who is Turkish, said after the Trump administration announcement about arming the Syrian Kurds. ''Erdogan looking the other way as Trump moves to take Raqqa'' with the Syrian Kurds, while Mr. Trump looks the other way, or even helps behind the scenes, as Mr. Erdogan strikes in Iraq.

A central contradiction now bedeviling United States-Turkey relations is that, while the United States agrees with Ankara that the P.K.K. is a terrorist group, American forces work with its Syrian affiliate so closely that the Kurdish fighters help call in U.S. airstrikes. And those Syrian militants will now receive heavy machine guns and armored vehicles from the Pentagon.

Turkey's foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, said on Wednesday that ''every weapon'' that goes to the Syrian Kurdish group is ''a threat against Turkey.''

Taking on the Syrian Kurds more forcefully would be difficult. Besides the militants' close relations with the United States, the Turkish Army is considered too weak, and Kurdish militias in Syria too strong.

Militarily, ''the Turks are not in a position to take this on,'' said Naz Durakoglu, who helped develop Turkey policy at the State Department during the Obama administration.

After at least a dozen Turkish attacks on the Syrian Kurdish militants last month, the United States took emphatic steps to prevent further clashes, by moving troops to the border in Humvees as a buffer between Turks and Syrian Kurds.

They even flew American flags, a symbolic and provocative move usually avoided in Middle Eastern interventions.

That leaves Iraq, where Turkey would face fewer obstacles. The P.K.K. there does not operate under the cover of Syrian Kurds and would therefore not be supported by Washington.

Mr. Erdogan could likely count on the backing of the dominant Kurdish faction in northern Iraq, which controls Iraqi Kurdistan and has a difficult relationship with the main Kurdish groups in Turkey and Syria.

But if Turkey did move on Mount Sinjar, easing one geopolitical headache for Washington in Syria, it would create new complications for another American partner, the Iraqi government in Baghdad.

In yet another indication of the complexity of the battlefield, the United States works indirectly with Iranian-backed Iraqi Shiite militias against the Islamic State.

The Iraqi government, which balances ties between the United States and Iran, relies heavily on those Iran-backed militias to assist its military. Baghdad would not look kindly on a Turkish incursion into its territory, which it would see as a provocative act and a disruption of its fight against ISIS.

Follow Anne Barnard @ABarnardNYT and Patrick Kingsley @PatrickKingsley on Twitter.

President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey addressed members of his Justice and Development Party in Ankara this month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TURKISH PRESIDENTIAL PRESS OFFICE); American soldiers and Kurdish Y.P.G. fighters in Syria near the Turkish border in April. Turkey considers the group an enemy. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DELIL SOULEIMAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) MAP: The decision could have farreaching effects on the region. 

Document NYTF000020170511ed5b0005d



Europe Edition
Briefing
James Comey , Emmanuel Macron, Russia: Your Wednesday Briefing

By PATRICK BOEHLER 
1,332 words
10 May 2017
06:01
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up .)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•resident Trump has fired James Comey, the F.B.I. director , citing his handling of the investigation into Hillary Clinton ’ emails.

In a first since the Watergate scandal, the president dismissed the person leading an inquiry bearing on him : Mr. Comey was also investigating Russian meddling in last year’ election.

Mr. Comey, who was four years into a 10-year term, learned of the decision from news reports while addressing F.B.I. employees in Los Angeles.

Here’ our investigation last month into h is  role  at the center of one of the biggest political firestorms in U.S. history.

_____

•r. Trump approved a plan to arm Syrian Kurds with heavier weapons to fight \b ISIS\b0 , despite strong objections from Turkey.

The Kurdish militia, known as the Y.P.G., will participate in the battle to retake Raqqa, the Pentagon said. But Turkey insists that the militia is linked to Kurdish separatists.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan , the Turkish president, is scheduled to meet Mr. Trump in Washington next week.

_____

•he Russian hacking attack intended to disrupt the French election was a reminder that cyberattacks can also be defeated.

In Washington, the director of the National Security Agency testified  before a Senate committee that U.S. intelligence agencies watched the intrusion unfold and warned their French counterparts.

The digital team of the target, the French president-elect, Emmanuel Macron, opted for a “yber-blurring”trategy , creating false email accounts and documents.

_____

•usinesses across France hope that Mr. Macron will reduce regulations , but trade unions have already vowed to stop him from dismantling labor protections.

Manuel Valls , above, a former prime minister, said that he was running in parliamentary elections with  Mr. Macron’ movement. But party officials said they might not have room for the president-elect’ onetime boss.

Here’ a look at reactions to Mr. Macron’ victory from writers across the political spectrum .

_____

•ussia’ Victory Day parade served as a reminder of how isolated the country has become . Igor Dodon, the pro-Russian president of Moldova, was the only foreign leader in the reviewing stand.

Ukraine said that, starting next year, it would no longer celebrate victory over the Nazis in tandem with Russia on May 9, but a day earlier, when it is observed in much of Europe.

Russia’ foreign minister is in the U.S. for a meeting with Mr. Trump and talks on Syria  today and an Arctic Council meeting tomorrow .

_____

•o one has ever reached the top of the Himalayan peak K2 in winter.

Many have died trying. It is the world’ second-highest, but most dangerous mountain, with hurricane-strength winds and freezing temperatures.

This winter, a group of Polish climbers will try it . Our sportswriter went to meet them in Krakow, where they are training for the mission.

_____

Business

•he rise of HNA Group —rom a tiny airline in southern China into   —rom Deutsche Bank’ largest shareholder  —s drawing scrutiny, at home and abroad.

•s the European Unionurges Washington  to commit to the Paris climate deal, here’ a look at the signatories’ommitments : There is no legal obstacle to submitting a weaker pledge, and even reneging on aid goals.

•he first major legislation President Trump signed stands to benefit a business  run until recently by his son-in-law, Jared Kushner .

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets .

In the News

•s many as 245 migrants were feared dead in two shipwrecks in the Mediterranean, pushing the toll so far this year past 1,300. [ The New York Times ]

•Moon Jae-in , a son of North Korean refugees, was sworn in as president of South Korea, returning the country’ liberals to power. [ The New York Times ]

•he Nigerian government is seeking to trade captured Boko Haram commanders for the release of more schoolgirls the militant group abducted in 2014. [ The New York Times ]

•n Germany, the authorities detained a second soldier in their inquiry into a xenophobic group’ plans to stage a terrorist attack and put the blame on migrants. [ Deutsche Welle ]

•IFA announced it would replace the judge and prosecutor whose investigations resulted in the suspensions of Sepp Blatter, Michel Platini and other top soccer officials. [ The New York Times ]

•ormer President Barack Obama could hardly have found less controversial ground for a return to the global stage than discussing food in Italy. [ The New York Times ]

Smarter Living

•ecipe of the day: For a verdant side dish, try a pilaf with parsley, cilantro, chives and mint .

•xperts advise that fitness be assessed during medical exams  because it can better indicate proneness to heart disease.

•ecluttering? There are apps for that .

Noteworthy

•hampions League: Juventus reached the final . Real Madrid, the defending champion, enters the second . Real Madrid, the defending champion, enters -leg match  today of its semifinal against Atléico Madrid with a 3-0 lead.

•NASA ’ Cassini spacecraft has sent images from  inside the rings of Saturn, including the closest views ever of its hazy moon, Titan.

•rass Press, a new satirical paper in Bulgaria, is testing the limits of press freedom in the E.U.’ poorest country . Even the prime minister is a subscriber, though he says the cartoons make him look too fat.

•nd Yotam Ottolenghi, the Israeli-British chef, writes about learning to make flaky phyllo dough  for baklava and tarts. “ou think you’e pretty good at something until you meet someone who has been doing it for 41 years.”

Back Story

Two decades ago, a machine conquered humanity. In chess, that is, when the IBM computer Deep Blue defeated Garry Kasparov , then the world champion.

The two had faced off the previous year, with Mr. Kasparov winning the six-game match , 4-2. But the computer won the rematch, 3½2½

Before the first contest, Mr. Kasparov was reportedly so confident that he turned down an offer to split the $500,000 winnings 60-40. Instead he insisted on a winner-take-all affair.

Then he lost the first game, which was a “hattering experience,”according to his coach .

“’ a human being,”r. Kasparov said after losing the second matchup. “hen I see something that is well beyond my understanding, I’ afraid.”

Mr. Kasparov and chess pundits attributed the loss to a single move, which may have simply been a bug .

According to one of the computer’ designers , Deep Blue was unable to choose a move, so it picked one at random. It was a glitch, but the machine’ counterintuitive play may have confused Mr. Kasparov.

“t was an incredibly refined move,”said the grandmaster Yasser Seirawan . “nd it sent Garry into a tizzy.”

Evan Gershkovich contributed reporting.

_____

This briefing was prepared for the European morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian , Asian  and American  mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here  .

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com .

Correction: May 18, 2017, Thursday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this briefing misstated how long James Comey served as F.B.I. director. As a correction on the linked article notes, he was in his fourth year when he was fired, not in his third.

Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times | Rodi Said/Reuters | Daniel Leal-Olivas/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Philippe Lopez/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Sergei Chirikov/European Pressphoto Agency | Max Whittaker for The New York Times | Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters | Massimo Pica/European Pressphoto Agency | Yunhee Kim for The New York Times. Food stylist: Megan Schlow. Prop stylist: Deborah Williams. | Miguel Medina/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Stan Honda/Agence France-Presse 

Document NYTFEED020170510ed5a00235



world
After Trump Vows to Arm Syrian Kurds, the Next Move Is Erdogan’; Memo From Turkey

By ANNE BARNARD and PATRICK KINGSLEY 
1,343 words
10 May 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ISTANBUL —resident Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey lost his first major political battle with the Trump administration, which is arming the Syrian Kurds who the Turks consider enemies. The question now is what Mr. Erdogan, a headstrong leader, will do next.

The White House made the move to arm the Kurdish fighters, despite vociferous objections from Turkey, because it considers them an effective military proxy in the fight against the Islamic State.

But doing so comes at a cost. Angering Turkey risks a rupture with an important NATO ally that is being courted by Russia, and could have an unpredictable impact on the battle against the Islamic State and the wars in Syria and Iraq.

Mr. Erdogan and his aides have warned for months about taking more aggressive, though unspecified, actions against Kurdish militants —hough in a different stronghold, Iraq. And analysts say such a plan would make some strategic sense.

On Wednesday, Mr. Erdogan’ prime minister, Binali Yildirim, added another warning: that arming the Kurds could have “onsequences”or the United States and a “egative result.”e did not go into detail, promising only that Mr. Erdogan would elaborate when he meets President Trump at the White House next week.

Mr. Erdogan also sharply criticized the Trump administration’ decision in remarks quoted by Turkish news media, and said he hoped it would be “eversed as soon as possible.”

Analysts believe Mr. Erdogan could now seek a quid pro quo in return for swallowing the American decision to work ever more closely with the Kurds in Syria.

In return, Mr. Erdogan could seek an American green light for a newly forceful intervention against Turkey’ Kurdish foes in Iraq, the P.K.K.

Experts said that would mostly consist of Turkey increasing its periodic bombing runs on the militants. But in the most extreme case, the Turks could coordinate a ground operation likely carried out by rival Kurdish forces friendly to Turkey, said Soner Cagaptay, a Turkey expert at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

For decades, the P.K.K. has fought an on-and-off insurgency inside Turkey, aided by its bases in northern Iraq. The group has been coordinating lately with Iraqi militias that are backed by Iran, another power that Turkey views as a threat.

“ tend to take the Turkish president at his word,”aid Aaron Stein, a Turkey specialist at the Atlantic Council, a Washington think tank. “f he keeps telling everybody that he could do something in Iraq, I tend to think he could do something in Iraq.”

Striking in Iraq would accomplish some Turkish goals, several analysts said. While it would do little to prevent the Kurdish autonomous areas inside northeast Syria from consolidating, it would isolate those cantons from Kurdish areas in Iraq. It could stop the Kurds from expanding their power in the region further and from possibly bolstering the Kurdish nationalist movement inside Turkey —r. Erdogan’ ultimate worry.

It would also make it harder for Iran, a rival for power in the region whose proxies are friendly with the P.K.K., to keep a continuous corridor of influence stretching from Tehran through Iraq and northern Syria to the Mediterranean.

Underscoring the complexity of alliances in the region, the P.K.K. is a parent organization of the Americans’ewly official Syrian Kurdish partner. The Syrian group, known as the Y.P.G., has used the chaos of war to carve out de facto semiautonomous zones inside Syria.

Mr. Erdogan “an live with a Y.P.G. statelet in northern Syria,”aid James F. Jeffrey, a former American ambassador to Turkey. “e can’ live with a Y.P.G. statelet that is supported by the U.S. and is linked with Iran.”

Analysts say Turkey could move against the P.K.K. around Mount Sinjar in northern Iraq. Turkish officials worry that the group is trying to establish new headquarters there that could give it control of a strategic route between Syria and Iran. (The group’ existing Iraqi headquarters are in the Qandil mountains, in another part of northern Iraq.)

Mr. Erdogan declared just last month that Turkey was obliged to keep attacking the P.K.K. on Mount Sinjar “ntil the last terrorist is eliminated.”

“hey will do everything they can do to take it out before it becomes P.K.K. headquarters No. 2,”r. Cagaptay said.

“ think this could be the basis of the Trump-Erdogan deal,”r. Cagaptay, who is Turkish, said after the Trump administration announcement about arming the Syrian Kurds. “rdogan looking the other way as Trump moves to take Raqqa”ith the Syrian Kurds, while Mr. Trump looks the other way, or even helps behind the scenes, as Mr. Erdogan strikes in Iraq.

A central contradiction now bedeviling United States-Turkey relations is that, while the United States agrees with Ankara that the P.K.K. is a terrorist group, American forces work with its Syrian affiliate so closely that the Kurdish fighters help call in U.S. airstrikes. And those Syrian militants will now receive heavy machine guns and armored vehicles from the Pentagon.

Turkey’ foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, said on Wednesday that “very weapon”hat goes to the Syrian Kurdish group is “ threat against Turkey.”

Taking on the Syrian Kurds more forcefully would be difficult. Besides the militants’lose relations with the United States, the Turkish Army is considered too weak, and Kurdish militias in Syria too strong.

Militarily, “he Turks are not in a position to take this on,”aid Naz Durakoglu, who helped develop Turkey policy at the State Department during the Obama administration.

After at least a dozen Turkish attacks on the Syrian Kurdish militants last month, the United States took emphatic steps to prevent further clashes, by moving troops to the border in Humvees as a buffer between Turks and Syrian Kurds.

They even flew American flags, a symbolic and provocative move usually avoided in Middle Eastern interventions.

That leaves Iraq, where Turkey would face fewer obstacles. The P.K.K. there does not operate under the cover of Syrian Kurds and would therefore not be supported by Washington.

Mr. Erdogan could likely count on the backing of the dominant Kurdish faction in northern Iraq, which controls Iraqi Kurdistan and has a difficult relationship with the main Kurdish groups in Turkey and Syria.

But if Turkey did move on Mount Sinjar, easing one geopolitical headache for Washington in Syria, it would create new complications for another American partner, the Iraqi government in Baghdad.

In yet another indication of the complexity of the battlefield, the United States works indirectly with Iranian-backed Iraqi Shiite militias against the Islamic State.

The Iraqi government, which balances ties between the United States and Iran, relies heavily on those Iran-backed militias to assist its military. Baghdad would not look kindly on a Turkish incursion into its territory, which it would see as a provocative act and a disruption of its fight against ISIS.

Follow Anne Barnard @ABarnardNYT and Patrick Kingsley @PatrickKingsley on Twitter.Tim Arango contributed reporting from Baghdad, Maher Samaan from Paris and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul.

PHOTOS: President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey addressed members of his Justice and Development Party in Ankara this month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TURKISH PRESIDENTIAL PRESS OFFICE); American soldiers and Kurdish Y.P.G. fighters in Syria near the Turkish border in April. Turkey considers the group an enemy. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DELIL SOULEIMAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE —GETTY IMAGES) MAP: The decision could have farreaching effects on the region.

* Trump to Arm Syrian Kurds, Even as Turkey Strongly Objects

* Turkish Strikes Target Kurdish Allies of U.S. in Iraq and Syria

* U.S. Aid to Syrian Militia Strains Turkish Ties

* Battle to Retake Syrian City Turns Into a Geopolitical Test of the War

* Turkey’ Wars: Quelling Kurdish Uprisings, and Suffering From Terror Attacks

Document INHT000020170511ed5a0000y



‘ Was There’
Times Insider
Reporting on Airstrikes, the ‘ingle Biggest Recruiting Tool’

By STEPHEN FARRELL 
803 words
10 May 2017
14:25
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

When American Tomahawk missiles slammed into the airfield from which Syria’ President Bashar al-Assad launched chemical weapons against his own people, it was a new twist in the seemingly endless Syrian civil war.

New, at least in this conflict —nd new to the neophyte administration of President Trump. But by no means was it new to those familiar with interventions by the United States and its Western allies into other conflicts across the Middle East and South Asia.

Few have witnessed those conflicts more closely than Rod Nordland, the international correspondent at large and Kabul, Afghanistan, bureau chief for The New York Times, who has worked as a reporter in more than 150 countries and conflict locales including Baghdad, Cairo and Beirut.

Back in the mid-1980s the 16-inch guns of the battleship New Jersey bombarded Druze and Syrian gun batteries in Lebanon as America was drawn into that country’ own protracted civil war. In 2001, after Sept. 11, airstrikes helped to break the Taliban’ stranglehold on Afghanistan, allowing the Afghan military, helped by American special forces on the ground, to take city after city and eventually the capital, Kabul. In 2003, nightly bombing raids on Iraq helped to topple Saddam Hussein’ regime, allowing United States soldiers and Marines to enter Baghdad just three weeks after the war began.

But toppling regimes, taking cities or stopping large-scale insurgent attacks on a city or a military position is one thing. Holding onto cities and countries in the face of insurgent attacks is another, especially when the very airstrikes that prove so effective in the initial phase of the war becomes a liability in the aftermath because they kill civilians as well as combatants.

Speaking in the latest episode of The Times’ live interactive video series “ Was There,”r. Nordland said that civilian casualties, and the deaths of allies during errant airstrikes, were a huge negative factor.

“ think both in Iraq and Afghanistan it’ been the single biggest recruiting tool, death through airstrikes especially, for the Taliban and for Al Qaeda and its allied groups in Iraq,”e said.

“irstrikes have almost never succeeded, especially against irregular forces, or with very limited objectives. I can think of one case where they succeeded, against Milosevic in Serbia, but even that is debatable, the Russians withdrew support.”

Taking the recent strike against Syria as an example of their limited effectiveness, he said that 59 Cruise missiles was a “uge amount of ordnance, more than $50 million worth.”et the outcome was that it “illed possibly four people, who may or may not have been civilians.”

Mr. Nordland took questions from viewers during the Facebook Live interview. He was unable to answer all of them, but here are two of his replies to queries about the broader political and military engagement of the United States in the Middle East and South Asia.

Marjorie Rose asked what would happen if there were to be a “otal withdrawal by the U.S. and allied forces”rom the region.

He replied: “fghanistan would become a Taliban state again in a fairly short time, or at the very least the Taliban would reconquer large parts of the country. ISIS would probably roll back Iraqi forces from Mosul and might even threaten Baghdad again, and ISIS would be expanding rather than shrinking in Syria, as it is now. The Damascus regime would be less affected, since the American military role is only oriented against ISIS, and the regime is much more threatened by other opposition rebels than ISIS.”

Rina Goins asked if the recent Syrian strike “as military action as such or a publicity stunt.”

Mr. Nordland replied: “t could well be a publicity stunt to try to undercut that argument that Trump is in the Russians’ockets, and the Russians could be posturing when they claimed that they came within minutes of a confrontation with the United States —fter all, we gave them advance warning to minimize that risk.”

“hat’ clear,”e added, “s that, as a military action, it was pretty ineffective, especially when you consider bang (airport reopened next day) for buck ($59 million worth of cruise missiles).”

_____

This is the t hird installment of a series titled “ Was There,”n which we feature Times reporters, photographers and editors who have witnessed moments that shaped our era. Previous installments have featured John Noble Wilford, who reported on the moon landing, and Stephen Castle, who reported on “rexit.”

Follow Times Insider on Twitter.

In Syria, what lessons can America draw from its wars in Iraq and Afghanistan? Our Kabul bureau chief, Rod Nordland, discusses air strikes with Stephen Farrell. | By STEPHEN FARRELL and JOSEPHINE SEDGWICK 

Document NYTFEED020170510ed5a0040i



EDITORIAL
Editorial Desk; SECTA
A Syrian Plan Worth a Look

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
688 words
10 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
26
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

After six years and with some 400,000 people killed, almost any plan to end or reduce the carnage in Syria would be welcome. So the Trump administration would be derelict if it did not give serious consideration to a plan for a cease-fire and safe zones brokered by Russia, with the backing of Turkey and Iran.

The plan contains flaws, and President Trump could make the situation worse if he is too eager to make common cause with his erstwhile buddy, President Vladimir Putin of Russia, who cares most about securing his own legacy and Russian interests in the Middle East. Syria will be a main focus when Secretary of State Rex Tillerson meets Russia's foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, in Washington on Wednesday.

Meanwhile, the Trump administration announced on Tuesday that it would provide Syrian Kurds near the Turkish border with heavy weapons so they can help retake Raqqa from the Islamic State. Like Barack Obama before him, Mr. Trump has faced a choice between arming the Syrian Kurds -- a move deeply opposed by Turkey -- and not arming them and thus weakening the fight against ISIS. The Kurds have been among the most effective American allies in the war against the Islamic State, but Turkey regards them as allies of Kurdish separatists inside Turkey.

It is not clear how the administration intends to avoid a backlash from Turkey, or whether its decision will in some way affect the cease-fire deal, which went into effect at midnight Friday. Under the deal, Russia, Turkey and Iran pledged to enforce a cease-fire between Syrian government and opposition forces in Idlib Province, part of Homs Province, the Ghouta suburbs of Damascus and parts of Syria's southern provinces.

The plan would allow displaced or embattled Syrians to relocate to the designated safe areas, still held by rebels unaffiliated with the Islamic State, and enable aid deliveries to some 4.5 million people at risk. It also calls for all parties to fight jihadists like the Islamic State and the Qaeda-linked group once known as the Nusra Front.

Previous cease-fires have been short-lived. The new deal has led to reduced fighting, but hardly a cessation. On Sunday, the army of President Bashar al-Assad, whose government agreed to the cease-fire, seized control of the village of al-Zalakiyat north of Hama, a war monitor reported.

Syrian opposition groups, mostly Sunni Muslims, including some backed by the United States, rejected the deal because they have little faith that Russia and Iran can get Mr. Assad to fulfill his promise to halt the slaughter of civilians. And they object to the role of Iran, a Shiite Muslim nation that has a religious kinship with Mr. Assad's Alawite sect.

Insuring compliance is a big question. The Russian negotiator at the talks, Aleksandr Lavrentyev, reportedly told Russian news outlets that Moscow could ''work more closely'' with countries that back the rebels, including the United States and Saudi Arabia. Other reports suggested that Russia, Turkey and Iran could send armed forces to secure the zones.

In Copenhagen on Monday for a meeting of the anti-ISIS coalition, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said the United States owed it to the Syrian people to take a close look at the deal but emphasized the many questions, including whether it could be effective.

Although President Trump raised the idea of safe zones during the campaign, the Pentagon has long been opposed because they could lead to a new commitment of American forces in a messy civil war.

Dividing Syria into government and rebel sectors, even temporarily, as this agreement does, is not ideal. The last thing the region needs is another fractured state. But after years of fruitless attempts to end the killing and forge a comprehensive political solution that would replace Mr. Assad with a more inclusive government, it may be the only way to stop the bloodshed.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170510ed5a0006s



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Defying Turkey, U.S. Will Arm Kurds in Syria

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT; Anne Barnard contributed reporting from Antakya, Turkey. 
1,480 words
10 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Trump has approved a plan to arm Syrian Kurds so they can participate in the battle to retake Raqqa from the Islamic State, a strategy that has drawn deep opposition from Turkey, a NATO ally.

American military commanders have long argued that arming the Y.P.G., a Kurdish militia fighting alongside Syrian Arab forces against the Islamic State, is the fastest way to seize Raqqa, the capital of the militants' self-proclaimed caliphate.

And Mr. Trump, who made fighting Islamist militants a priority during his campaign, again showed the high regard he has for Pentagon generals by endorsing their advice when faced with a policy dilemma.

Turkey has objected vociferously to such a move, raising fears of a backlash that could prompt the Turks to curtail their cooperation with Washington in the struggle against the Islamic State.

A high-level delegation of Turkish officials was informed of the decision by Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, Mr. Trump's national security adviser, when they visited the White House on Monday, and the Pentagon announced the move on Tuesday.

Mr. Trump's decision on arming the Syrian Kurds comes as Iraqi forces, backed by American and allied air power and artillery, are making headway in Mosul. American military commanders have argued for simultaneous offenses in Raqqa and Mosul so the Islamic State would be forced to defend multiple fronts.

The president's decision also comes as his top advisers recommended sending 3,000 to 5,000 more American troops to try to break a stalemate in another hot spot: the 15-year war in Afghanistan.

Dana W. White, the chief Pentagon spokeswoman, said in a statement that the arming was necessary to ensure that Raqqa could be taken ''in the near future.''

''Yesterday, the president authorized the Department of Defense to equip Kurdish elements of the Syrian Democratic Forces as necessary to ensure a clear victory over ISIS in Raqqa, Syria,'' she said, using the name of the umbrella group for Arab and Kurdish fighters battling the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

Ms. White added that the United States would take steps to ensure that Turkey did not face ''additional security risks.''

There was no immediate comment from the Turkish government, which considers the Kurdish force to be terrorists, and it remains to be seen whether the assurances the Trump administration is offering the Turks will be sufficient to ease the concerns of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who is scheduled to meet with Mr. Trump in Washington next week.

The weapons that the United States will provide Kurdish and Arab fighters in the anti-Islamic State coalition include heavy machine guns, mortars, anti-tank weapons, armored cars and engineering equipment.

American military officials have said that weapons are needed to help the lightly armed Kurdish and Arab fighters cope with urban warfare in Raqqa against unyielding Islamic State militants who are equipped with car bombs and even some tanks they captured from the Syrian Army.

To address Turkish concerns that the arms might be used against their forces one day, the supply of weapons and ammunition will be limited to what the Kurds and Arab fighters need to carry out specific operations, American officials said.

After the battle is over, an effort will be made to retrieve any excess equipment. American advisers will also monitor the weapons that are provided to the Kurds and will cut off the supply if they discover that they are being smuggled for use elsewhere or misused, United States officials said.

To further mollify the Turks, most of the fighters who will be involved in the assault on Raqqa are expected to be Arabs, and the Pentagon said the Y.P.G. would not occupy the city after Islamic State fighters had been ousted. ''Raqqa and all liberated territory should return to the governance of local Syrian Arabs,'' Ms. White said. ''We do not envision a long-term Y.P.G. presence.''

The United States has long worked with the Y.P.G., or People's Protection Units, under the umbrella of the Syrian Democratic Forces. The American military has always emphasized that those forces includes Arab fighters, who make up nearly half of the total force and most of the fighters near Raqqa. But the Y.P.G. is generally considered to have the most experienced and battle-hardened fighters.

The Turkish government has long insisted that the Kurdish militia is closely linked to the Kurdistan Workers' Party, a separatist group known as the P.K.K. That group is listed by Turkey, the United States and Europe as a terrorist organization.

Any hope that Mr. Erdogan might soften his position on arming the Y.P.G. after winning a referendum that gave him vast powers appeared to fade last month after Turkish warplanes carried out an airstrike against the Syrian Kurds.

According to Turkish news reports, the officials who met with General McMaster on Monday included Gen. Hulusi Akar, the commander of the Turkish armed forces; Hakan Fidan, Turkey's intelligence chief; and Ibrahim Kalin, the presidential spokesman. Their mission, the Turkish news media reported, was to talk the Trump administration out of arming the Kurds. Instead, they were informed that the decision had already been made.

Syria analysts, as well as current and former senior American officials, said Mr. Trump's decision was not surprising given the military's insistence on arming the Kurds for the impending battle for Raqqa, but they warned it could damage broader relations with Turkey.

''This decision was probably necessary if the coalition to defeat the Islamic State was to take Raqqa without huge numbers of U.S. troops being directly involved,'' said Andrew Exum, a former top Pentagon Middle East policy official who served as an Army Ranger. ''But this decision -- to arm a group closely associated with a foreign terrorist organization, and one that has waged a decades-long insurgency against the Turkish state -- will likely reverberate through U.S. relations with Turkey for decades to come.''

James F. Jeffrey, a former United States ambassador to Turkey and a fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, agreed that the decision would add to the tension in American-Turkish relations. ''We're putting Turkey in a very difficult position,'' he said.

Syrian Kurds, however, hailed the move. Alan Hassan, reached via internet messaging in Qamishli, in northeastern Syria, part of the de facto semiautonomous zone Kurds have carved out during the Syrian war, said that Mr. Trump's decision gave new legitimacy to an existing partnership with the Y.P.G.

''In the beginning, American support was secret,'' he said. ''Now it is public. The relationship has changed from undeclared to declared.''

Former President Barack Obama also favored arming the Kurds, although divisions among his aides were so pronounced that he did not come to that view until his last week in office. During his administration's deliberations, American diplomats in Ankara warned of a possible Turkish backlash, while military officials insisted that the Y.P.G. was the only option if Raqqa was to be taken in the coming months.

Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the commander of American forces in the Middle East, has acknowledged the challenges of dealing with two pivotal allies in the fight against the Islamic State in Syria who essentially loathe each other -- the Turks and the Syrian Kurds.

But General Votel and senior American counterterrorism officials have said it is essential to rout the Islamic State from its stronghold, principally to weaken its ability to plan, direct and enable terrorist plots against the West.

In recent weeks, analysts said, the Islamic State has tried to slip some of its senior planners and operatives out of Raqqa before the battle to maintain essential functions like command and control, recruiting, handling of finances and the ability to help carry out plots against the West.

That is one reason that even as the American-backed Syrian Kurdish and Arab forces have increasingly tightened a noose around the city, and the coalition has pummeled it with airstrikes, allied fighters have also struck targets south of Raqqa, near Deir al-Zour and Mayadeen, where many of the senior Islamic State members have fled.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Michael R. Gordon @gordonnyt and Eric Schmitt @EricSchmittNYT on Twitter.

Kurdish fighters with the Y.P.G. militia coordinated airstrikes by the United States on Islamic State positions in Syria in 2015. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAURICIO LIMA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Kurdish Y.P.G. fighters near an American military vehicle last month in Darbasiya, Syria. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RODI SAID/REUTERS) (A10) 

Document NYTF000020170510ed5a0005c



OP-ED COLUMNIST
OpEd; SECT
Donald Trump Is Lying Again, Now About James Comey

By DAVID LEONHARDT 
703 words
10 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The president of the United States is lying again.

He is lying about the reason he fired James Comey, the F.B.I. director. Trump claimed that he was doing so because Comey bungled the investigation into Hillary Clinton's email, which meant that Comey was ''not able to effectively lead the bureau.''

There is no reason to believe Trump's version of the facts and many reasons to believe he is lying. How can I be so confident?

First, it's important to remember just how often Trump lies. Virtually whenever he finds it more convenient to tell a falsehood than to tell a truth, he chooses the falsehood.

An incomplete list of the things he has lied about include: Barack Obama's birthplace, Obama's phone ''tapp,'' John F. Kennedy's assassination, Sept. 11, the Iraq war, ISIS, NATO, military veterans, Mexican immigrants, Muslim immigrants, anti-Semitic attacks, the unemployment rate, the murder rate, the Electoral College, voter fraud, the size of his inaugural crowd, his health care bill and his own groping of women.

Second, Trump previously praised Comey for reopening the Clinton email investigation, which was the core of Trump's rationale for the firing, as Igor Volsky noted.

Third, Trump claimed that he was merely following up on a Justice Department recommendation and released a letter from the department to bolster his case. Yet the timing doesn't make sense -- and Trump aides have already undercut their boss, by acknowledging that he wanted to fire Comey.

As Bill Kristol pointed out, the Justice Department letter was dated the same day as the firing, and the official who wrote it has been on the job for just two weeks -- not enough time for a serious review that could have reversed Trump's previous position.

''So there was no real recommendation from DOJ,'' Kristol wrote. ''Trump wanted to do it, and they created a paper trail.'' Kristol, a conservative, added, ''One can be at once a critic of Comey and alarmed by what Trump has done and how he has done it.''

Even more damning, White House sources also admitted on Tuesday night that Trump himself initiated the firing. The White House charged Jeff Sessions, the attorney general, with coming up with a reason to fire Comey, as The Times and others have reported.

Finally, and most obviously, Trump had a very big motive to fire Comey and install a loyalist. Comey was overseeing the investigation into the Trump campaign's numerous strange ties with the Russian government.

''The firing of James Comey as F.B.I. director is a stunning event,'' Benjamin Wittes and Susan Hennessey, two of the sharpest observers of the Russia case, wrote for Lawfare. ''It is a profoundly dangerous thing -- a move that puts the Trump-Russia investigation in immediate jeopardy and removes from the investigative hierarchy the one senior official whom President Trump did not appoint and one who is known to stand up to power.''

The president is lying about firing a top law enforcement official, and he is almost certainly lying to protect himself and his aides from a full investigation into their own activities.

Brian Schatz, a Democratic senator from Hawaii, wrote on Tuesday night, ''We are in a full-fledged constitutional crisis.''

It's now clear that Trump's Justice Department has no independence. Both Sessions, and Sessions's deputy, Rod Rosenstein, are acting like Trump enforcers. And now the F.B.I. is compromised as well.

The only way to unwind the constitutional crisis is an independent inquiry, completely free of Trump's oversight. Several Republican members of Congress expressed concerned about Comey's firing, but words aren't enough.

Members of Congress need to give Americans reason to believe the Russia investigation isn't a charade with a predetermined outcome. They need to make clear that while the president may think he is above the truth, he is not above the law.

You can join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook. I am also writing a daily email newsletter and invite you to subscribe.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).

Document NYTF000020170510ed5a0005e



Op-Ed Columnist
Opinion
Donald Trump Is Lying Again, Now About James Comey

By DAVID LEONHARDT 
737 words
10 May 2017
05:12
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The president of the United States is lying again.

He is lying about the reason he firedJames Comey, the F.B.I. director. Trump claimed that he was doing so because Comey bungled the investigation into Hillary Clinton’ email, which meant that Comey was “ot able to effectively lead the bureau.”

There is no reason to believe Trump’ version of the facts and many reasons to believe he is lying. How can I be so confident?

First, it’ important to remember just how often Trump lies. Virtually whenever he finds it more convenient to tell a falsehood than to tell a truth, he chooses the falsehood.

An incomplete list of the things he has lied about include: Barack Obama’ birthplace, Obama’ phone  “app,” John F. Kennedy’ assassination, Sept. 11, the Iraq war, \b ISIS\b0 , NATO, military veterans, Mexican immigrants, Muslim immigrants, anti-Semitic attacks, the unemployment rate, the murder rate, the Electoral College, voter fraud, the size of his inaugural crowd, his health care bill and his own groping of women.

Second, Trump previously praised Comey for reopening the Clinton email investigation, which was the core of Trump’ rationale for the firing, as Igor Volsky noted.

Third, Trump claimed that he was merely following up on a Justice Department recommendation and released a letter from the department to bolster his case. Yet the timing doesn’ make sense —nd Trump aides have already undercut their boss, by acknowledging that he wanted to fire Comey.

As Bill Kristol pointed out, the Justice Department letter was dated the same day as the firing, and the official who wrote it has been on the job for just two weeks —ot enough time for a serious review that could have reversed Trump’ previous position.

“o there was no real recommendation from DOJ,”ristol wrote. “rump wanted to do it, and they created a paper trail.”ristol, a conservative, added, “ne can be at once a critic of Comey and alarmed by what Trump has done and how he has done it.”

Even more damning, White House sources also admitted on Tuesday night that Trump himself initiated the firing. The White House charged Jeff Sessions, the attorney general, with coming up with a reason to fire Comey, as The Times and others have reported.

Finally, and most obviously, Trump had a very big motive to fire Comey and install a loyalist. Comey was overseeing the investigation into the Trump campaign’ numerous strange ties with the Russian government.

“he firing of James Comey as F.B.I. director is a stunning event,”enjamin Wittes and Susan Hennessey, two of the sharpest observers of the Russia case, wrote for Lawfare. “t is a profoundly dangerous thing — move that puts the Trump-Russia investigation in immediate jeopardy and removes from the investigative hierarchy the one senior official whom President Trump did not appoint and one who is known to stand up to power.”

The president is lying about firing a top law enforcement official, and he is almost certainly lying to protect himself and his aides from a full investigation into their own activities.

Brian Schatz, a Democratic senator from Hawaii, wrote on Tuesday night, “e are in a full-fledged constitutional crisis.”

It’ now clear that Trump’ Justice Department has no independence. Both Sessions, and Sessions’ deputy, Rod Rosenstein, are acting like Trump enforcers. And now the F.B.I. is compromised as well.

The only way to unwind the constitutional crisis is an independent inquiry, completely free of Trump’ oversight. Several Republican members of Congress expressed concerned about Comey’ firing, but words aren’ enough.

Members of Congress need to give Americans reason to believe the Russia investigation isn’ a charade with a predetermined outcome. They need to make clear that while the president may think he is above the truth, he is not above the law.

You can join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook. I am also writing a daily email newsletter and invite you to subscribe.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).

* Donald Trump’ Firing of James Comey

* F.B.I. Director James Comey Is Fired by Trump

* In Trump’ Firing of James Comey, Echoes of Watergate

Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170510ed5a001xh



Briefing
James Comey, Syria, Moon Jae-in: Your Tuesday Evening Briefing

By KAREN ZRAICK and SANDRA STEVENSON 
995 words
10 May 2017
00:02
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good evening. Here’ the latest.

1. President Trump has fired James Comey, the F.B.I. director, citing his handling of the investigation into Hillary Clinton’ emails.

The White House said Attorney General Jeff Sessions had recommended Mr. Comey’ dismissal.

The F.B.I. had also been investigating whether Trump campaign associates colluded with Russia to influence the election.

“hile I greatly appreciate you informing me, on three separate occasions, that I am not under investigation, I nevertheless concur with the judgment of the Department of Justice that you are not able to effectively lead the bureau,”r. Trump said in a letter to Mr. Comey.

We have live coverage of the reaction to this stunning development, and you can read the full White House statement and memos here.

And a longer read, from April: Our investigation into Mr. Comey’ role at the center of one of the biggest political firestorms in U.S. history.

_____

2. Hours earlier, President Trump approved a plan to arm Syrian Kurds with heavier weapons to fight \b ISIS\b0 , despite strong objections from Turkey.

The experienced fighters of the Y.P.G. militia will participate in the battle to retake Raqqa, the Pentagon said. But Turkey insists that the militia is linked to a Kurdish insurgent group.

President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey is scheduled to meet with Mr. Trump in Washington next week, and the decision is likely to be at the top of the agenda.

Above, Y.P.G. members took down an ISIS flag in a town west of Raqqa last week.

_____

3. Moon Jae-in, the child of North Korean refugees, was elected president of South Korea, returning the country’ liberals to power.

Mr. Moon, above left, seeks dialogue with North Korea over its weapons program, an approach favored by China, but not by President Trump, who wants to squeeze Pyongyang with sanctions.

The vote caps a remarkable national drama in which a corruption scandal, mass protests and impeachment forced Mr. Moon’ predecessor from office.

_____

4. As many as 245 migrants were feared dead in two shipwrecks in the Mediterranean, pushing the toll so far this year past 1,300.

The wrecks occurred over the weekend, but the toll was released only on Tuesday. The first occurred off Sicily, with 50 people rescued.

The second was off the coast of Libya, and only seven people were reported to have survived.

_____

5. New details emerged about the fatal police shooting of 15-year-old Jordan Edwards in Texas.

The arrest warrant for the 37-year-old officer who has been charged with murder states that a second officer had taken aggressive action in the moments leading up to the shooting.

Jordan was buried on Saturday. Above, his teammates on the high school football team at his funeral.

_____

6. In the face of an opioid epidemic, a Massachusetts city is weighing a novel approach: installing lockboxes with Narcan, a medication that can revive people who have overdosed, on street corners for passers-by to administer.

That raises the question: Would you administer Narcan to a stranger who was dying of an opioid overdose in public?

_____

7. Is the middle-class American dream coming at the cost of poorer citizens?

The Pulitzer-winning author Matthew Desmond thinks so. His piece, “ow Homeownership Became the Engine of American Inequality,” was our most-read article today.

His thesis: The mortgage-interest deduction, which advocates say facilitates homeownership, actually inflates home prices and helps perpetuate inequality.

Above, a Massachusetts family that benefits from the deduction.

_____

8. A study of Russian cosmonauts living in a capsule for 28 days may change what we know about salt and the human body.

The research upends traditional thinking about salt, suggesting that it makes you hungry, but not thirsty —nd may help burn calories.

Speaking of seasoning, our colleagues in Cooking introduced a beautiful new guide, “ow to Make Salad.”

It might sound simple, but they have some great suggestions for creative variations to complement, or even replace, your entree.

_____

9. No one has ever reached the top of the Himalayan peak K2 in winter.

Many have died trying. It is the world’ second-highest, but most dangerous mountain, with hurricane-strength winds and temperatures that drop as low as minus-80 Fahrenheit.

This winter, a group of Polish climbers will attempt it. Our sportswriter went to meet them in Krakow, where they are training for the mission.

_____

10. Finally, Jimmy Kimmel offered an apology of sorts for his emotional monologue about his newborn son last week.

“ would like to apologize for saying that children in America should have health care,”e deadpanned.

And we might be in for some surprises on “he Late Show”onight. Stephen Colbert has an all-star lineup, with appearances by “aily Show”lumni Jon Stewart, Samantha Bee and John Oliver.

Above, a recent appearance by Mr. Stewart.

Have a great night.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.

And don’ miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.

Want to look back? Here’ last night’ briefing.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

* Emmanuel Macron, Republicans, Michael Flynn: Your Monday Evening Briefing

Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times | Delil Souleiman/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Kim Kyung-Hoon/Reuters | Massimo Pica/European Pressphoto Agency | Brandon Wade/European Pressphoto Agency | Erik Jacobs for The New York Times | Damon Casarez for The New York Times | Karsten Moran for The New York Times | Max Whittaker for The New York Times | Michele Crowe/CBS 

Document NYTFEED020170509ed590093t



Editorial
Opinion
A Syrian Plan Worth a Look

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
639 words
9 May 2017
20:18
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

After seven years and with some 400,000 people killed, almost any plan to end or reduce the carnage in Syria would be welcome. So the Trump administration would be derelict if it did not give serious consideration to the plan for a cease-fire and safe zones brokered by Russia, with the backing of Turkey and Iran.

But the plan contains considerable deficiencies, and President Trump could make the situation worse if he is too eager to make common cause with his erstwhile buddy, President Vladimir Putin of Russia, who cares most about securing his own legacy and Russian interests in the Middle East. Syria will be a main focus when Secretary of State Rex Tillerson meets Russia’ foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, in Washington on Wednesday.

Under the deal, which went into effect at midnight Friday, the three nations pledged to enforce a cease-fire between Syrian government and opposition forces in the Idlib province, a part of Homs province, the Ghouta suburbs of Damascus and parts of Syria’ southern provinces.

The plan would allow displaced or embattled Syrians to relocate to the designated safe areas, still held by rebels unaffiliated with the Islamic State, and enable aid deliveries to some 4.5 million people at risk. It also calls for all parties to fight jihadists like the Islamic State and the Qaeda-linked group once known as the Nusra Front.

Previous cease-fires have been short-lived. The new deal has led to reduced fighting, but hardly a cessation. On Sunday, the army of President Bashar al-Assad, whose government agreed to the cease-fire, seized control of the village of al-Zalakiyat north of Hama on Sunday, a war monitor reported.

Syrian opposition groups, mostly Sunni Muslims, some backed by the United States, rejected the deal because they have little faith that Russia and Iran can get Mr. Assad to fulfill his promise to halt the slaughter of civilians. And they object to the role of Iran, a Shiite Muslim nation that has a religious kinship with Mr. Assad’ Alawite sect.

It is not at all clear how Russia, Turkey and Iran will ensure compliance. The Russian negotiator at the talks, Aleksandr Lavrentyev, reportedly told Russian news outlets that Moscow could “ork more closely”ith countries that back the rebels, including the United States and Saudi Arabia. Other reports suggested that Russia, Turkey and Iran could send armed forces to secure the zones.

In Copenhagen on Monday for a meeting of the anti-ISIS coalition, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said the United States owes it to the Syrian people to take a close look at the deal but emphasized the many questions, including whether it could be effective.

Although President Trump raised the idea of safe zones during the campaign, the Pentagon has long been opposed because it could lead to a new commitment of American forces in a messy civil war.

Another major question is the impact of the agreement on the Syrian Kurds near the Turkish border who have been the most effective American allies in the fight against the Islamic State and whom the Pentagon is counting on to help take the ISIS stronghold of Raqqa.

Dividing Syria into government and rebel sectors, even temporarily, as this agreement does, is not ideal. The last thing the region needs is another fractured states. But after years of fruitless attempts to end the killing and forge a comprehensive political solution that would replace Mr. Assad with a more inclusive government, it may be the only way to stop the bloodshed.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Syrians in Daraa on Tuesday. | Mohamad Abazeed/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170509ed590070v



U.S.; Politics
Warning of ‘talemate’n Afghanistan, Trump Advisers Call for More Troops

By MICHAEL R. GORDON 
996 words
9 May 2017
04:55
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —enior Trump administration and military officials are recommending sending several thousand additional American troops to Afghanistan to try to break a military deadlock in the 15-year war there, in part by pressuring the Taliban to negotiate with the Afghan government.

The added troops would allow American advisers to work with a greater number of Afghan forces, and closer to the front lines.

The recommendation, which has yet to be approved by President Trump, is the product of a broad review by the Pentagon, State Department, intelligence community and other government agencies on America’ longest war. It is broadly consistent with advice Gen. John W. Nicholson, the top American commander in Afghanistan, gave Congress in February.

Warning that the United States and its NATO allies faced a “talemate,”eneral Nicholson told lawmakers that he had a shortfall of a “ew thousand”roops and said more personnel would enable the American military to advise the Afghan military more effectively and at lower levels in the chain of command.

The international force assisting the Afghans has about 13,000 troops, of whom about 8,400 are American.

American officials said that 3,000 to 5,000 additional troops, including hundreds of Special Operations forces, could be sent. The officials spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations.

NATO nations would also be asked to send thousands of troops, and the precise number of American forces deployed would probably depend on what those allies were prepared to do.

Mr. Trump is expected to make a decision on his Afghan strategy before a May 25 NATO meeting in Brussels. The recommendation of his top advisers was first reported by The Washington Post.

How to handle the situation in Afghanistan, which was rarely discussed during the presidential campaign, looms as a major decision for Mr. Trump. In some respects, it is a liability for a president who has called for putting “merica first.”eploying more troops would cost billions of dollars, and there is no guarantee of a clear win. The United States failed to produce successful negotiations when it had 100,000 troops in Afghanistan, a poor country with little in the way of natural resources.

But without a strong American military role, the Taliban and more extreme groups like the Islamic State’ Afghan wing would most likely gain ground, weakening Mr. Trump’ vow to defeat Islamic extremists. Pulling back would also put Mr. Trump at odds with generals whom he embraced and turned to for national security advice.

The shift of strategy recommended by Mr. Trump’ advisers reflects the assessment that a major new troop commitment —ike the 30,000-troop reinforcement President Barack Obama announced in December 2009 —s undesirable and politically impossible. But it also reflects the assumption that maintaining the current level of forces could leave the United States presiding over a slow deterioration in security, with fading hopes for a negotiated settlement between the Taliban and the Afghan government.

One twist is that the new strategy would dispense with the hard deadlines the Obama administration set, and was sometimes forced to revise, for gradually withdrawing troops.

Many military officers have argued that setting a public deadline for withdrawal is counterproductive because it allows adversaries to wait out the American and NATO troop commitment instead of forcing them to the negotiating table.

But Mr. Trump’ advisers do not want a new American commitment to be open-ended, and they are suggesting that its duration be dependent on steps by President Ashraf Ghani to fight corruption and appoint more effective commanders.

Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, Mr. Trump’ national security adviser, led an anticorruption task force in Afghanistan and is especially sensitive to the need for better governance in Kabul. Jim Mattis, the secretary of defense, also has extensive experience with Afghanistan, having overseen the military effort there as head of the United States Central Command.

The generals, however, are not the only ones who favor a stronger commitment to Afghanistan. American intelligence officials also want more support, calculating that a stronger military presence would assist their intelligence efforts against extremist groups in Afghanistan and neighboring Pakistan.

One issue that remains unclear is how the new strategy would deal with the safe havens the Taliban and other militant groups have in Pakistan.

General Nicholson acknowledged to Congress that it was “ery difficult to succeed on the battlefield when your enemy enjoys external support and safe haven.”e urged “ holistic review”f American policy toward Pakistan.

American forces have two basic missions in Afghanistan: advising and training Afghan forces and conducting counterterrorism missions, like a recent operation in which about 50 Army Rangers and a similar number of Afghan commandos killed the leader of the Afghan branch of the Islamic State.

General Nicholson told Congress the shortfall was mainly in forces for training and advising the Afghans. Currently, advisers are working with Afghans mostly at the command level of the army corps. But more advisers, he said, would enable the American-led coalition to work at the level of the Afghan brigades.

Military advisers are generally considered more effective if they are not limited to advising foreign armies in their headquarters, but extend to units in the field.

The Obama administration’ decision last summer to give American commanders more flexibility to provide air support for Afghan forces fighting the Taliban increased the need for advisers below the level of the Afghan army corps, General Nicholson told Congress.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Eric Schmitt contributed reporting.

* Leader of Afghanistan Branch of \b ISIS\b0  Killed in Special Forces Raid

* ‘riendly Fire’ay Have Killed 2 U.S. Soldiers in Afghanistan Raid

* ‘ Shortage of Coffins’fter Taliban Slaughter Unarmed Soldiers

* U.S. General Seeks ‘ Few Thousand’ore Troops in Afghanistan

Document NYTFEED020170509ed59001b9



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Head of  ISIS  Branch in Afghanistan Killed in April Raid

By MUJIB MASHAL; Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting from Washington, and Fahim Abed contributed from Kabul. 
648 words
8 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan -- The leader of the Islamic State affiliate in Afghanistan who orchestrated audacious attacks that further upended the country's deteriorating security situation was killed in a special forces raid last month, the president of Afghanistan said in a statement on Sunday.

The militant leader, Abdul Hasib, had overseen a number of bloody attacks that directly challenged the authority of President Ashraf Ghani, including a massacre at the main Afghan Army hospital in Kabul that killed at least 50 people.

Mr. Hasib was killed in an operation on April 27 in eastern Nangarhar Province, along the border with Pakistan, according to the statement by Mr. Ghani's office. The statement said the government had waited for verification that Mr. Hasib had been killed in the raid before announcing his death. It did not say how his death had been confirmed.

The United States military command in Afghanistan said in a statement on Sunday that American forces had participated in the raid that killed Mr. Hasib and up to 35 other militants.

It was the second time in nine months that the leader of the Islamic State in the Khorasan, as the Afghanistan affiliate is known, was killed, Gen. John W. Nicholson, the commander of American forces in the country, said in the statement. Mr. Hasib's predecessor, Hafiz Saeed Khan, was killed in July in a United States airstrike; he had been reported dead a few times before the American military confirmed it in August.

The United States military command in Afghanistan had said that an operation on April 27 targeted Mr. Hasib. Two American Army Rangers, Sgt. Joshua Rodgers and Sgt. Cameron Thomas, were killed in the operation, perhaps by so-called friendly fire, the Pentagon has said.

Afghan and American forces often go on joint missions. The one that killed Mr. Hasib included about 50 United States Army Rangers and a similar number of Afghan special security forces, the Pentagon has said. A firefight broke out during the raid, which lasted over three hours, and American F-16 fighter jets and Apache attack helicopters carried out airstrikes to protect the troops.

The Islamic State in the Khorasan, which uses an ancient name for the region that includes Afghanistan and Pakistan, expanded rapidly in the eastern part of Afghanistan, where government forces and an intense air campaign by the United States military have tried to rout the militants. They have been reduced to about 700 fighters, down from as many as 3,000, American officials said.

Last month, the United States dropped its largest conventional bomb, the 22,000-pound MOAB, on one of the group's redoubts in Nangarhar, killing as many as 96 fighters, Afghan officials said.

Commanders decided on a ground assault, instead of another airstrike, to kill or capture Mr. Hasib because women and children were living in his compound, said an American military official who asked not to be identified when providing operational details, adding that none of them had been hurt in the raid.

Even as the militants' numbers were reduced near the eastern border with Pakistan, they claimed daring attacks in Kabul, the Afghan capital. The group's deadliest attack was a suicide bombing at a peaceful demonstration in the city last July, which killed at least 80 people.

Little is known about Mr. Hasib, a former Afghan Taliban commander who switched his loyalty to the Islamic State and took over the Afghanistan affiliate when Mr. Khan was killed. But the Afghan president's office said he was behind the March hospital attack.

President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan said Sunday that Abdul Hasib, the leader of the Islamic State affiliate there, was dead. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAWAD JALALI/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) 

Document NYTF000020170508ed5800037



Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The Magazine's Money Issue

By BILL WASIK 
761 words
7 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
18
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDMoney, it's said, makes the world go round. While that might not be literally true -- Earth, much like its wealthiest inhabitants, moves forward through sheer inertia, a kinetic inheritance bestowed at its creation -- money undeniably does make things go around the world. An astonishing number of things, in fact: The weight of goods moved by ship alone each year now surpasses 10 billion tons, or nearly 3,000 pounds of stuff for every human being on the planet. (Or if you prefer, imagine it as 27,000 Empire State Buildings, or 15 times the weight of all the cows on Earth.) The estimated annual value of global trade since 1979 has increased tenfold, to more than $16 trillion, a figure nearly equivalent to the entire G.D.P. of the United States.

The consequences of all this global exchange have been profound, and not merely in an economic sense. Trade may not have made the world ''small'' (if anything, it feels more capacious and complex than ever) or ''flat'' (its relative economic opportunities and its physical form both remain irreducibly three-dimensional, whatever Tom Friedman or Kyrie Irving might tell you), but our hyperglobalized economy has certainly made the world strange, as the interconnections of capital have brought about other, unforeseen types of connection. Smartphones, designed largely in California and manufactured almost entirely in Asia, proliferate only thanks to conflict minerals mined largely (and often brutally) in Africa. Recently a dispute over South Korea's missile-defense system prompted China to retaliate against Korea's exports of pop music and soap operas, which have become wildly popular with Chinese consumers. The propagandists of ISIS use American meme generators to lure potential fighters from Europe and elsewhere. Money pulls soccer talent from the developing world's farms and slums and sends it across the developed world, creating unlikely national heroes in the process.

This week's Money Issue tries to capture some of that intense interdependence, gathering a collection of stories in which global trade -- for good and ill -- has forged surprising links among nations. In Namibia, an extraordinary influx of investment from China, now unquestionably the world's expansionist superpower, has utterly transformed local economies and communities. In Chile, Korea's infectious pop music has found an unusual foothold. The harvesters of the once-obscure açíerry in Brazil have had their livelihoods improved but also complicated by a surge of demand in the United States.

If a common theme emerges from these pages, it is that politicians, in trying to enrich their citizens or themselves, can steer the flows -- but only to a point. Alabama's tax breaks have helped import hundreds of airplane-industry jobs from Europe, even as similar tax breaks by Britain and Canada have exploded Hollywood's visual-effects industry. Tens of thousands of Filipino caregivers have gone to Israel to tend to its aging population, but the contortions of ideology have kept them from being entirely welcomed.

This issue arrives at a moment when a new class of political leader, in Europe and the United States, has arisen to denounce the effects of trade -- and to demand that the world's nations become more distinct, its alliances wind down, its weird ties unbind. But if the promiscuous connections of global capitalism have made the planet more strange, they have helped forge a real acquaintance among peoples who once were strangers, by making the handiwork of each more familiar and legible to the other. The new nationalists may try to stanch the flow of goods (through tariffs and tax policy) and jobs (by backing out of international trade agreements) and workers (through draconian restrictions in migration). But they will be hard pressed to stanch the impulse among their citizens, one born of curiosity and acquisitiveness, to keep getting the best of whatever (and whomever) the world can give. Bellow all you like about America First, or la France pour les Françis, or anyplace else üer alles. As of 2017, at least, capital and its incessant planetary movements still reliably make a mockery of such slogans.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Correction: June 4, 2017, Sunday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An essay on May 7 about the globalization of trade misidentified a component of smartphones. ''Conflict minerals'' (which are taken from conflict zones) -- not rare-earth metals -- are mined largely in Africa.

Document NYTF000020170604ed570001j



World; Asia Pacific
Leader of  ISIS  Branch in Afghanistan Killed in Special Forces Raid

By MUJIB MASHAL 
686 words
8 May 2017
01:16
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan —he leader of the Islamic State affiliate in Afghanistan who orchestrated audacious attacks that further upended the country’ deteriorating security situation was killed in a special forces raid last month, the president of Afghanistan said in a statement on Sunday.

The militant leader, Abdul Hasib, had overseen a number of bloody attacks that directly challenged the authority of President Ashraf Ghani, including a massacre at the main Afghan Army hospital in Kabul that killed at least 50 people.

Mr. Hasib was killed in an operation on April 27 in eastern Nangarhar Province, along the border with Pakistan, according to the statement by Mr. Ghani’ office. The statement said the government had waited for verification that Mr. Hasib had been killed in the raid before announcing his death. It did not say how his death had been confirmed.

The United States military command in Afghanistan said in a statement on Sunday that American forces had participated in the raid that killed Mr. Hasib and up to 35 other militants.

It was the second time in nine months that the leader of the Islamic State in the Khorasan, as the Afghanistan affiliate is known, was killed, Gen. John W. Nicholson, the commander of American forces in the country, said in the statement. Mr. Hasib’ predecessor, Hafiz Saeed Khan, was killed in July in a United States airstrike; he had been reported dead a few times before the American military confirmed it in August.

The United States military command in Afghanistan had said that an operation on April 27 targeted Mr. Hasib. Two American Army Rangers, Sgt. Joshua Rodgers and Sgt. Cameron Thomas, were killed in the operation, perhaps by so-called friendly fire, the Pentagon has said.

Afghan and American forces often go on joint missions. The one that killed Mr. Hasib included about 50 United States Army Rangers and a similar number of Afghan special security forces, the Pentagon has said. A firefight broke out during the raid, which lasted over three hours, and American F-16 fighter jets and Apache attack helicopters carried out airstrikes to protect the troops.

The Islamic State in the Khorasan, which uses an ancient name for the region that includes Afghanistan and Pakistan, expanded rapidly in the eastern part of Afghanistan, where government forces and an intense air campaign by the United States military have tried to rout the militants. They have been reduced to about 700 fighters, down from as many as 3,000, American officials said.

Last month, the United States dropped its largest conventional bomb, the 22,000-pound MOAB, on one of the group’ redoubts in Nangarhar, killing as many as 96 fighters, Afghan officials said.

Commanders decided on a ground assault, instead of another airstrike, to kill or capture Mr. Hasib because women and children were living in his compound, said an American military official who asked not to be identified when providing operational details, adding that none of them had been hurt in the raid.

Even as the militants’umbers were reduced near the eastern border with Pakistan, they claimed daring attacks in Kabul, the Afghan capital. The group’ deadliest attack was a suicide bombing at a peaceful demonstration in the city last July, which killed at least 80 people.

Little is known about Mr. Hasib, a former Afghan Taliban commander who switched his loyalty to the Islamic State and took over the Afghanistan affiliate when Mr. Khan was killed. But the Afghan president’ office said he was behind the March hospital attack.

Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting from Washington.

* ‘riendly Fire’ay Have Killed 2 U.S. Soldiers in Afghanistan Raid

* Islamic State Attack Kills Dozens Near Syria Refugee Camp

* A Fatal and Fiery Photograph Reawakens Memories of a Soldier’ Life

* Iraqi Forces Open a Front in West Mosul, Trying to Squeeze \b ISIS\b0 

President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan said Sunday that Abdul Hasib, leader of the Islamic State affiliate there, had been killed. | Jawad Jalali/European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170507ed57004h5



Arts and Leisure Desk; SECTAR
Meet the New Mr. Right

By ROBERT ITO 
1,969 words
7 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
31
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

LOS ANGELES -- Kumail Nanjiani loves '90s romantic comedies, the mushier the better. ''I started doing standup because of Hugh Grant's best-man speech in 'Four Weddings,' which is basically a standup routine,'' he said. For the aspiring comic, Mr. Grant was the gold standard of rom-com stars, although Mr. Nanjiani never dreamed of becoming one himself. ''It just felt like the people who were making those things were, like, aliens, or gods,'' he said.

Next month, Mr. Nanjiani tackles the lead role in the romantic comedy ''The Big Sick,'' based on his own experiences meeting, dating and making a hash of things with his future wife, Emily V. Gordon, who wrote the script with him. Mr. Nanjiani, 39, plays a gently tweaked version of himself, a Pakistani-American standup comedian and Uber driver; Emily (Zoe Kazan) is a therapist-to-be who heckles him -- in a flirty, endearing way -- during one of his sets. The relationship seems doomed from the start, seeing as how Mr. Nanjiani's family expects him to marry a nice Pakistani woman, a fact he somehow neglects to mention to his new girlfriend. When Emily becomes ill and is placed in a medically induced coma -- again, from real life -- things come to an unexpectedly funny head.

[Video: The Big Sick -- Official US Trailer -- Kumail Nanjiani and Ray Romano Intro | Amazon Studios Watch on YouTube.]

Seeing a Pakistani-American comic secure the romantic lead in a Hollywood film would be a rare delight under any circumstances. But what makes ''The Big Sick'' all the more remarkable is how little fuss is made of it. In the film, we see Kumail and his family eating and laughing and goofing off, fighting and (after a spell) making up, just like the actor's real family. It's a vision of a Muslim family, Mr. Nanjiani notes, rarely seen in American film.

''You just don't see Muslims being matter-of-fact Muslim,'' he said. ''They're always defined by their Muslim-ness. We're either terrorists, or we're fighting terrorists. I remember seeing 'True Lies' and going, why are we always the bad guys?''

When Mr. Nanjiani and Ms. Gordon first began working on the film five years ago, they envisioned a personal yet relatable film inspired by improbable events. But then came the 2016 presidential election. Not only has Mr. Nanjiani since become known for his political views, taking to Twitter to criticize Mr. Trump's abortive Muslim ban and making national news after a confrontation with Trump supporters, but audience reactions have also changed. In the Trump era, a simple tale about a Muslim immigrant falling in love with a girl in a coma is anything but.

''When we started it, it was an important part of the movie, this experience of an immigrant in America,'' said Judd Apatow, a producer of the movie. ''What it's turned into is an important representation that there are a billion people out there who are much closer to what we're like than we are led to believe.''

His fellow producer Barry Mendel noted, ''Every day we made the film, we were under the impression that it would be released during President Hillary Clinton's first term.''

The filmmakers better understood how the new political climate affected their movie when early audiences got to the scene in which a young white man heckles Mr. Nanjiani in the middle of a comedy set. ''Go back to ISIS,'' the man yells, smirking. Playing Mr. Nanjiani's future mother-in-law, Holly Hunter is having none of it; near fisticuffs ensue. ''We had test screenings of the film before the election, and that scene played so differently,'' Mr. Nanjiani said. ''It played very funny, but now it's almost a cathartic moment, like a howl of righteous rage. People used to laugh; now they laugh and clap.''

The film, directed by Michael Showalter and also starring Ray Romano and the Bollywood actor Anupam Kher, received rave reviews after its Sundance debut in January. For Mr. Nanjiani, it's a project marked by firsts: his first time playing a character so closely tied to his own life and experiences; his first dramatic lead in a feature film; his first romantic lead in, well, anything. Until now, he's tackled ensemble roles on award-winning shows: Dinesh, the romantically-challenged software engineer tormented by Gilfoyle, a practicing Satanist, on ''Silicon Valley'' (HBO), and Prismo, an omnipotent wish-granter with a pinkish, 2-D body on ''Adventure Time'' (Cartoon Network). Before that, he played a series of much smaller roles. ''I never decided I wanted to be an actor,'' he said. ''I just started doing standup because I love standup. Everything else has sort of been these tiny steps leading to this.''

[Video: Silicon Valley Season 3: Dinesh & Gilfoyle (HBO) Watch on YouTube.]

On a recent morning, Mr. Nanjiani and Ms. Gordon were at their home in the Los Feliz neighborhood of Los Angeles, discussing how the film came to be, and how much -- or little -- the story diverged from real life. In person, Mr. Nanjiani is better looking than his ''Silicon Valley'' character, with none of the computer-geek vibe; Ms. Gordon, funny and ebullient, with large blue eyes, seems like someone Dinesh might awkwardly pursue on the show, with little success. In conversation, the two back each other constantly (''I don't disagree'') and often finish each other's sentences; sometimes they'll say the exact same thing in near unison.

As Bagel, their affectionate gray cat, rubbed against our legs under the dinner table, the two talked about everything from the relative merits of Mr. Grant's rom-coms (''Notting Hill'' vs. ''Four Weddings and a Funeral'') and Mr. Nanjiani's encyclopedic knowledge of Sega Genesis video games (a staple of his childhood) to the couple's first date. For that momentous event, Mr. Nanjiani chose a Chicago restaurant very close to where he was living at the time. ''Always set up a date near your house, because then you can just go back to your house after,'' Ms. Gordon said. ''It's like, 'Oh my God, look! We're so close.'''

''It's a good move,'' Mr. Nanjiani agreed.

Mr. Nanjiani came to the United States from Pakistan when he was 18 to go to college in Iowa; his family followed. He began working on what would become ''The Big Sick'' in 2012, after running into Mr. Apatow at South by Southwest. The two had worked together before, on ''The Five-Year Engagement,'' and the prolific producer invited Mr. Nanjiani to pitch story ideas to him and Mr. Mendel, who had collaborated on unconventional romantic comedies like ''Bridesmaids'' and ''Trainwreck.'' Mr. Nanjiani immediately thought about how he had met Ms. Gordon, even though a central moment in that story -- Ms. Gordon's coma, which stretched on for eight days -- didn't necessarily seem rich comedic fodder.

Mr. Nanjiani began work on a first draft and asked Ms. Gordon, a former therapist turned writer-producer, for notes and suggestions; before long, the two were writing the script together. ''Right from the beginning, it was like, how do you make a movie about someone in a coma funny?'' he said.

Ms. Gordon added, ''I didn't want the joke to be like, 'Oh, I accidentally unplugged her. Uh-oh!' If it's going to be that level of humor, I'm out.''

There were rewrites and more rewrites, three years' worth; not so unusual by Apatow standards, but something new for Mr. Nanjiani and Ms. Gordon. ''We would write a draft, and Judd would tear it to shreds,'' Ms. Gordon said. After their first screening tested high, Mr. Apatow came to the two with one more request: Add 50 more jokes.

''We knew there were challenges in telling a story like this, but once we saw the story worked, we knew we could get a little more experimental,'' Mr. Apatow said, also noting, ''It really had to be the perfect script to try to get funding.''

There was also the matter of how to make the story dramatically compelling. In real life, there was a lot of sitting and waiting and worrying, but how thrilling is that? ''If we showed what actually happened, you would just see people going through a stressful event being very kind to each other,'' Ms. Gordon said.

Instead, Ms. Hunter and Mr. Romano play her parents as temperamental opposites -- she's a feisty Southerner, he's a laid-back guy from New York -- who enter the film with their own nettlesome back story. (Ms. Gordon said her parents ''want me to mention this always: My dad has not cheated on my mom, ever.'')

Though a fictional heckler is the catalyst for the film's ISIS confrontation, the actor has experienced similar run-ins onstage, about seven or eight times, by his count. ''It used to be 'Go back to Taliban,''' he said. ''Now it's 'Go back to ISIS.' That's about the only thing they've really updated.''

Last November, he and his ''Silicon Valley'' co-star Thomas Middleditch found themselves in a similar altercation in a bar in Silver Lake, Los Angeles. Two men approached them and told them that they were big fans, but that the two actors were, as Mr. Nanjiani recalled, ''off base about Trump.'' When he and Mr. Middleditch said that they didn't want to discuss politics, the ''fans'' started yelling at them, calling them ''cucks.'' The incident blew up online after both actors tweeted about it. ''It made me a little sad to see these guys go from really happy to meet us to really angry, so quick,'' Mr. Nanjiani said.

''I didn't feel scared, or physically threatened, because I was like, and this is probably not the right approach, but I felt if we had to, we could have taken these guys,'' he added.

This year is a busy one for Mr. Nanjiani. In addition to starring in ''Sick,'' he recently appeared in the Ice Cube comedy ''Fist Fight'' and has a role in the coming ''Lego Ninjago Movie.'' On ''Silicon Valley,'' which began its fourth season last month, his character, Dinesh, has several groundbreaking moments, including a brief taste of venture capital-backed power and a date with an actual girl.

''As an actor, I think this is just the tip of the iceberg in terms of what he can do,'' Ms. Kazan said.

Work promotions, romance, ninja battles -- it's all a far cry from Mr. Nanjiani's past gigs, which included roles as a counter guy, a custodian and an airport security guard.

''You never got cabdriver parts,'' Ms. Gordon said, ''but you went out for cabdriver parts.''

He said: ''The thing that helped me, I guess, was that I wasn't physically intimidating, so I never had to play terrorists.''

''You would have been adorable,'' Ms. Gordon observed.

''I know a lot of brown actors who play terrorists because they're physically intimidating. For me, it was like, 'O.K., you'll be the nerd.' So I've played the nerd. I've played food-delivery guys. But I always tried to find something in the characters so that they weren't just defined by what they looked like.''

(PHOTOGRAPH BY BRINSON+BANKS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (AR31); Top, Kumail Nanjiani and his wife, Emily V. Gordon. Right, Zoe Kazan and Mr. Nanjiani in the film ''The Big Sick.'' Below, from left, Mr. Nanjiani and Martin Starr, standing, Thomas Middleditch and Zach Woods, seated, in ''Silicon Valley.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRINSON+BANKS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; SARAH SHATZ/AMAZON; JOHN P. JOHNSON/HBO) (AR38) 

Document NYTF000020170507ed570007g



U.S.; Politics
Right and Left React to Trump’ Comments on the Civil War

By ANNA DUBENKO 
1,720 words
5 May 2017
09:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The political news cycle is fast, and keeping up can be overwhelming. Trying to find differing perspectives worth your time is even harder. That’ why we have scoured the internet for political writing from the right and left that you might not have seen.

Has this series exposed you to new ideas?

Tell us how. Email us at ourpicks@nytimes.com .

From the Right

•Samuel Goldman  in Law and Liberty :

“ntellectual conservatism has entered its crack-up phase.”

Samuel Goldman argues that, historically, conservative thought can be split into two fundamental tendencies: liberalism and reaction. Now, after decades of uneasy coexistence, the two tendencies are causing the conservative mind to “ome apart.”Read more »

_____

•Jacob Heilbrunn  in  The National Interest :

“Donald Trump is inviting the wrong Asian dictator to meet him in Washington. Instead of focusing on Philippine leader Rodrigo Duterte, he should extend an invitation to North Korea’ Kim Jong-un .”

Whereas some have bristled at President Trump’ willingness to meet with authoritarian leaders, Jacob Heilbrunn sees an opportunity. If there’ anything that the Cold War has taught us, he writes, is that “éente offers a road to undermining totalitarian regimes.”Read more »

_____

•Michelle Malkin  in Town  in h  in all :

“immel doesn’ need more maudlin Twitter suck-uppery. He needs a healthy fact-check.”

Not everyone  on the right had a empathetic reaction  to Jimmy Kimmel’ monologue this week about his newborn son. Michelle Malkin decided to take a more measured approach to the comedian’ statements, writing, “ feel your pain. But please use your brain.”Read more » to Jimmy Kimmel’ monologue this week about his newborn son. Michelle Malkin decided to take a more measured approach to the comedian’ statements, writing, “ feel your pain. But please use your brain.”

_____

•Rich Lowry  in Politico :

“he Party of Lincoln should, despite the enthusiasm of President Trump, keep Old Hickory at a healthy arm’ length.”

President Trump is trying to do for Andrew Jackson what Lin-Manuel Miranda did for Alexander Hamilton , and Rich Lowry is not pleased. Despite Jackson’ “talwart unionism,”he G.O.P. should “urb their enthusiasm”hen it comes to resurrecting this figure as the party’ standard-bearer. Not least because they have a perfectly suitable historical avatar in Abraham Lincoln. Read more », and Rich Lowry is not pleased. Despite Jackson’ “talwart unionism,”he G.O.P. should “urb their enthusiasm”hen it comes to resurrecting this figure as the party’ standard-bearer. Not least because they have a perfectly suitable historical avatar in Abraham Lincoln.

_____

•Matthew Walt h er  in The Week :

“onservatives in this country should get used to the idea of being prudent stewards of the welfare state, not its would-be destroyers.”

You won’ often hear a conservative case for a single-payer health care system, which is why this article by Matthew Walther is so valuable to read. “onservatism,”r. Walther writes, “s about stability and solidarity across class boundaries, not a fideistic attachment to classical liberal dogma.”Read more »

_____

From the Left

•Jamelle Bouie  in Slate :

“rump isn’ wrong to think there was a deal that could have prevented the Civil War. There was. But the price of that deal was the maintenance of slavery.”

President Trump’ comments about Andrew Jackson and the Civil War are more than just the latest in a series of misstatements. For Jamelle Bouie, they speak to a mind-set that privileges the success of a deal above its moral outcome. Moreover, they remind Mr. Bouie that the president’ “gnorance isn’ an act or a performance.” president who knows nothing of history is doomed to repeat its mistakes. Read more »

_____

•Seth Masket  in Pacific Standard:  in

“President Trump] has helped to explode three of American politics’ost pernicious myths.”

You could say that Seth Masket is a glass-half-full kind of guy. That’ because he sees the Trump administration’ first 100 days as a great way to dispel three persistent fallacies about American politics: The idea that politics is easy; the superiority of the political outsider; and the notion that government should be run as a business. Read more »

_____

•Naomi Wolf  in New Republic :

“olf whistle politics represents a new and frightening thing in twenty-first-century American public life: naked primal political rage howling at women, in filthy and scary ways.”

You’e heard of dog whistle politics, now learn about wolf whistle politics, a term coined by the former Texas state senator Wendy Davis to describe the “xplicit, in-your-face sexism”f our political moment. Naomi Wolf sketches the contours of this crude new political rhetoric and finds hope in the women “owling back.”Read more »

_____

•Harvey Kantor  in conversation with Jennifer Berkshire  in Have You Heard :

“e’e asking education to do things it can’ possibly do.”

An idea in David Leonhardt’ column  this week rankled some thinkers on the left. “ducation isn’ just another issue,”r. Leonhardt wrote. “t is the most powerful force for accelerating economic growth, reducing poverty and lifting middle-class living standards.”arvey Kantor believes that this line of thinking is a prime example of “ducationalizing the welfare state,”he belief that education can account for —nd fix —he societal ills more appropriately addressed by other government programs. The result, Mr. Kantor tells Jennifer Berkshire in their interview, “as been increasing support for the kinds of market-oriented policies that make inequality worse.”Read more » this week rankled some thinkers on the left. “ducation isn’ just another issue,”r. Leonhardt wrote. “t is the most powerful force for accelerating economic growth, reducing poverty and lifting middle-class living standards.”arvey Kantor believes that this line of thinking is a prime example of “ducationalizing the welfare state,”he belief that education can account for —nd fix —he societal ills more appropriately addressed by other government programs. The result, Mr. Kantor tells Jennifer Berkshire in their interview, “as been increasing support for the kinds of market-oriented policies that make inequality worse.”

_____

•Suleiman A. Mourad  in Jacobin :

“hat Muslim world are we expecting these actors to build after ISIS is gone?”

Suleiman Mourad chronicles how the disastrous American-led interventions in the Middle East have destabilized the region, creating the conditions for terrorist groups like ISIS to take hold. Moreover, the allies the United States has chosen, from the Turkish leader Recep Tayyip Erdogan to President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt, offer little assurance of a peaceful and free future for their citizens. Read more » to President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt, offer little assurance of a peaceful and free future for their citizens.

_____

From the Center:

•Kellogg School of Management :

“ven people who start out holding two points of view at the same time can very quickly go into an echo chamber.”

Much has been written about the way social media algorithms contribute to the filter bubble problem. But what role does human behavior play in the formation and consolidation of political echo chambers? Brian Uzzi, a professor of management and organizations at the Kellogg School of Management, teamed up with a group of Italian researchers to study the decisions people make in their newsfeeds. Read more »

_____

•Hal Brands  in War on   in t  in he Rocks :

“hen it comes to foreign policy, the one thing that has become piercingly obvious so far is that this president has no idea where he is going.”

Hal Brands, a professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, concludes that the Trump administration’ foreign policy to date can be summed up in two words: “ncoherence and incompetence.”ny attempt to bring together the string of decisions made by the president under the umbrella of “merica First,”r. Brands writes, misunderstands the “undamentally unserious approach to some of the most serious geopolitical issues.”Read more »

_____

•The Oatmeal :

“ou’e not going to believe what I’ about to tell you.”

Here’ something new to the partisan roundup: a comic. It’ about the “ackfire effect,”nd if you don’ know what that is, all the better. The best way to read this is to have as little introduction as possible. Read more »

_____

And Finally, Andrew Sullivan:

•Andrew Sullivan  in New York Magazine :

“he more I read today’ more serious reactionary writers, the more I’ convinced they are much more in tune with the current global mood than today’ conservatives, liberals, and progressives.”

Andrew Sullivan’ ideological position is so hard to categorize, we’e given him his own section.

In this thoughtful feature, Mr. Sullivan advises liberals and traditional conservatives to take the reactionary right seriously and engage —arefully, but in good faith —ith their ideas. If we fail to do this, he writes, we risk “orfeit[ing] the politics of the moment (and the future) to reaction.”nd so, he does just that.

Speaking with the intellectual defenders of Trumpism, Mr. Sullivan lays out a worldview occasionally obscured by heated rhetoric and inarticulate pundits. He’ sympathetic to the sense of loss that colors the reactionary mind, “ know its psychological temptations intimately,”ut refuses to defend the movement’ response, their “eiled racism is disturbing, and their pessimism a solipsistic pathology.”ltimately, he writes, “heir rage eclipses their argument.”ut he impresses upon his reader the importance of understanding this argument. Read more »

_____

Want the Partisan Writing Roundup in your inbox? Sign up for the Morning Briefing Newsletter  or the What We’e Reading Newsletter .

Have thoughts about this collection? Email feedback to ourpicks@nytimes.com .

Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, at a military parade in Pyongyang last month. | Wong Maye-E/Associated Press | President Trump with a portrait of Andrew Jackson in the Oval Office. | Al Drago/The New York Times | A statue of Andrew Jackson in Lafayette Square in Washington, D.C. | Brendan Smialowski/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | A protester at a Women’ March in Phoenix in January. | Caitlin O'Hara for The New York Times | President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey last month. | Reuters.. 

Document NYTFEED020170505ed550025t



New York Today
N.Y. / Region
New York Today: New Yorkers on Trump

By JONATHAN WOLFE 
1,477 words
5 May 2017
12:02
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

Good morning on this wet Friday.

On President Trump’ first trip back to the city, hundreds of residents took to the streets to chide, deride or applaud their hometown president.

New Yorkers, it seems, have a lot to say about Mr. Trump’ first 100 days in office.

So we asked the protesters and supporters who had gathered outside the decommissioned aircraft carrier Intrepid, where Mr. Trump spoke Thursday evening, to answer the following question with a Twitter-size response:

In President Trump’ next 100 days, what would you like to see him accomplish?

“ass affordable health care that takes care of the citizens of this country.”

—ennis Gagomiros, Hell’ Kitchen, 65, Democrat

“urn around his views on health care. Have some empathy, sympathy, and compassion for those who voted him in.”

—rundun Johnson, 71, Washington Heights, Democrat

“ake away money from New York City and put them on lockdown if they want to be a sanctuary city.”

—lisa Nahoum, 46, Bayside, Queens, Republican

“ hope he doesn’ accomplish anything because his agenda is horrific.”

—ete Sikora, 42, Carroll Gardens, Democrat

“umber 1: Tax Code. Lower on the poor, more on the rich.”

—sa Lowe, 45, Coney Island, Brooklyn, Republican

“ would like him to rescind every executive order he’ made. Resign.”

—isa Harrison, 60, Upper West Side, Democrat

“ want him to start an investigation into the deep state and clean it up.”

—ector Beguero, 58, Jackson Heights, Queens, Republican

“o not tweet. To form a mature adult sentence. And to go away.”

—anet Pytik, 50, Upper West Side, Democrat

“efeat ISIS. Build a Wall. Establish extreme vetting.”

—riel Kohane, 46, Upper West Side, Republican

“uclear Armageddon. Put us out of our misery.”

—on Kuby, 60, Chelsea, Democrat

What would you like to see Mr. Trump accomplish in his next 100 days in office? Let us know in the comments.

Here’ what else is happening:

Weather

Some people like watching the puddles gather rain.

If you’e one of them, you have three days of excitement ahead.

Today is likely to be the wettest, but expect the showers, fog, wind (and possible thunderstorms) to stick around for most of the weekend, with highs around 60.

Hair forecast: Sopping Shirley Temple.

In the News

• principal at Park Slope Collegiate in Brooklyn was accused of being a Communist. [New York Times]

•uring a push to test backlogged rape-evidence kits, DNA led to an arrest in the attack of a young girl 24 years ago. [New York Times]

•n “About New York,”he columnist Jim Dwyer writes about how city libraries are fining children who can’ afford to be without books. [New York Times]

•…nd in “Big City,”he columnist Ginia Bellafante explains an alternative policing ideology in which officers are akin to businesses that serve customers. [New York Times]

•oaquí Guzmá Loera, known as El Chapo, complains about his jail conditions, to no avail. [New York Times]

•he authorities in Brooklyn say they have charged the former pro basketball player James Williams with trafficking in heroin. [Bklyner]

•ichard Basciano, the longtime sex-shop owner in Times Square, has died. [Crain’, subscription required]

•here’ an immersive, Harry Potter-themed tour through the Metropolitan Museum of Art. [DNAinfo]

•oday’ Metropolitan Diary: “An Elevator Ride to Remember”

•coreboard: Rangers vote out Senators, 4-1.

•or a global look at what’ happening, see Your Friday Briefing.

Coming Up Today

•Bike Expo New York, featuring more than 100 exhibitors, workshops and lessons, at Pier 36 in Lower Manhattan. 10 a.m. [Free]

•Here’ a guide to the three-day Frieze New York art fair on Randalls Island, where galleries from across the world will display their most eye-popping work, beginning at 11 a.m. [Prices vary]

•usic performances and strawberry shortcake, part of the Strawberry Festival, at West Third Street near Mercer Street. Noon. [Free admission]

•ake the children to a basketball training camp at Walker Park on Staten Island. 4:30 p.m. [Free]

• screening of Laura Poitras’ new documentary, “Risk,”ollowed by a discussion with the director, at the IFC Center in Greenwich Village. 5:10 p.m. [$15]

•Yankees at Cubs, 2:20 p.m. (YES). Mets host Marlins, 7:10 p.m. (SNY).

•lternate-side parking remains in effect until May 25.

•eekend travel hassles: Check subway disruptions and street closings.

The Weekend

Saturday

•Free walking tours led by New Yorkers, part of Jane’ Walk, at various times and locations. [Free]

•he Dusty Film and Animation Festival presents screenings of works by students at the School of Visual Arts, at SVA Theater in Chelsea. Times vary. [Free]

•tart your Saturday with a Zumba class at the Poe Park Visitor Center in the Bronx. 10 a.m. [Free]

•ick up some perennials or peonies at the Snug Harbor plant sale and Staten Island Orchid Society show at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center. 10 a.m. [Free entry]

•rt and sculpture classes, fitness classes and dance and theater performances, part of the LIC Springs! block festival, on Vernon Boulevard between 50th and 46th Avenues in Long Island City, Queens. Noon. [Free]

•Rangers at Senators, 3 p.m., in Game 5 of their second-round playoff series. (NBCS). New York Red Bulls at Philadelphia Union, 7 p.m. (MSG). Mets host Marlins, 7:10 p.m. (WPIX). Yankees at Cubs, 7:15 p.m. (FOX).

Sunday

•atch the 40-mile Five Boro Bike Tour, which begins at 7:30 a.m. Here’ the route map. [Free to watch]

•oin an Urban Ranger to explore Seton Falls Park in the Bronx. Noon. [Free]

•Plays based on the lives of actors from El Grupo de ACQC (The AIDS Center of Queens County Troupe), part of the Legislative Theater Festival, at the Queens Museum in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park. 2 p.m. [Free, R.S.V.P. here]

•creenings of short films about the environment at the Greenpoint Film Festival at the Wythe Hotel in Brooklyn. 3 p.m. [$10]

•n afternoon of classical music on the waterfront at Conference House Park on Staten Island. 3:30 p.m. [Free]

•ets host Marlins, 1:10 p.m. (SNY). New York City F.C. host Atlanta United F.C., 4 p.m. (WFAN). Yankees at Cubs, 8:08 p.m. (ESPN).

•or more events, see The New York Times’ Arts & Entertainment guide.

And Finally...

For those counting the days until summer, here’ a bit of good news: Governors Island opened this week, nearly a month earlier than usual.

Toting your picnic basket or bike over the harbor is a bit easier this year.

The East River Ferry route that was relaunched this past week will continue to make stops at the island on weekends during the season, beginning tomorrow, and the new South Brooklyn route will connect to Governors Island beginning on June 3.

This weekend you can:

•et dusted with colored powder and take in music and dance performances at the Holi Hai festival. 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.

•ttend readings from more than a dozen authors during the Children’ Book Weekend. 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.

•ry out the city’ largest slide. Anytime.

•oin a bird walk. 10 a.m.

The best part? They’e all free.

Governors Island is open 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. on weekdays, and until 7 p.m. on the weekends and some holidays.

New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. If you don’ get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.

For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.

Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe , on Twitter.

You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.

Correction: May 5, 2017, Friday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of a Republican from the Upper West Side. He is Ariel Kohane, not Kohan.

Plenty of advice here. | Damon Winter/The New York Times | Protesters in the Hell’ Kitchen neighborhood on Thursday. | Damon Winter/The New York Times | “ mean, what decade are we living in?”aid the principal, Jill Bloomberg. Now, she’ suing. | Mark Kauzlarich for The New York Times | Joaquí Guzmá Loera was extradited from Mexico in January. | U.S. law enforcement, via Associated Press | An island awakens. | Karsten Moran for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170505ed550038w



OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
OpEd; SECT
An immoral preference for Christian refugees

By A. ODYSSEUS PATRICK 
979 words
5 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The International New York Times
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

SYDNEY, Australia -- Like many Western countries, Australia has agreed to resettle refugees from the wars in Syria and Iraq. Unlike other countries, Australia explicitly favors Christians, even though they are a minority of those seeking refuge.

The Australian experience is a case study for Europeans grappling with an influx of refugees and for Americans considering the long-term implications of the Trump presidency: When Muslims are demonized, state-directed prejudice is more likely.

Data I obtained through Australia's freedom of information law shows that 78 percent of the approximately 18,563 refugees from Syria and Iraq granted entry from July 1, 2015, to Jan. 6 of this year identified themselves as Christian.

This figure is significantly out of proportion to Christians' presence among the region's displaced peoples. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees puts the number of registered Christian refugees from Iraq at around 15 percent. The figure for Syria is just under 1 percent.

Australia's conservative coalition government has never denied that religion is an important factor in choosing who will be admitted from Syria and Iraq. The favoritism is justified by the claim that Christians are more at risk from the Islamic State and other groups that engage in indiscriminate murder.

Some Christians feel that members of their religion are the unacknowledged victims of the wars in Syria and Iraq. ''Christians have been copping the brunt of persecution at the hands of ISIS,'' Lyle Sheldon, the managing director of the Australian Christian Lobby, told me.

Similarly, a Labour legislator, Tony Zappia, said in the Australian Parliament, ''Christians appear to be the most persecuted people on earth.''

But experts don't buy it.

''Christians from conflict zones in Syria and Iraq aren't persecuted more than others,'' said the head of Human Rights Watch in Australia, Elaine Pearson. ''In both Syria and Iraq, Muslims have overwhelmingly borne the brunt of most of the atrocities by ISIS and by the Assad regime.''

There is evidence that in Syria Christians are being protected by the Assad regime, which likes to portray itself as the defender of minorities. The civil war in Iraq is primarily a Sunni-Shiite conflict.

The Australian approach is in part motivated by a belief expressed in private by government ministers, and in public by Christian groups like Mr. Sheldon's, that Christians are more likely to integrate into Australia's Anglo-Christian-dominated culture than Muslims. ''They have a worldview that's more aligned with the founding principles of our society,'' Mr. Sheldon said of Christians.

Selecting refugees based on their spiritual beliefs is a form of state-supported prejudice that secular societies like Australia have a moral obligation to reject.

As one of Australia's foremost experts on refugees points out, specific religions don't have a monopoly on peaceful behavior. ''Some Buddhists, for example, are extremely spiritual and peaceable,'' William Maley, a professor at the Australian National University and author of ''What is a Refugee?,'' said in an email. ''But there are Buddhist extremists in Sri Lanka and Myanmar who might better be classed as fascists.''

There are two primary ways refugees from the Middle East get to Australia. They can go through the United Nations refugee agency, which prioritizes the most desperate. Most are from Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan.

The agency works closely with Australian immigration officials, but does not use religion as a criterion. In 2015 and 2016 the agency selected 6,444 refugees from the region for resettlement in Australia. Twelve percent were Christian -- just 782 people.

The other way is to apply for asylum directly to the Australian government. This route is stacked in favor of Christians, whether they be Armenian Apostolic, Assyrian Orthodox, Syrian Catholic or one of dozens of other Christian denominations. Indeed, since the total pool of refugees admitted to Australia in this period was so largely Christian, the government must have approved few if any Muslims seeking asylum by direct application.

When I asked the Australian Department of Immigration and Border Protection about its criteria for selecting refugees, it didn't dispute the policy has a religious bias. But a spokesman said applicants don't have to disclose their religion.

But telling refugees they don't have to declare their faith is like telling them they don't have to choose a gender. The Australian data puts the number of admitted refugees who didn't state their religion at 0.07 percent.

Muslims, especially those from the Middle East, have an image problem in the Western world. Concerns are fed by a legitimate fear of terrorism and the alienness of Muslim and Arabic social norms, clothing and language.

In Australia, hostility is fanned by populist politicians and Rupert Murdoch's tabloid newspapers, which are eager to seize on perceived slights to Anglo-Australian culture by the nation's tiny population of militant or orthodox Muslims. The attack outside the British Parliament on March 22 prompted a prominent Australian anti-Muslim politician to start a hashtag: #pray4muslimban. Last month, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said he would make it harder to obtain citizenship. The new rules will require behavior consistent with ''Australian values,'' a vague test that many commentators on the right and left regard as aimed at Muslims.

Before World War II, Australia resisted international pleas to grant refuge to more Jews. ''As we have no real racial problem, we are not desirous of importing one by encouraging any scheme of large-scale foreign migration,'' a government official said in 1938.

Australia should consider that history may judge it harshly for treating today's Muslims as it did yesterday's Jews.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

A. Odysseus Patrick is a writer for The Australian Financial Review.

Document NYTF000020170505ed550006b



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Iraqi Forces Open a New Front Against  ISIS  in West Mosul

By MICHAEL R. GORDON; Tim Arango contributed reporting. 
1,203 words
5 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Iraqi forces opened a new front in western Mosul on Thursday in a major shift intended to accelerate an operation that had slowed to a crawl, leaving hundreds of thousands of civilians trapped on an urban battlefield.

The attack began early in the day as the Ninth Division of the Iraqi Army and Interior Ministry troops who had been pulled from another combat assignment started pushing into Mosul from the north, according to an Iraqi military statement.

The Iraqi Counterterrorism Service has been clawing its way from the south, and the goal of the new operation is to force the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, to fight in multiple directions and collapse its defenses.

Hinting at the change of strategy, Lt. Gen. Othman al-Ghanmi, the Iraqi Army's chief of staff, recently told a state-run newspaper that the battle for Mosul, now in its seventh month, would be won ''in a maximum of three weeks.''

Still, the Iraqi forces face hundreds of militants who appear determined to fight to the end in neighborhoods still teeming with hungry and increasingly desperate civilians.

The new operation will also require careful synchronization among the Iraqi Army, Interior Ministry troops and the Counterterrorism Service, which report to different authorities in Baghdad and sometimes seem to be fighting separate wars.

Tensions among Iraq's disparate forces came to the fore in a closed-door meeting that Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi convened in mid-April in Hamam al-Alil, a town nestled on the Tigris River about 15 miles southeast of Mosul. Outfitted in the black uniform of the Counterterrorism Service, Mr. Abadi warned his commanders that prolonging the battle for the city would only play into the hands of the Islamic State and signaled that it was time to pick up the pace.

But that was followed by sharp debate among frustrated Iraqi commanders about which of their units have been making the greatest sacrifice and who should shoulder the burden of the next stage of the battle.

Lt. Gen. Raed Shaker Jawdat, the commander of the Federal Police, which have suffered many casualties as they advanced from the south along the Tigris, complained that his force was fighting hard but that the Iraqi Army had yet to push into the city, filled with snipers and car bombs.

But Lt. Gen. Abdul-Amir Rasheed Yar Allah, the head of the operations center in Nineveh Province, who is overseeing the Mosul battle, pointed the finger at the Federal Police, complaining that their once audacious assault was no longer gaining ground.

Highlighting the stakes, the meeting hall was decorated with the portraits of Iraqi troops killed in the campaign against the Islamic State.

''The point of the meeting was to ask if the Federal Police have done their job and how to get the army to participate more in the fighting inside the city,'' said Lt. Gen. Abdul-Wahab al-Saadi, a senior commander with the Counterterrorism Service, who attended the meeting.

''Each of the leaders was trying to say his force had done the best, but let's see the reality on the ground,'' General Saadi added, asserting that his Counterterrorism Service had reclaimed the most territory from the Islamic State.

In the days of consultations with his fellow commanders that followed, General Yar Allah appeared to have overcome many of the strains and built a consensus on a new plan. It gives the Ninth Division a new role and has been quietly supported by Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, who commands the American-led task force that is fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

The Ninth Division, an armored unit, had positioned itself to the north of Mosul after fighting its way along a dusty ridge west of the city to cut the Islamic State's supply lines and potential escape routes to the west.

The division's southward push is being reinforced by troops from the Emergency Response Division, which answers to the Interior Ministry, and two army brigades that were pulled from security duties in eastern Mosul and near Tal Afar.

The theory is that attacking from the north will force the Islamic State to split its defensive operations and make it easier for the Counterterrorism Service to make headway from the south. The Federal Police are also holding their position in the southern part of western Mosul.

The operation has been timed to coincide with clear weather so that American Apache attack helicopters, armed drones and warplanes flown by the United States and allies can provide ready air support. At least one Iraqi F-16 also carried out airstrikes; the Iraqi military said the target was factories making car bombs.

But reinforcing the Ninth Division will involve trade-offs. At least some of the Emergency Response forces that have been sent to augment the division have been repositioned from southwestern Mosul.

That will remove some of the military pressure on Islamic State fighters in the densely packed old section of Mosul, which still looms as the most difficult battlefield and includes the Great Mosque where Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State, delivered a public sermon in July 2014.

Iraqi commanders appear to be calculating that they can clear much of western Mosul and leave the old city for last.

Col. John L. Dorrian, a spokesman for the American-led command in Baghdad, said on Wednesday that the Islamic State force in Mosul was ''well short of a thousand fighters'' but added that they were ''going to be very difficult to get out.''

''When in that type of dense urban terrain, a small number of fighters can control that territory,'' he added.

The Counterterrorism Service was established by the United States soon after the 2003 invasion to conduct raids to capture or kill militants. It reports directly to the prime minister and has assumed a lead role in large-scale urban operations against the Islamic State because it is the best trained and most capable of Iraq's fighting forces.

The Iraqi Army, which the American-led coalition has worked to rebuild after the loss of Mosul to the Islamic State in 2014, reports to the Defense Ministry. The Federal Police and the Emergency Response Division both report to the Interior Ministry.

''The organizations involved in the Mosul campaign have different reporting chains,'' said David M. Witty, a retired Special Forces colonel with the United States Army and a former adviser to the Counterterrorism Service. ''The various ministries that the units report to are competing fiefdoms, each struggling for power, influence, prestige and resources.''

The Iraqis struggled to synchronize their forces when they began their offensive to retake the eastern half of Mosul in October. But officials with the United States military insist that coordination among the Iraqi forces later improved with the help of American advisers.

Follow Michael R. Gordon on Twitter @gordonnyt.

Evacuating a wounded man by boat on the Tigris River, south of Mosul, on Thursday. The city is teeming with desperate civilians. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SUHAIB SALEM/REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020170505ed550005z



Magazine
The Magazine’ Money Issue

By BILL WASIK 
764 words
4 May 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

Money, it’ said, makes the world go round. While that might not be literally true —arth, much like its wealthiest inhabitants, moves forward through sheer inertia, a kinetic inheritance bestowed at its creation —oney undeniably does make things go around the world. An astonishing number of things, in fact: The weight of goods moved by ship alone each year now surpasses 10 billion tons, or nearly 3,000 pounds of stuff for every human being on the planet. (Or if you prefer, imagine it as 27,000 Empire State Buildings, or 15 times the weight of all the cows on Earth.) The estimated annual value of global trade since 1979 has increased tenfold, to more than $16 trillion, a figure nearly equivalent to the entire G.D.P. of the United States.

The consequences of all this global exchange have been profound, and not merely in an economic sense. Trade may not have made the world “mall”if anything, it feels more capacious and complex than ever) or “lat”its relative economic opportunities and its physical form both remain irreducibly three-dimensional, whatever Tom Friedman or Kyrie Irving might tell you), but our hyperglobalized economy has certainly made the world strange, as the interconnections of capital have brought about other, unforeseen types of connection. Smartphones, designed largely in California and manufactured almost entirely in Asia, proliferate only thanks to conflict minerals mined largely (and often brutally) in Africa. Recently a dispute over South Korea’ missile-defense system prompted China to retaliate against Korea’ exports of pop music and soap operas, which have become wildly popular with Chinese consumers. The propagandists of ISIS use American meme generators to lure potential fighters from Europe and elsewhere. Money pulls soccer talent from the developing world’ farms and slums and sends it across the developed world, creating unlikely national heroes in the process.

This week’ Money Issue tries to capture some of that intense interdependence, gathering a collection of stories in which global trade —or good and ill —as forged surprising links among nations. In Namibia, an extraordinary influx of investment from China, now unquestionably the world’ expansionist superpower, has utterly transformed local economies and communities. In Chile, Korea’ infectious pop music has found an unusual foothold. The harvesters of the once-obscure açíerry in Brazil have had their livelihoods improved but also complicated by a surge of demand in the United States.

If a common theme emerges from these pages, it is that politicians, in trying to enrich their citizens or themselves, can steer the flows —ut only to a point. Alabama’ tax breaks have helped import hundreds of airplane-industry jobs from Europe, even as similar tax breaks by Britain and Canada have exploded Hollywood’ visual-effects industry. Tens of thousands of Filipino caregivers have gone to Israel to tend to its aging population, but the contortions of ideology have kept them from being entirely welcomed.

This issue arrives at a moment when a new class of political leader, in Europe and the United States, has arisen to denounce the effects of trade —nd to demand that the world’ nations become more distinct, its alliances wind down, its weird ties unbind. But if the promiscuous connections of global capitalism have made the planet more strange, they have helped forge a real acquaintance among peoples who once were strangers, by making the handiwork of each more familiar and legible to the other. The new nationalists may try to stanch the flow of goods (through tariffs and tax policy) and jobs (by backing out of international trade agreements) and workers (through draconian restrictions in migration). But they will be hard pressed to stanch the impulse among their citizens, one born of curiosity and acquisitiveness, to keep getting the best of whatever (and whomever) the world can give. Bellow all you like about America First, or la France pour les Françis, or anyplace else üer alles. As of 2017, at least, capital and its incessant planetary movements still reliably make a mockery of such slogans.

Sign up for  our newsletter  to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Correction: June 4, 2017, Sunday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An essay on May 7 about the globalization of trade misidentified a component of smartphones. “onflict minerals”which are taken from conflict zones) —ot rare-earth metals —re mined largely in Africa.

Illustration by Stephen Doyle 

Document NYTFEED020170504ed54002e6



NEWS ANALYSIS
National Desk; SECTA
Trump, Bullish on Mideast Peace, Will Need More Than Confidence

By PETER BAKER 
1,389 words
4 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
16
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Ever since Britain declared 100 years ago that there should be a Jewish homeland in Palestine, harmony has eluded that dry, benighted land. Presidents and kings and prime ministers and diplomats and special envoys have labored for a century in a futile search for peace.

President Trump, however, is not daunted by the challenge of bringing together Israelis and Palestinians. ''It's something that, I think, is frankly maybe not as difficult as people have thought over the years,'' he said on Wednesday.

Whatever else may be said of him, Mr. Trump does not suffer from a confidence deficit. As he hosted the Palestinian leader, Mahmoud Abbas, Mr. Trump proclaimed that he would be the president who finally makes peace in the Middle East. ''We will get this done,'' he said. He even suggested that, with his leadership, ''hopefully there won't be such hatred for very long.''

Never mind that he also thought repealing and replacing his predecessor's health care program would be ''so easy.'' Or that he predicted he would have no trouble bending North Korea to his will, or forcing Mexico to pay for a border wall. Then there was Mr. Trump's assertion as a candidate that he knew more about the Islamic State than the generals. And his insistence that he could ''fairly quickly'' pay off the entire $19 trillion national debt accumulated over the last 182 years.

Braggadocio, of course, has been at the center of Mr. Trump's persona for decades, and arguably helped make him into a swaggering celebrity real estate tycoon and reality television star with enough appeal to win the presidency. In the White House, though, it has historically been more problematic. Presidents who make bold predictions often come to regret them. All Mr. Trump would have to do is ask those who, for decades, have banged their heads against the Middle East brick wall.

''When the president says we'll do this deal, he thinks in terms of a one-off real estate deal,'' said Aaron David Miller, a former Middle East negotiator who spent years trying to bring Israelis and Palestinians together. ''And while that's partly true,'' the specific issues dividing Israelis and Palestinians ''transcend the 'art of the deal' in ways I'm not sure he can now even begin to imagine.''

Mr. Trump's introduction to Mr. Abbas made that plain. The president said he would do ''whatever is necessary'' to negotiate an agreement without offering any sense of how he intends to do that, or what such an agreement might look like.

Mr. Abbas, by contrast, repeated the conditions the Palestinians have insisted on for years -- the creation of an independent Palestinian state based on borders that existed before the Arab-Israeli War of 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital; the right of return for refugees; and freedom for prisoners in Israeli cells. That formulation has been a nonstarter for Israel, which itself has shown no sign of backing off its own fixed positions.

Mr. Trump has made clear that details do not matter to him, abandoning the longtime American commitment to the so-called two-state solution. When he hosted Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel in February, Mr. Trump said he would be fine with either a two-state or a one-state solution if both sides agreed. Palestinians hoping he might be more supportive of the two-state plan with Mr. Abbas were disappointed when Mr. Trump made no mention of it on Wednesday.

''We want to create peace between Israel and the Palestinians,'' Mr. Trump said. ''We will get it done. We will be working so hard to get it done.''

Turning to Mr. Abbas, he added, ''I think there's a very, very good chance, and I think you feel the same way.''

Mr. Abbas, 82, who was among the negotiators at the signing of the Oslo Accords on the White House lawn in 1993, indicated that he did feel optimistic that, nearly a quarter-century later, Mr. Trump might finally build on that initial agreement to forge a final resolution.

Praising Mr. Trump's ''courageous stewardship,'' ''wisdom'' and ''great negotiating ability,'' Mr. Abbas said, ''We believe that we can be partners, true partners, to you to bring about a historic peace treaty.''

Mr. Abbas implored Mr. Trump to understand the Palestinian perspective. ''It's about time for Israel to end its occupation of our people and of our land after 50 years,'' he said. ''We are the only remaining people in the world that still live under occupation. We are aspiring and want to achieve our freedom, our dignity and our right to self-determination.''

Echoing Israel's position, Mr. Trump pressed Mr. Abbas to discourage Palestinian instigation against Israelis. ''There cannot be lasting peace unless the Palestinian leaders speak in a unified voice against incitement to violence and hate,'' Mr. Trump said. He did not publicly mention Palestinian financial payments to the families of convicted terrorists, but his spokesman, Sean Spicer, said Mr. Trump raised the issue privately.

Mr. Abbas insisted that Palestinians were not preaching hatred. ''I affirm to you that we are raising our youth, our children, our grandchildren on a culture of peace,'' he said, a contention Israeli officials would reject.

By all accounts, Mr. Trump seems genuinely determined to pursue Middle East peace and has assigned his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, and his longtime lawyer, Jason Greenblatt, to lead the effort. The president may visit Israel this month before a scheduled trip to Europe.

Mr. Trump seems drawn to the idea of succeeding where others have failed. ''Over the course of my lifetime, I've always heard that perhaps the toughest deal to make is the deal between the Israelis and the Palestinians,'' Mr. Trump said. ''Let's see if we can prove them wrong.''

Yet few think conditions are ripe. Aging and unpopular, Mr. Abbas may not have the clout to deliver even if he were willing to make concessions. Similarly, Mr. Netanyahu, now in his fourth term and under corruption investigations, faces significant pressure from his political right not to make a deal, and does not seem especially eager to do so anyway. Both leaders have an interest in making Mr. Trump think they are serious even if they are not.

''I think the Palestinian calculation is that they can follow this further than Netanyahu can,'' said Grant Rumley, the co-author of ''The Last Palestinian,'' a biography of Mr. Abbas to be published in July. ''I think they expect that when the time comes to resist or say no to Trump, as it inevitably will for both leaders, that Abbas can do so and still maintain his grip on power, while the same likely cannot be said for Netanyahu.''

John Hannah, senior counselor at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies who served as former Vice President Dick Cheney's national security adviser, said failure has a cost. ''The peace process is nothing if not a huge diplomatic time suck,'' he said. ''And the more time the president and his top advisers spend trying to push this particular rock up that hill, the less time they are focused on addressing the profound strategic challenges like Iran, ISIS and Al Qaeda.''

Still, Jeremy Ben-Ami, the president of J Street, a pro-peace lobbying group in Washington, said ''there's a scenario where this falls into his lap later in his term, not necessarily because of the brilliance of his diplomacy.'' With Sunni Arab states aligned with Israel in the regional struggle with Iran, he said, pressure may build for a resolution to the Palestinian question.

If nothing else, Mr. Ben-Ami said, not being steeped in the details has advantages. ''People who've been hardened by 20 or 30 years of doing this may think they know it all and they come in with their preconceived approach and it doesn't work,'' he said. ''So maybe this is better.''

Follow Peter Baker @peterbakernyt on Twitter.

President Trump with the Palestinian leader, Mahmoud Abbas, at the White House on Wednesday. ''We will get this done,'' Mr. Trump said of a peace deal. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170504ed540006d



FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
Social Insecurity

By FARHAD MANJOO 
5,874 words
30 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
39
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

In early January, I went to see Mark Zuckerberg at MPK20, a concrete-and-steel building on the campus of Facebook's headquarters, which sits across a desolate highway from the marshy salt flats of Menlo Park, Calif. The Frank Gehry-designed building has a pristine nine-acre rooftop garden, yet much of the interior -- a meandering open-plan hallway -- appears unfinished. There are exposed air ducts and I-beams scribbled with contractors' marks. Many of the internal walls are unpainted plywood. The space looks less like the headquarters of one of the world's wealthiest companies and more like a Chipotle with standing desks. It's an aesthetic meant to reflect -- and perhaps also inspire employee allegiance to -- one of Facebook's founding ideologies: that things are never quite finished, that nothing is permanent, that you should always look for a chance to take an ax to your surroundings.

The mood in overwhelmingly liberal Silicon Valley at the time, days before Donald Trump's inauguration, was grim. But Zuckerberg, who had recently returned from his 700-acre estate on the Hawaiian island of Kauai, is preternaturally unable to look anything other than excited about the future. ''Hey, guys!'' he beamed, greeting me and Mike Isaac, a Times colleague who covers Facebook. Zuckerberg wore a short-sleeve gray T-shirt, jeans and sneakers, which is his Steve Jobsian daily uniform: Indoor Zuck.

Zuckerberg used to be a nervous speaker, but he has become much less so. He speaks quickly but often unloads full paragraphs of thought, and sometimes his arguments are so polished that they sound rehearsed, which happened often that morning. ''2016 was an interesting year for us,'' he said as the three of us, plus a P.R. executive, sat around a couple of couches in the glass-walled conference room where he conducts many of his meetings. (There are many perks to working at Facebook, but no one, not even Zuckerberg, has a private office.) It was an understatement and a nod to the obvious: Facebook, once a mere app on your phone, had become a global political and cultural force, and the full implications of that transformation had begun to come into view last year. ''If you look at the history of Facebook, when we started off, there really wasn't news as part of it,'' Zuckerberg went on. But as Facebook grew and became a bigger part of how people learn about the world, the company had been slow to adjust to its new place in people's lives. The events of 2016, he said, ''set off a number of conversations that we're still in the middle of.''

Nearly two billion people use Facebook every month, about 1.2 billion of them daily. The company, which Zuckerberg co-founded in his Harvard dorm room 13 years ago, has become the largest and most influential entity in the news business, commanding an audience greater than that of any American or European television news network, any newspaper or magazine in the Western world and any online news outlet. It is also the most powerful mobilizing force in politics, and it is fast replacing television as the most consequential entertainment medium. Just five years after its initial public offering, Facebook is one of the 10 highest market-capitalized public companies in the world.

As recently as a year ago, Zuckerberg might have proudly rattled off these facts as a testament to Facebook's power. But over the course of 2016, Facebook's gargantuan influence became its biggest liability. During the U.S. election, propagandists -- some working for money, others for potentially state-sponsored lulz -- used the service to turn fake stories into viral sensations, like the one about Pope Francis' endorsing Trump (he hadn't). And fake news was only part of a larger conundrum. With its huge reach, Facebook has begun to act as the great disseminator of the larger cloud of misinformation and half-truths swirling about the rest of media. It sucks up lies from cable news and Twitter, then precisely targets each lie to the partisan bubble most receptive to it.

After studying how people shared 1.25 million stories during the campaign, a team of researchers at M.I.T. and Harvard implicated Facebook and Twitter in the larger failure of media in 2016. The researchers found that social media created a right-wing echo chamber: a ''media network anchored around Breitbart developed as a distinct and insulated media system, using social media as a backbone to transmit a hyperpartisan perspective to the world.'' The findings partially echoed a long-held worry about social news: that people would use sites like Facebook to cocoon themselves into self-reinforcing bubbles of confirmatory ideas, to the detriment of civility and a shared factual basis from which to make collective, democratic decisions. A week and a half after the election, President Obama bemoaned ''an age where there's so much active misinformation and it's packaged very well and it looks the same when you see it on a Facebook page or you turn on your television.''

After the election, Zuckerberg offered a few pat defenses of Facebook's role. ''I'm actually quite proud of the impact that we were able to have on civic discourse over all,'' he said when we spoke in January. Misinformation on Facebook was not as big a problem as some believed it was, but Facebook nevertheless would do more to battle it, he pledged. Echo chambers were a concern, but if the source was people's own confirmation bias, was it really Facebook's problem to solve?

It was hard to tell how seriously Zuckerberg took the criticisms of his service and its increasingly paradoxical role in the world. He had spent much of his life building a magnificent machine to bring people together. By the most literal measures, he'd succeeded spectacularly, but what had that connection wrought? Across the globe, Facebook now seems to benefit actors who want to undermine the global vision at its foundation. Supporters of Trump and the European right-wing nationalists who aim to turn their nations inward and dissolve alliances, trolls sowing cross-border paranoia, even ISIS with its skillful social-media recruiting and propagandizing -- all of them have sought in their own ways to split the Zuckerbergian world apart. And they are using his own machine to do it.

In Silicon Valley, current events tend to fade into the background. The Sept. 11 attacks, the Iraq war, the financial crisis and every recent presidential election occurred, for the tech industry, on some parallel but distant timeline divorced from the everyday business of digitizing the world. Then Donald Trump won. In the 17 years I've spent covering Silicon Valley, I've never seen anything shake the place like his victory. In the span of a few months, the Valley has been transformed from a politically disengaged company town into a center of anti-Trump resistance and fear. A week after the election, one start-up founder sent me a private message on Twitter: ''I think it's worse than I thought,'' he wrote. ''Originally I thought 18 months. I've cut that in half.'' Until what? ''Apocalypse. End of the world.''

Trump's campaign rhetoric felt particularly personal for an industry with a proud reliance upon immigrants. Stephen K. Bannon, Trump's campaign chief executive and now chief White House strategist, once suggested that there were too many South Asian chief executives in tech. More than 15 percent of Facebook's employees are in the United States on H-1B visas, a program that Trump has pledged to revamp. But the outcome also revealed the depth of the Valley's disconnection with much of the rest of the country. ''I saw an election that was just different from the way I think,'' says Joshua Reeves, a Bay Area native who is a co-founder of Gusto, a human-resources software start-up. ''I have this engineering brain that wants to go to this analytical, rational, nonemotional way of looking at things, and it was clear in this election that we're trending in a different direction, toward spirited populism.''

Underneath it all was a nagging feeling of complicity. Trump had benefited from a media environment that is now shaped by Facebook -- and, more to the point, shaped by a single Facebook feature, the same one to which the company owes its remarkable ascent to social-media hegemony: the computationally determined list of updates you see every time you open the app. The list has a formal name, News Feed. But most users are apt to think of it as Facebook itself.

If it's an exaggeration to say that News Feed has become the most influential source of information in the history of civilization, it is only slightly so. Facebook created News Feed in 2006 to solve a problem: In the social-media age, people suddenly had too many friends to keep up with. At the time, Facebook was just a collection of profiles, lacking any kind of central organization. To figure out what any of your connections were up to, you had to visit each of their profiles to see if anything had changed. News Feed fixed that. Every time you open Facebook, it hunts through the network, collecting every post from every connection -- information that, for most Facebook users, would be too overwhelming to process themselves. Then it weighs the merits of each post before presenting you with a feed sorted in order of importance: a hyperpersonalized front page designed just for you.

Scholars and critics have been warning of the solipsistic irresistibility of algorithmic news at least since 2001, when the constitutional-law professor Cass R. Sunstein warned, in his book ''Republic.com,'' of the urgent risks posed to democracy ''by any situation in which thousands or perhaps millions or even tens of millions of people are mainly listening to louder echoes of their own voices.'' (In 2008, I piled on with my own book, ''True Enough: Learning to Live in a Post-Fact Society.'') In 2011, the digital activist and entrepreneur Eli Pariser, looking at similar issues, gave this phenomenon a memorable name in the title of his own book: ''The Filter Bubble.''

Facebook says its own researchers have been studying the filter bubble since 2010. In 2015, they published an in-house study, which was criticized by independent researchers, concluding that Facebook's effect on the diversity of people's information diet was minimal. News Feed's personalization algorithm did filter out some opposing views in your feed, the study claimed, but the bigger effect was users' own choices. When News Feed did show people views contrary to their own, they tended not to click on the stories. For Zuckerberg, the finding let Facebook off the hook. ''It's a good-sounding theory, and I can get why people repeat it, but it's not true,'' he said on a call with analysts last summer.

Employees got the same message. ''When Facebook cares about something, they spin up teams to address it, and Zuck will come out and talk about it all the time,'' one former executive told me. ''I have never heard of anything close to that on the filter bubble. I never sensed that this was a problem he wanted us to tackle. It was always positioned as an interesting intellectual question but not something that we're going to go focus on.''

Then, last year, Facebook's domination of the news became a story itself. In May, Gizmodo reported that some editors who had worked on Facebook's Trending Topics section had been suppressing conservative points of view. To smooth things over, Zuckerberg convened a meeting of conservative media figures and eventually significantly reduced the role of human editors. Then in September, Facebook deleted a post by a Norwegian writer that included the photojournalist Nick Ut's iconic photo of a naked 9-year-old girl, Phan Thi Kim Phuc, running in terror after a napalm attack during the Vietnam War, on the grounds that it ran afoul of Facebook's prohibition of child nudity.

Facebook, under criticism, reinstated the picture, but the photo incident stuck with Zuckerberg. He would bring it up unbidden to staff members and to reporters. It highlighted, for him, the difficulty of building a policy framework for what Facebook was trying to do. Zuckerberg wanted to become a global news distributor that is run by machines, rather than by humans who would try to look at every last bit of content and exercise considered judgment. ''It's something I think we're still figuring out,'' he told me in January. ''There's a lot more to do here than what we've done. And I think we're starting to realize this now as well.''

It struck me as an unsatisfying answer, and it later became apparent that Zuckerberg seemed to feel the same way. On a Sunday morning about a month after the first meeting, I got a call from a Facebook spokesman. Zuckerberg wanted to chat again. Could Mike and I come back on Monday afternoon?

We met again in the same conference room. Same Zuck outfit, same P.R. executive. But the Zuckerberg who greeted us seemed markedly different. He was less certain in his pronouncements than he had been the month before, more expansive and questioning. Earlier that day, Zuckerberg's staff had sent me a draft of a 5,700-word manifesto that, I was told, he spent weeks writing. The document, ''Building Global Community,'' argued that until now, Facebook's corporate goal had merely been to connect people. But that was just Step 1. According to the manifesto, Facebook's ''next focus will be developing the social infrastructure for community -- for supporting us, for keeping us safe, for informing us, for civic engagement, and for inclusion of all.'' If it was a nebulous crusade, it was also vast in its ambition.

The last manifesto that Zuckerberg wrote was in 2012, as part of Facebook's application to sell its stock to the public. It explained Facebook's philosophy -- what he called ''the hacker way'' -- and sketched an unorthodox path for the soon-to-be-public company. ''Facebook was not originally created to be a company,'' he wrote. ''It was built to accomplish a social mission: to make the world more open and connected.''

What's striking about that 2012 letter, read through the prism of 2017, is its certainty that a more ''open and connected'' world is by definition a better one. ''When I started Facebook, the idea of connecting the world was not controversial,'' Zuckerberg said now. ''The default assumption was that the world was incrementally just moving in that direction. So I thought we can connect some people and do our part in helping move in that direction.'' But now, he said, whether it was wise to connect the world was ''actually a real question.''

Zuckerberg's new manifesto never quite accepts blame for any of the global ills that have been laid at Facebook's feet. Yet by the standards of a company release, it is remarkable for the way it concedes that the company's chief goal -- wiring the globe -- is controversial. ''There are questions about whether we can make a global community that works for everyone,'' Zuckerberg writes, ''and whether the path ahead is to connect more or reverse course.'' He also confesses misgivings about Facebook's role in the news. ''Giving everyone a voice has historically been a very positive force for public discourse because it increases the diversity of ideas shared,'' he writes. ''But the past year has also shown it may fragment our shared sense of reality.''

At the time of our second interview, the manifesto was still only a draft, and I was surprised by how unsure Zuckerberg seemed about it in person. He had almost as many questions for us -- about whether we understood what he was trying to say, how we thought it would land in the media -- as we had for him. When I suggested that it might be perceived as an attack on Trump, he looked dismayed. He noted several times that he had been noodling over these ideas since long before November. A few weeks earlier, there was media speculation, fueled by a postelection tour of America by Zuckerberg and his wife, that he was laying the groundwork to run against Trump in 2020, and in this meeting he took pains to shoot down the rumors. When I asked if he had chatted with Obama about the former president's critique of Facebook, Zuckerberg paused for several seconds, nearly to the point of awkwardness, before answering that he had.

Facebook's spokespeople later called to stress that Obama was only one of many people to whom he had spoken. In other words: Don't read this as a partisan anti-Trump manifesto. But if the company pursues the admittedly airy aims outlined in ''Building Global Community,'' the changes will echo across media and politics, and some are bound to be considered partisan. The risks are especially clear for changes aimed at adding layers of journalistic ethics across News Feed, which could transform the public's perception of Facebook, not to mention shake the foundations of its business.

The Facebook app, and consequently News Feed, is run by one of Zuckerberg's most influential lieutenants, a 34-year-old named Chris Cox, the company's chief product officer. Ten years ago, Cox dropped out of a graduate program in computer science at Stanford to join Facebook. One of his first assignments was on the team that created News Feed. Since then, he has become an envoy to the media industry. Don Graham, the longtime publisher of The Washington Post who was for years a member of Facebook's board, told me that he felt Cox, among Facebook staff, ''was at the 99.9th percentile of interest in news. He thought it was important to society, and he wanted Facebook to get it right.''

For the typical user, Cox explained when I met him on a morning in October at MPK20, News Feed is computing the relative merits of about 2,000 potential posts in your network every time you open the app. In sorting these posts, Facebook does not optimize for any single metric: not clicks or reading time or likes. Instead, he said, ''what you really want to get to is whether somebody, at the end of the day, would say, 'Hey, my experience today was meaningful.' '' Personalizing News Feed, in other words, is a very big ''math problem,'' incorporating countless metrics in extraordinarily complicated ways. Zuckerberg calls it ''a modern A.I. problem.''

Last summer, I sat in on two meetings in another glass-walled MPK20 conference room, in which News Feed's engineers, designers, user-research experts and managers debated several small alterations to how News Feed displays certain kinds of posts. The conversations were far from exciting -- people in jeans on couches looking at PowerPoints, talking quietly about numbers -- and yet I found them mesmerizing, a demonstration of the profound cultural differences between how news companies like The Times work and how Facebook does. The first surprise was how slowly things move, contrary to the freewheeling culture of ''the hacker way.'' In one meeting, the team spent several minutes discussing the merits of bold text in a certain News Feed design. One blessing of making social software is that you can gauge any potential change to your product by seeing how your users react to it. That is also the curse: At Facebook, virtually every change to the app, no matter how small or obviously beneficial, is thoroughly tested on different segments of the audience before it's rolled out to everyone.

The people who work on News Feed aren't making decisions that turn on fuzzy human ideas like ethics, judgment, intuition or seniority. They are concerned only with quantifiable outcomes about people's actions on the site. That data, at Facebook, is the only real truth. And it is a particular kind of truth: The News Feed team's ultimate mission is to figure out what users want -- what they find ''meaningful,'' to use Cox and Zuckerberg's preferred term -- and to give them more of that.

This ideal runs so deep that the people who make News Feed often have to put aside their own notions of what's best. ''One of the things we've all learned over the years is that our intuition can be wrong a fair amount of the time,'' John Hegeman, the vice president of product management and a News Feed team member, told me. ''There are things you don't expect will happen. And we learn a lot from that process: Why didn't that happen, and what might that mean?'' But it is precisely this ideal that conflicts with attempts to wrangle the feed in the way press critics have called for. The whole purpose of editorial guidelines and ethics is often to suppress individual instincts in favor of some larger social goal. Facebook finds it very hard to suppress anything that its users' actions say they want. In some cases, it has been easier for the company to seek out evidence that, in fact, users don't want these things at all.

Facebook's two-year-long battle against ''clickbait'' is a telling example. Early this decade, the internet's headline writers discovered the power of stories that trick you into clicking on them, like those that teasingly withhold information from their headlines: ''Dustin Hoffman Breaks Down Crying Explaining Something That Every Woman Sadly Already Experienced.'' By the fall of 2013, clickbait had overrun News Feed. Upworthy, a progressive activism site co-founded by Pariser, the author of ''The Filter Bubble,'' that relied heavily on teasing headlines, was attracting 90 million readers a month to its feel-good viral posts.

If a human editor ran News Feed, she would look at the clickbait scourge and make simple, intuitive fixes: Turn down the Upworthy knob. But Facebook approaches the feed as an engineering project rather than an editorial one. When it makes alterations in the code that powers News Feed, it's often only because it has found some clear signal in its data that users are demanding the change. In this sense, clickbait was a riddle. In surveys, people kept telling Facebook that they hated teasing headlines. But if that was true, why were they clicking on them? Was there something Facebook's algorithm was missing, some signal that would show that despite the clicks, clickbait was really sickening users?

To answer these questions, Cox and his team hired survey panels of more than a thousand paid ''professional raters'' around the world who answer questions about how well News Feed is working. Starting in 2013, Facebook began adding first dozens and then hundreds and then thousands of data points that were meant to teach the artificial-intelligence system that runs News Feed how people were reacting to their feeds. Facebook noticed that people would sometimes click open a clickbaity story but spend very little time on it. In other cases, lots of people would click on a story but few would share or Like it. Headlines on stories that people seemed to reject often contained a set of signature phrases (''you'll never believe,'' ''this one trick,'' etc.) or they came from a set of repeat-offender publishers.

The more such signals Facebook incorporated into the feed, the more clickbait began to drop out of the feed. Since its 2013 peak, Upworthy's traffic has declined; it now averages 17.5 million visitors a month. The site has since disavowed clickbait. ''We sort of unleashed a monster,'' Peter Koechley, Upworthy's co-founder, told a conference in 2015. ''Sorry for that.''

Cox suggested that it was not exactly correct to say that Facebook, as a company, decided to fight clickbait. What actually happened was that Facebook found better ways to listen to users, who were themselves rejecting clickbait. ''That comes out of good-quality panels and measurement systems, rather than an individual decision saying, 'Hey, I really want us to care about clickbait,' '' he says.

This approach -- looking for signs of user dissatisfaction -- could curb stories that constitute the most egregious examples of misinformation. Adam Mosseri, Facebook's vice president in charge of News Feed, says that Facebook has begun testing an algorithm change that would look at whether people share an article after reading it. If few of the people who click on a story decide to share it, that might suggest people feel misled by it and it would get lower billing in the feed.

But the solution to the broader misinformation dilemma -- the pervasive climate of rumor, propaganda and conspiracy theories that Facebook has inadvertently incubated -- may require something that Facebook has never done: ignoring the likes and dislikes of its users. Facebook believes the pope-endorses-Trump type of made-up news stories are only a tiny minority of pieces that appear in News Feed; they account for a fraction of 1 percent of the posts, according to Mosseri. The question the company faces now is whether the misinformation problem resembles clickbait at all, and whether its solutions will align as neatly with Facebook's worldview. Facebook's entire project, when it comes to news, rests on the assumption that people's individual preferences ultimately coincide with the public good, and that if it doesn't appear that way at first, you're not delving deeply enough into the data. By contrast, decades of social-science research shows that most of us simply prefer stuff that feels true to our worldview even if it isn't true at all and that the mining of all those preference signals is likely to lead us deeper into bubbles rather than out of them.

After the election, Margaret Sullivan, the Washington Post columnist and a former public editor of The Times, called on Facebook to hire an executive editor who would monitor News Feed with an eye to fact-checking, balance and editorial integrity. Jonah Peretti, the founder of BuzzFeed, told me that he wanted Facebook to use its data to create a kind of reputational score for online news, as well as explore ways of strengthening reporting through monetary partnerships.

''At some point, if they really want to address this, they have to say, 'This is good information' and 'This is bad information,' '' says Emily Bell, the director for the Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia Journalism School. ''They have to say, 'These are the kinds of information sources that we want to privilege, and these others are not going to be banned from the platform, but they are not going to thrive.' In other words, they have to create a hierarchy, and they're going to have to decide how they're going to transfer wealth into the publishing market.''

There aren't many technical reasons Facebook could not implement such plans. The hurdles are institutional and philosophical, and ultimately financial too. Late last year, Facebook outlined a modest effort to curb misinformation. News Feed would now carry warning labels: If a friend shares a viral story that has been flagged and shot down by one of Facebook's fact-checking partners (including Snopes and PolitiFact), you'll be cautioned that the piece has been ''disputed.'' But even that slight change has been met with fury on the right, with Breitbart and The Daily Caller fuming that Facebook had teamed up with liberal hacks motivated by partisanship. If Facebook were to take more significant action, like hiring human editors, creating a reputational system or paying journalists, the company would instantly become something it has long resisted: a media company rather than a neutral tech platform.

In many ways, the worry over how Facebook changes the news is really a manifestation of a grander problem with News Feed, which is simply dominance itself. News Feed's aggressive personalization wouldn't be much of an issue if it weren't crowding out every other source. ''To some degree I feel like the Pottery Barn Rule applies,'' says Pariser, the Upworthy chief executive. ''They play a critical role in our information circulatory system, and so -- lucky them -- all of the problems therein are significantly on their shoulders.''

During our first meeting in January, I posed this question to Zuckerberg: ''When you see various problems in the media, do you say to yourself, 'I run Facebook, I can solve that?' ''

''Um,'' he started, and then paused, weighing his words as carefully as American presidents once did. ''Not usually.'' He argued that some of Facebook's critics' proposed fixes for news on the service, such as hiring editors, were impractical due to Facebook's scale and global diversity. Personalization, he said, remained a central tenet. ''It really gets back to, like, what do people want at a deep level,'' he said. ''There's this oversimplified narrative that a company can get very successful by just scratching a very superficial itch, and I don't really think that's right over the long term.''

Yet by our second meeting, Zuckerberg's position seemed to have evolved. Facebook had by then announced plans for the Facebook Journalism Project, in which the company would collaborate with news companies on new products. Facebook also created a project to promote ''news literacy'' among its users, and it hired the former CNN news anchor Campbell Brown to manage the partnership between it and news companies. Zuckerberg's tone toward critics of Facebook's approach to news had also grown far more conciliatory. ''I think it's really important to get to the core of the actual problem,'' he said. ''I also really think that the core social thing that needs to happen is that a common understanding needs to exist. And misinformation I view as one of the things that can possibly erode common understanding. But sensationalism and polarization and other things, I actually think, are probably even stronger and more prolific effects. And we have to work on all these things. I think we need to listen to all the feedback on this.''

Still, in both our conversation and his new manifesto, Zuckerberg remained preoccupied with the kind of problems that could be solved by the kind of hyperconnectivity he believed in, not the ones caused by it. ''There's a social infrastructure that needs to get built for modern problems in order for humanity to get to the next level,'' he said. ''Having more people oriented not just toward short-term things but toward building the long-term social infrastructure that needs to get built across all these things in order to enable people to come together is going to be a really important thing over the next decades.'' By way of example, he pointed to Safety Check, Facebook's system for letting people tell their friends that they've survived some kind of dangerous event, like a natural disaster or terrorist attack.

''We're getting to a point where the biggest opportunities I think in the world ... problems like preventing pandemics from spreading or ending terrorism, all these things, they require a level of coordination and connection that I don't think can only be solved by the current systems that we have,'' Zuckerberg told me. What's needed, he argues, is some global superstructure to advance humanity.

This is not an especially controversial idea; Zuckerberg is arguing for a kind of digital-era version of the global institution-building that the Western world engaged in after World War II. But because he is a chief executive and not an elected president, there is something frightening about his project. He is positioning Facebook -- and, considering that he commands absolute voting control of the company, he is positioning himself -- as a critical enabler of the next generation of human society. A minor problem with his mission is that it drips with megalomania, albeit of a particularly sincere sort. With his wife, Priscilla Chan, Zuckerberg has pledged to give away nearly all of his wealth to a variety of charitable causes, including a long-term medical-research project to cure all disease. His desire to take on global social problems through digital connectivity, and specifically through Facebook, feels like part of the same impulse.

Yet Zuckerberg is often blasébout the messiness of the transition between the world we're in and the one he wants to create through software. Building new ''social infrastructure'' usually involves tearing older infrastructure down. If you manage the demolition poorly, you might undermine what comes next. In the case of the shattering media landscape, Zuckerberg seems finally to have at least noticed this problem and may yet come up with fixes for it. But in the meantime, Facebook rushes headlong into murky new areas, uncovering new dystopian possibilities at every turn.

A few months after I spoke with Zuckerberg, Facebook held its annual developer conference in San Jose, Calif. At last year's show, Zuckerberg introduced an expanded version of Facebook's live streaming service which had been promised to revolutionize how we communicate. In the year since, Live had generated iconic scenes of protest, but it was also used to broadcast a terrorist attack in Munich and at least one suicide. Hours before Zuckerberg's appearance at the conference, police announced that a Cleveland man who had killed a stranger and posted a video on Facebook had shot himself after a manhunt.

But as he took the stage in San Jose, Zuckerberg was ebullient. He started with a few dad jokes and threatened to read his long manifesto on stage. For a brief moment, there was a shift in tone: Statesman Zuck. ''In all seriousness, this is an important time to work on building community,'' he said. He offered Facebook's condolences to the victim in Cleveland; the incident, he said, reminded Facebook that ''we have a lot more to do.''

Just as quickly, though, Zuckerberg then pivoted to Facebook's next marvel, a system for digitally augmenting your pictures and videos. The technical term for this is ''augmented reality.'' The name bursts with dystopian possibilities -- fake news on video rather than just text -- but Zuckerberg never mentioned them. The statesman had left the stage; before us stood an engineer.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Farhad Manjoo is a technology columnist for The New York Times. He is working on a book about what he calls the Frightful Five: Apple, Amazon, Google, Facebook and Microsoft -- the five technology giants that are swallowing up the rest of the economy.

The News Feed team at Facebook headquarters in Menlo Park, Calif. (MM40-MM41); Mark Zuckerberg at his desk. No one at the company has a private office. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SPENCER LOWELL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM42) DRAWING (DRAWING BY MIKE MCQUADE) (MM38-MM39) 

Document NYTF000020170430ed4u00077



World; Middle East
Pope Francis Urges U.S. and North Korea to Step Away from the Brink

By JASON HOROWITZ 
1,301 words
29 April 2017
22:48
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ROME —Pope Francis  urged the United States and North Korea  on Saturday to defuse their increasingly tense standoff and avert a potentially horrific conflict.

“ call on them, and I will call on them, as I have on leaders of different places, to work to resolve their problems through diplomatic avenues,”Pope Francis said, speaking aboard his plane as he returned to Rome from a trip to Egypt . Noting that North Korea’ missile program was not a new concern, he added that “hings have gotten too hot”nd suggested that “he United Nations has the duty to reassume, a little, its leadership because it’ been watered down.”

During a 30-minute news conference on his plane, Francis, steadying himself through rough turbulence, touched on a number of topics. He said he still had not received a request for a meeting with President Trump; he defended his appearance with the authoritarian president of Egypt , Abdel Fattah el-Sisi; and he again called refugee camps in Europe “oncentration camps.”

Francis partly deflected a question about how he would advise French Catholics taking part in next month’ presidential election , especially with Marine Le Pen, a far-right candidate with an anti-immigrant platform, on the ballot.

The pope said he did not know enough about French politics to respond, but, he said, “urope is in danger of breaking apart, this is true.”e noted that the migrant crisis fueled fears that destabilized the Continent, “ut we mustn’ forget that Europe is made by immigrants.”

“enturies and centuries of immigrants,”e said. “t’ us.”

That inclusive message has proved popular with liberals. But Francis, 80, also repeated language that some have criticized as insensitive or tone deaf.

Asked if he wanted to clarify remarks he made last week at a special prayer event for Christian martyrs when he said that refugee camps were like concentration camps , a comparison criticized by Jewish groups, the pope said, “t wasn’ a slip of the tongue.”

“here are refugee camps that are real concentration camps,”e said, adding, by way of explanation, that the refugees were detained in camps and could not get out.

The pope’ instruction to reporters on the plane that questions be limited to themes touched on during his Egypt visit meant that he skirted some pressing issues facing the Vatican , notably the lack of progress by his commission established to safeguard children from sexual abuse.

But Francis seemed eager to address one pressing geopolitical issue. He urged the United States and North Korea to step away from the brink and avoid a nuclear conflict that could, he said, be disastrous for “he future of humanity.”

His comments came just days after Mr. Trump said in an interview with Reuters  that there was a chance “hat we could end up having a major, major conflict with North Korea.”he president’ remarks seemed to undercut remarks by others in his administration to ease the dispute by raising the possibility of direct negotiations between the United States and North Korea.

Mr. Trump is scheduled to make his first trip abroad as president in May. His exact itinerary is unclear, but he is expected in Taormina, Sicily, for a meeting of the world’ leading economic powers at the end of the month. A visit with the pope is standard for American presidents traveling to Italy, but the two world leaders have a rocky history.

In February 2016, Francis responded to a question about Mr. Trump by saying, “ person who thinks only about building walls, wherever they may be, and not building bridges, is not a Christian.”

The pope’ view does not seem to have changed. In one of his Cairo speeches, Francis said: “emagogic forms of populism are on the rise. These certainly do not help to consolidate peace and stability.”

All of that has led to doubts about whether a meeting will actually happen. During a news conference at the White House this month with Prime Minister Paolo Gentiloni of Italy, Mr. Trump said, “ look very much forward to meeting the pope.”mmediately after, Mr. Trump’ spokesman, Sean Spicer , acknowledged that no meeting had been scheduled.

That was still the case as of Saturday evening.

“ still haven’ been informed by the secretary of state that a request has been made,”he pope said, “ut I meet every head of state who asks for an audience.”

Francis began the day celebrating an open-air Mass outside Cairo. He told a crowd of 15,000 people who had filled about half of the locked-down Air Defense Stadium that “he only fanaticism believers can have is that of charity.”

“ny other fanaticism does not come from God and is not pleasing to him,”e said.

The pope’ message echoed his strong and extensive remarks during the first day of his two-day trip to Egypt, when, in one of the most influential centers of Sunni Islamic learning, he spoke out  against radicalism and the use of religious language as a cloak for terrorism and violence.

On Saturday, he continued in that vein, saying that true faith required “irst crucifying our narrow notions of a God who reflects only our own understanding of omnipotence and power.”

“t is better not to believe than to be a false believer, a hypocrite!”e added.

People in white hats emblazoned with the message “ope of Peace in Egypt of Peace,”aved Egyptian flags and released yellow and white balloons, representing the Vatican colors. Above them, military helicopters circled and Republican Guards in dark camouflage patrolled the perimeter.

“’ so happy,”aid Nabil Shoukry, 55, who wore a scarf adorned with an image of Francis’ace. Mr. Shoukry, a Coptic Orthodox Christian, said he was taking part in the event “or praying.”

That has been a courageous act for Coptic Christians of late, as suicide bombers have attacked their churches, killing scores of worshipers. Francis mourned those victims on Friday night in a haunting ceremony at a cathedral. Saturday’ open-air Mass took place far east of Cairo, amid long arid stretches of rock, garbage piles and desert in the June 30 Stadium. The stadium is named in honor of the 2013 street protests that preceded Mr. Sisi’ ouster of his predecessor, who was supported by the Muslim Brotherhood , and the military takeover of the country.

Antonios Aziz Mina, a Coptic Catholic bishop of Giza, called the pope’ visit a blessing that showed solidarity with Egypt’ Christians, especially those killed in recent months by Islamist extremists. But the bishop showed similar deference to Mr. Sisi, who has cracked down on civil rights and dissent in Egypt, often with the support of the country’ Christian leaders.

“f the Muslim Brotherhood were still around, where would we be?”e said. “e were saved by the skin of our teeth. The Christians and the Muslims, Sisi saved us all.”

On his plane hours later, Francis suggested that his visit to Egypt should not be interpreted as a sign of support for Mr. Sisi. He did not intervene in local politics, the pope said.

“ speak of values,”rancis explained, adding that everyone could judge if the country “rings those values forward.”

* Balancing Act for Pope in Egypt: Outreach to Muslims, and Speaking Out for Christians 

* Was the Pope Wrong to Compare Refugee Centers to Concentration Camps? 

* Egypt Declares State of Emergency, as Attacks Undercut Promise of Security 

* Targeted by \b ISIS\b0 , Egyptian Christians Flee Violence 

* Attack on Coptic Cathedral in Cairo Kills Dozens 

President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt meeting with Pope Francis on Friday in Cairo. | Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170429ed4t004s9



U.S.
American Service Member Dies in Explosion Outside Mosul

By HELENE COOPER 
305 words
30 April 2017
00:46
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —n American service member was killed in an explosion on Saturday near Mosul, Iraq, the Pentagon said, as part of the battle to drive Islamic State fighters out of their last major stronghold in the country.

The United States Central Command did not identify the service member, pending notification of the family. A Central Command statement said that “ U.S. service member died from wounds sustained in an explosive device blast outside of Mosul, Iraq.”

American service members have been getting closer to the fighting in Iraq as Iraqi security forces have been engaged in urban warfare in West Mosul, where Islamic State fighters have had almost three years to dig into entrenched positions.

Iraqi civilians and soldiers, as well as militants, have suffered a number of deaths and injuries from mines and roadside bombs in East Mosul and West Mosul.

Saturday’ American casualty was the third this past week in the fight against the Islamic State. On Wednesday, two American soldiers were killed in Afghanistan during a raid on ISIS fighters. Pentagon officials said they might have been struck by friendly fire.

The Defense Department on Friday identified the soldiers, both of them Army Rangers, as Sgt. Joshua Rodgers, 22, and Sgt. Cameron Thomas, 23, deployed from Fort Benning, Ga. A third soldier was wounded in the operation, which targeted the “mir”f Islamic State militants in Afghanistan, Defense Department officials said.

The Mosul death is the second American military fatality since the fight to regain the city began last year. In October, a Navy chief petty officer, Jason C. Finan, 34, of Anaheim, Calif., was killed as a roadside bomb exploded north of the city.

* ‘riendly Fire’ay Have Killed 2 U.S. Soldiers in Afghanistan Raid

Document NYTFEED020170429ed4t005eh



National Desk; SECTA
(Almost) 100 Days Of Front Page Headlines About No. 45

By LARRY BUCHANAN, K.K. REBECCA LAI and ANJALI SINGHVI 
1,286 words
29 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
13
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Here are headlines from the print front page of The New York Times that covered the beginning of President Trump's administration. Headlines shown are from the next day's print newspaper.

DAY 1 JAN. 20 Trump, Sworn In, Issues A Call: 'This American Carnage Stops'

DAY 2 JAN. 21 Defiant Yet Jubilant Voices Flood U.S. Cities

DAY 3 JAN. 22 Trump's Rocky Start Jeopardizes Leverage DAY 4 JAN. 23 Upending Trade Policies, Trump Scraps Asia Pact

DAY 5 JAN. 24 Trump to Authorize Wall and Curtail Immigration

DAY 6 JAN. 25 Trump Rolls Out His Crackdown on Immigration

DAY 7 JAN. 26 Tax Plan Sows Confusion As Border Tensions Soar

DAY 8 JAN. 27 Trump Targets Muslim Areas in Refugee Ban

DAY 9 JAN. 28 Air Travelers Blocked And Held Under Immigration Order

DAY 10 JAN. 29 Trump Modifies Ban on Migrants as Outcry Grows

DAY 11 JAN. 30 Trump Fires Justice Chief Who Defied Him

DAY 12 JAN. 31 Trump's Court Pick Sets Up Political Clash

DAY 13 FEB. 1 Trump Embraces Change In Rules for Court Pick

DAY 14 FEB. 2 Trump Reverts to Pillars Of Obama Policies Abroad DAY 15 FEB. 3 Trump Vows Cuts in Wall St. Rules From Obama Era

DAY 16 FEB. 4 Borders Reopen to Visa Holders Barred From U.S.

DAY 17 FEB. 5 Legal Showdown Over Immigrants Tests Presidency DAY 18 FEB. 6 Justice Dept. Says a Ban On Travel Is Vital to Safety

DAY 19 FEB. 7 Judges Question Government Case For Travel Ban

DAY 20 FEB. 8 Court Pick Says Trump's Censure Is 'Demoralizing'

DAY 21 FEB. 9 Judges Refuse to Reinstate Travel Ban

DAY 22 FEB. 10 Blocked by Courts, Trump Weighs New Travel Order

DAY 23 FEB. 11 G.O.P.-Led States Race To Cement Their Priorities

DAY 24 FEB. 12 Tensions and Chaos Rattle National Security Council

DAY 25 FEB. 13 Facing Scrutiny Over Russia Call, Flynn Steps Down

DAY 26 FEB. 14 Trump Aides Had Contact With Russian Intelligence

DAY 27 FEB. 15 President Wants Ally to Review U.S. Spy Agencies

DAY 28 FEB. 16 Trump Delivers Heated Defense of First Month

DAY 29 FEB. 17 Familiar Targets Face Elimination In Trump Budget

DAY 30 FEB. 18 For $200,000, a Chance To Whisper in Trump's Ear

DAY 31 FEB. 19 Trump Associates Push Backdoor Ukraine Plan

DAY 32 FEB. 20 Military Officer Is Trump Choice for Security Job

DAY 33 FEB. 21 More Immigrants Face Deportation Under New Rules

DAY 34 FEB. 22 Trump Rescinds Obama Directive on Bathroom Use

DAY 35 FEB. 23 Mexico Weighs Mixed Signals From the U.S. DAY 36 FEB. 24 Trump Intensifies Criticism of F.B.I. and Journalists

DAY 37 FEB. 25 Agents Discover a New Freedom on Deportations

DAY 38 FEB. 26 Widespread Cuts in Trump Budget Bypass Military

DAY 39 FEB. 27 Trump Concedes Health Overhaul Is a Thorny Task

DAY 40 FEB. 28 Before Congress, Trump Urges End To 'Trivial Fights'

DAY 41 MARCH 1 Unity Is Elusive as G.O.P. Presses Health Overhaul

DAY 42 MARCH 2 Sessions Recuses Himself From Russia Investigation

DAY 43 MARCH 3 Set to Lift Rate, Fed Adopts Hope Felt by Investors DAY 44 MARCH 4 Trump Inherits Secret Cyberwar on North Korea

DAY 45 MARCH 5 F.B.I. Chief Pushes For Justice Dept. To Refute Trump

DAY 46 MARCH 6 Trump's New Ban Halts Travelers From 6 Nations

DAY 47 MARCH 7 Documents Said to Reveal Hacking Secrets of C.I.A.

DAY 48 MARCH 8 Health Groups Unite to Oppose Republican Bill

DAY 49 MARCH 9 Trump Jumps In, Trying to Propel Health Care Bill

DAY 50 MARCH 10 Steady Job Gains Set Stage For Fed to Raise Key Rate

DAY 51 MARCH 11 Tillerson Leads From Shadows of State Dept. DAY 52 MARCH 12 Economic Steam Pits Trump Goal Against Wary Fed

DAY 53 MARCH 13 24 Million More Among Uninsured Under G.O.P. Plan

DAY 54 MARCH 14 Senators in G.O.P. Suggest Changes for Health Bill

DAY 55 MARCH 15 Federal Judge Blocks New Ban on Travel to U.S.

DAY 56 MARCH 16 Trump Gambles in Cutting Services That Aid His Base

DAY 57 MARCH 17 Britain Furious as Trump Pushes Claim of Spying

DAY 58 MARCH 18 Conservatives Press Overhaul in the Judiciary

DAY 59 MARCH 19 Trump Adopting Hands-Off Style Toward Military

DAY 60 MARCH 20 Comey Confirms Inquiry On Russia and Trump Allies DAY 61 MARCH 21 President Warns Holdouts In G.O.P. Over Health Bill

DAY 62 MARCH 22 Deadly Rampage In Heart of London

DAY 63 MARCH 23 Trump, Demanding Vote On Imperiled Health Bill, Tells G.O.P.: Now or Never DAY 64 MARCH 24 G.O.P. Revolt Sinks Bid To Void Health Law

DAY 65 MARCH 25 Trump Becomes Ensnared In Fiery G.O.P. Civil War

DAY 66 MARCH 26 Dealt a Setback, Republicans Aim To Push Tax Cuts

DAY 67 MARCH 27 Grim Toll in Mosul Reflects New Urgency in ISIS Fight

DAY 68 MARCH 28 Trump Signs Rule to Block Efforts on Aiding Climate

DAY 69 MARCH 29 U.S. War Footprint Grows, With No Endgame in Sight

DAY 70 MARCH 30 Trump Aides Gave Reports To Head of House Inquiry

DAY 71 MARCH 31 Trump's Family Still Benefiting From Businesses

DAY 72 APRIL 1 Divide in G.O.P. Now Threatens Trump Tax Plan

DAY 73 APRIL 2 China Recognizes Kushner As Path to the President

DAY 74 APRIL 3 In Shift by U.S., Trump Praises Egypt Autocrat

DAY 75 APRIL 4 Chemical Attack on Syrians Ignites World's Outrage

DAY 76 APRIL 5 Trump Suggests Bigger U.S. Role in Syria Conflict

DAY 77 APRIL 6 U.S. Launches Missiles Into Syria

DAY 78 APRIL 7 Strike by Trump on Syria Air Base Angers Russians

DAY 79 APRIL 8 U.S. Strike on Syria Fuels Uncertainty on the Ground

DAY 80 APRIL 9 Tillerson Halts Any Thawing of Russia Ties

DAY 81 APRIL 10 Many Voices on Syria Policy, but One Is Silent

DAY 82 APRIL 11 White House Says Russia Is Engaged in Covering Up Syrians' Chemical Attack

DAY 83 APRIL 12 U.S. Takes Sharper Tone On Russia's Role in Syria

DAY 84 APRIL 13 A Giant U.S. Bomb Strikes ISIS Caves In Afghanistan

DAY 85 APRIL 14 Korea Tensions Could Overheat, China Declares

DAY 86 APRIL 15 Raft of Potential Conflicts In President's Appointees

DAY 87 APRIL 16 Erdogan Tightens His Grip On Turkey After Close Vote

DAY 88 APRIL 17 Trump's Promise to Fix Tax Code Is Bogging Down

DAY 89 APRIL 18 Aircraft Carrier Was Not Heading Where U.S. Said

DAY 90 APRIL 19 Ex-Trump Aide's Russia Trip Sent F.B.I. Digging

DAY 91 APRIL 20 White House Roaring Again on Free Trade

DAY 92 APRIL 21 Trump Promises Tax Plan In Days, Surprising Staff

DAY 93 APRIL 22 Trump Reaches Beyond West Wing for Counsel

DAY 94 APRIL 23 Trump Saved Indiana Jobs, But Not These

DAY 95 APRIL 24 Trump Rejects 100-Day Test, Yet Seeks an A

DAY 96 APRIL 25 White House's Tax Plan Puts Business at the Fore

DAY 97 APRIL 26 Tax Overhaul Would Aid Wealthiest

DAY 98 APRIL 27 Health Law Repeal Will Miss Trump's 100-Day Target Date

DAY 99 APRIL 28 Economy Grows At Slowest Rate In 3 Years: 0.7%

Document NYTF000020170429ed4t0005m



The Learning Network; Lesson Plans
10 Ways to Teach With The New York Times Today

By KATHERINE SCHULTEN and MICHAEL GONCHAR 
3,777 words
28 April 2017
17:34
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Updated: August, 2017

Last spring, inspired by the many schools who had just received subscriptions to NYTimes.com through our new Sponsorship program, we dedicated our first-ever Learning Network webinar to showcasing 10 ways most teachers could weave any day’ Times into their curriculum.

You can register and watch that webinar here, but we have also written up pretty much everything important we said in the post below.

Have a look, and let us know if you have questions or ideas. And whether you’e new to using the paper in your classroom or have been teaching with The Times for years, thank you!

_________

1. Introduce news literacy with a quick game.

Maybe you’e just gotten a class subscription to NYTimes.com, or maybe, at a time when everyone’ talking about “ake news,”ou would like your students to understand what makes a trusted, 165-year-old news source different from invented information created by jobless young people in need of cash.

We have a quick game that can help — scavenger hunt that should take just one class period for most students.

The 26 questions are designed to get students clicking around NYTimes.com, learning how to navigate the site, locating news that’ important to them —rom the local weather to sports scores —nd understanding things like how to use Times search, what a byline is, and how the Opinion section is different from the news section.

It also invites them to think about the role of a newspaper in a democracy, by posing one simple challenge:

Write the headline of an article that would not be printed if the U.S. government controlled the press.

For instance, try that with the headlines from the April 1, 2017, front page:

The hunt ends by asking them to choose one article that especially interested them and read it closely —omething we consider perhaps the most important first step you can take in getting your students to build a news-reading habit. Allowing students free choice and letting them “ander”hrough the paper shows them how much there is beyond big front-page headline news —nd, with almost 20 years of hearing from students on this site, we promise you that you’l be surprised by the interesting breadth of choices they make.

You can take the learning even further with this related lesson plan. (And if you’e using the paper in print, we have a couple of games for that too —oth a separate scavenger hunt and Front Page Bingo.)

_________

2. Teach writing with argumentative, informational and narrative mentor texts and prompts.

One of the top reasons teachers and students visit The Learning Network is to use our daily writing prompts. Like all our student features, they and the Times articles they link to are completely free.

Every school day since 2009 we have asked a Student Opinion question. That’ more than a thousand questions so far.

To find them, use the writing prompt icon on the Learning Network home page. There you will see we offer two types of daily prompts.

Our Student Opinion questions include an excerpt from a Times article, as well as sub-questions to promote deeper thinking.

Our Picture Prompts include just a few lines of text and invite student writing inspired by an image —lthough they, too, link to a related Times article. Teachers tell us Picture Prompts work particularly well for E.L.L. students and middle school students, though, of course, they can be used with many kinds of learners.

Over the years we’e collected our most popular Student Opinion questions into two different lists: one that features  401 argumentative writing prompts and another that contains 650 narrative and personal writing prompts. Both of these lists are organized by categories, such as “ocial media”r “ideo games,”nd all of the questions link back to the original post.

In addition to our prompts, we also offer rich lesson plans on many writing topics like these two illustrated here, using New York Times features like “odern Love”nd “ives”o teach personal writing and how to teach more effective counterarguments.

_________

3. Give students an authentic audience for their work.

Updated: Here is our 2017-18 contest calendar.

We know how important it is to give students an authentic audience beyond the classroom for their writing and opinions. One feature of The Learning Network we’e very proud of is the way it allows students from around the world a public voice.

All our writing prompts are open to student comment, and tens of thousands of teenagers have posted their thoughts over the years. Students can also read what others have to say and reply to them.

And, unlike most other online public forums, our comments are all human-moderated. While we’e quite forgiving of spelling, grammar or vocabulary errors —fter all, for many in our audience, English is not a first language —e do not approve rude or disrespectful remarks. Our goal is to promote civil dialogue, no matter what the issue.

In addition to our daily writing prompts, we also offer student contests throughout the entire year.

This school year’ contests include our Editorial Cartoon Contest, along with many more, including three new ones. Take a look, and plan ahead.

Each student entry is read or judged by an editor of the Learning Network, a New York Times staff member, a teacher-partner of ours, or an expert in the field. We publish the winning submissions of each contest on The New York Times Learning Network, and we also celebrate the work of runners-up and honorable mentions too.

_________

4. Keep up with current events.

Our site helps you do this every day, and many teachers know that if important breaking news happens, we’l always create a student writing prompt, lesson plan or other feature to give you a quick way to weave it into your curriculum.

But if you want some quick suggestions that can work with any day’ paper, here is our 50 Ways to Teach With Current Events that contains both our own ideas and ideas from teachers all over.

The Times itself has also made keeping abreast of the news easier than ever:

•very weekday morning and evening, and once each weekend, you can find a “riefing”n the home page that summarizes the top stories in just a couple of sentences. You and your students can also get that briefing by email if you like.

•he Times is now on Snapchat Discover, with new visual narratives every 24 hours.

•ou can also listen to a new 15-minute daily podcast that explores the top news and puts it into context.

For our part, once a week on The Learning Network we write a 10-question news quiz just for students. Each question provides a bit of context and links to the original story, as well as scores how many got each question right. We always save our 10th question for news literacy: Students have to choose which of four articles is not from The Times, but, instead, from the satirical site The Onion:

We also choose an Article of the Day every weekday, on important stories students need to understand —nd on topics we think will interest them. For each, we pose comprehension questions to help them read the article, as well as a Warm-Up and Going Further that they can do on their own, or that teachers can turn into a lesson plan. A typical week might look like the one in early April in which we chose stories on Syria, the Supreme Court, Space X, video gaming and an arts program in a U.S. prison.

_________

5. Connect what you’e teaching to the world today.

[Video: JMU DNA Dance on the Quad Watch on YouTube.]

Back in 2011, professors at James Madison Univer s i ty were so inspired by a Times series on DNA that they made it the required reading for the incoming freshman class —hen got those students to create the dance you see above, a “hysical representation”f what they learned. One of those professors wrote it up  for us  .

We love to hear about how people are teaching and learning with The Times. Our Reader Ideas column features scores of ideas, sent in by teachers, librarians, coaches, parents and peer-educating teenagers, all showing you how easy it can be to connect what you’e already teaching to current events or other Times features.

Whether you have a relatively simple idea like using restaurant reviews with E.L.L. students or an elaborate project done by the entire incoming class at your university, we’ love to hear from you.

Here’ how Joni-Jean Crivello , a middle school social studies teacher in New Jersey, uses the paper:

I use The New York Times almost daily as a teaching tool with my eighth-grade American history students. Connections exist consistently, whether we are analyzing American indigenous people, colonization or occupation in places like Zimbabwe, events leading to revolution, the idea of democracy, the assimilation of immigrants into American culture, the role of African-Americans and women in society, civil unrest or civil war.

Middle schoolers appreciate being treated like adults by the simple act of sharing The New York Times and the multitude of discussions that always ensue.

If you teach with The Times, just tell us about it here.

_________

6. Make often-taught themes and topics relevant.

How is the history or literature you’e teaching still relevant today?

What recent research reporting in the Science Times might update your biology textbook?

How are questions you pose in your civics class playing out on the front page?

Via The Times, your students can see the concepts, questions and theories they wrestle with in class in action in the “eal world.”

We offer weekly lesson plans that attempt to simplify things for you by collecting articles, essays, videos, photographs and infographics on often-taught subjects.

English teachers : We have a big, and growing collection that matches literature to the nonfiction found in The Times.

In some of these lesson plans, we choose just one piece that works well, as in this “ext to text”esson plan that pairs an article about delayed adulthood with “he Catcher in the Rye.”

Other lesson plans provide several ideas for teaching an author or work, each with many links to Times features that can help, as in Seven Ways to Teach Shakespeare, which includes everything from videos from the Theater section to an article about a Baghdad production of “omeo and Juliet”eaturing Shiites and Sunnis.

Here is our complete collection as of now, but it’ always growing:

Maya Angelou, “he Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian,”“ntigone,”“he Book Thief,”“he Catcher in the Rye,”“he Crucible,”“eath of a Salesman,”Roald Dahl, Charles Dickens, “nrique’ Journey,”“rankenstein,”“he Giver,”“he Glass Castle,”“he Grapes of Wrath,”“he Great Gatsby,”“arry Potter,”“The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks,”“he Hunger Games,”“he Kite Runner,”“ord of the Flies,”“f Mice and Men,”John Milton,“he Necklace,””Orwell and “984”, “he Outsiders,”“ Raisin in the Sun,”Shakespeare, Mark Twain and “uckleberry Finn,”“he Scarlet Letter,”“peak,” and “o Kill a Mockingbird.”

Social studies teachers: When there’ important news we know teachers want to bring it into the classroom right away —uch as the president’ immigration ban or the rising concern over fake news —e publish a lesson plan to help you.

But we’e also mindful of topics that we know are already embedded in your curriculum, and we want to help you connect those to current events easily. For instance, in one lesson this year we paired Colin Kaepernick’ national anthem protest with a speech by Frederick Douglass. In another, we tied the Syrian refugee crisis with Jewish refugees in the 1930s.

STEM teachers: Our STEM lessons take the latest research that appears in the Science Times, such as genetically engineered organisms and Crispr technology, or statistics and the Electoral College, and provide ways to help students go deeper and make connections. We also have a whole column of STEM-focused Articles of the Day.

But if you’e just looking for inspiration, the Science section front is the place to start. For instance, if you don’ know about the very short (one to three minute) “cience Take”ideos, we hope you’l find them uniquely easy to weave in.

And if you’e looking for a lesson plan or teaching resource on any topic —hether climate change, infectious diseases, or checks and balances in government —ust scroll down on the Learning Network home page or our Lesson Plan page to find our search bar. Type in what you’e looking for, and see what comes up.

You can also do a search from the NYTimes.com home page for anything you’e teaching, which will surface articles with those keywords published in The New York Times since 1851. Sometimes, as in the cases of topics like the Civil War or the theory of evolution, the topic is so big and so much has been written about it that there will be a whole Times Topics page that collects all the most relevant Times articles published on the subject.

_________

7. Teach with visuals.

If you picked up a copy of an 1851 New-York Daily Times, you’ be hard pressed to find any visual images, but that’ not at all true today.

NYTimes.com is full of photographs, videos, illustrations, charts, graphs, infographics and maps that present an opportunity for students to look closely, practice their visual thinking and analysis skills, and engage with the news and the world.

One way to find intriguing Times images and videos is by clicking on our Multimedia icon.

There you’l find perhaps our most popular weekly feature, What’ Going On in This Picture? Every Monday we ask students to look closely at an image stripped of its caption and closely observe what they see. Typically we have several hundred students participating in a live-moderated discussion each week. We hear from English teachers, E.L.L. teachers, elementary school teachers and even science teachers about how much they love this feature —nd how easily it can be used to encourage students to support claims with evidence.

We also have a Friday Film Club, where we feature a short Times film, usually under 10 minutes long, on a range of interesting subjects, such as low-rider fans and their tricked-out cars in Odessa, Texas.

In addition, we offer a bank of lesson plans and teaching resources on how to use Times visuals, such as our collection of 25 mini-films on race, bias and identity; and our lesson plan on teaching with ScienceTake videos; our lesson plan “Baseball, Happiness and Immigration,”hich highlights various U.S. maps such as the “ap of Baseball Nation” and our math lesson on using infographics, including a graph illustrating from where N.B.A. players are most likely to hit their shots.

And if you’e not familiar with The Upshot, check it out —t’ a Times section dedicated to telling important stories with analysis and graphics.

_________

8. Enliven history with primary sources from our archives.

Newspapers like the Times have been called the “ough draft of history,”nd if you flip through the tool we call TimesMachine, you can see why.

TimesMachine allows you to page through every single edition of The New York Times from 1851-2002, exactly as it was originally published.

So you can see how “en Walk on Moon”as originally reported, but you can also see the moon-themed advertisements that accompanied the reporting that day, as well as what was happening back on earth, from the movies that were playing to what the fashions looked like to who was winning in baseball.

We also have many lesson plans and collections that link to archival reporting we’e found for you, such as our recent Vietnam War lesson, or these about the transcontinental railroad, Black history, World War I, the civil rights movement and many more. In most of these collections, we link not only to archival articles, but also to collections of photographs, relevant videos, essays, first-person accounts, infographics and more.

But keep in mind that The Times now and The Times then is not only front-page news about wars and disasters. You can also find cats mailing themselves to Santa and the history of the prom and the first mention of pizza. We hope both you and your students will have fun looking around.

_________

9. Develop vocabulary and other literacy skills across the curriculum.

The photo above is a screenshot of the home page one day this month, and, as you can see, at least nine of what we used to call “AT words”re waiting there for your students. But we guarantee that if you go to the home page at any time, including right now, there will be at least that many, if not more —ll offering a way to understand words in context.

On our site, we have a couple of features that can help deepen vocabulary-learning. Our Word of the Day feature tells you how often a word was in the Times in the last year, includes an interesting paragraph for context, and ends with a little quiz that tests student understanding.

We also have an annual contest that invites students to make 15-second videos to show their understanding of the word of their choice ... like this recent winner who defined “octurnal.”ou can find many more ideas in our 12 Ways to Learn Vocabulary With The New York Times.

[Video: Nocturnal Watch on YouTube.]

And we have heard from both teachers and parents that the Daily Mini crossword —hich can take just seconds or minutes to complete depending on the day —s very popular with teenagers, and a fun way to learn vocabulary.

We also have lesson plans on a number of other literacy skills that you can use across the curriculum, and we reinforce those skills regularly in all of our features. Here are just a few:

Making inferences

Close-reading

Summarizing

Annotating

Determining the reliability of sources

Sorting fact from opinion

Listening and note-taking

Revising writing

_________

10. Encourage independent readers and empowered citizens.

The best way to get teenagers to start reading The Times or any other newspaper regularly? Just give them time to browse the articles, features, photos, videos, podcasts, games and graphics and find what they like.

We know from nearly 20 years of hearing from students on this site that you’l be surprised and delighted by the range of stories they choose —nd what they say about why they chose them.

This home-schooled girl wrote to our Reader Ideas column last year and explained how she “anders”hrough The Times daily, and finds everything from recipes she wants to make to physics articles from the Science Times to talk about with her brother.

Since 2010, our Summer Reading Contest has tried to encourage this “andering”y posing two simple questions each Friday: “hat interested you most in The Times this week? Why?”his year the contest runs from June 16-Aug. 25, and we’ love to have your students join us.

Everything you need to know to participate is here, but we’l also have a webinar that goes beyond the contest to talk about making The Times an integral part of an independent-reading program in your classroom.

_________

Finally, if you watched our webinar, you know we had help from the Times political and investigative reporter Nicholas Confessore.

He spoke about how a Times story is reported, written, fact-checked and published, and he focused that explanation on this Feb. 18, 2017, article, “Trump’ ‘inter White House’ A Peek at the Exclusive Members’ist at Mar-a-Lago.”

You might ask your students to read the piece carefully and think about what a journalist might need to do to obtain and verify information like The Times reported —hen invite them to watch the last part of the webinar (beginning at 39:11) to hear about how he and the rest of his team did it.

You might also like to ask them to respond to the question a webinar participant asked (beginning at 53:40), “hat do you see as the biggest problem for a new generation of citizens, our students, now that there is less clarity between real and fake news?”

Printable Scavenger Hunt | Our list of writing prompts includes: Does technology make us more alone? And, Is social media making us more narcissistic? Find them here. | Jake Michaels for The New York Times | Contest Calendar | One of the student winners from our 2016 Editorial Cartoon Contest. Click here to see all of them. | Margaret Lu | An Iraq map showing areas under ISIS control; a rally outside the Supreme Court in October 2013 protesting the role of money in politics; demonstrators in Washington in August 2014 protesting the killing of Michael Brown. Related Lesson Plan | The New York Times, left; Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images; and Jose Luis Magana/Associated Press | Related Interactive | Related Lesson Plan | Football players at Aurora Central High School in Colorado went down on one knee in a sign of protest on Oct. 1 while the national anthem was played before a game. Related Article | Related Lesson Plan | Nick Cote for The New York Times | Our What’ Going On in This Picture? Feature | A Map of Baseball Nation | Related Lesson Plan | Tom Giratikanon, Josh Katz, David Leonhardt and Kevin Quealy | April 16, 1912, as seen in TimesMachine. | Kathryn Rosnau, a member of this year’ Student Council, reads The Times as a regular part of her home-schooling, and wrote about it for the blog. | Kathryn Rosnau | Mar-a-Lago, the members-only club in Palm Beach, Fla., is being called the winter White House. The entry fee for members was doubled, to $200,000, shortly after President Trump took office. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | The New York Times prints between 300,000 to 800,000 newspapers daily at its main facility in Queens. Take a 360°our as the paper comes together. | By CHANG W. LEE, NIKO KOPPEL and SAMANTHA QUICK 

Document NYTFEED020170428ed4s005ha



World; Middle East
Pope Francis , in Egypt, Delivers a Blunt Message on Violence and Religion

By JASON HOROWITZ 
1,417 words
29 April 2017
00:35
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

CAIRO —Pope Francis  delivered his most blunt and powerful message to the Muslim world on Friday when he began a papal mission to Egypt  by warning against wrapping violence and terror in the language of religion.

“s religious leaders, we are called, therefore, to unmask the violence that masquerades as purported sanctity,”he pope said at a peace conference organized by Al Azhar mosque and university, one of the most influential centers of Sunni Islamic learning. He added: “e have an obligation to denounce violations of human dignity and human rights, to expose attempts to justify every form of hatred in the name of religion, and to condemn these attempts as idolatrous caricatures of God.”

The papal visit came at a critical time for Egypt, a country caught up in intensifying terrorist attacks, particularly against Christians, and a deepening crackdown by an authoritarian government.

On Friday, Pope Francis seemed to put on different hats during the day’ three stops, reflecting his interreligious, ecumenical and political roles.

At Al Azhar, he embraced the mosque’ Grand Imam, Ahmad al-Tayeb, who urged the West not to hold an entire religion “ccountable for the crimes of any small group of followers.”

Pope Francis then turned to matters of state, seeking to encourage progress on human rights from his host, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. Mr. Sisi ousted the Muslim Brotherhood in a military takeover in 2013, and has since crushed dissent even as a recent report by the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom found he has incrementally improved security and religious freedoms for the country’ small Christian minority, which mostly supported his coup.

“ome minutes ago you told me that God is the God of liberty,”Pope Francis said in an off-script moment as he looked meaningfully over at Mr. Sisi. “nd this is true.”

He nevertheless recognized Mr. Sisi for having spoken out often and “ith a clarity”gainst a religious extremism that crushes diversity. But then the pope pointedly asserted that “istory does not forgive those who preach justice but then practice injustice. History does not forgive those who talk about equality but then discard those who are different.”

If Mr. Sisi, fresh off a White House visit with President Trump, felt unfairly reprimanded, he didn’ show it. He smiled broadly after the pope’ speech, and clasped his hands warmly —ueling concern from some in Egypt that the pope’ visit, while well intentioned, is serving to lend an authoritarian another layer of credibility.

The pope’ supporters have repeatedly made the case that he will meet anyone, anywhere, to establish dialogue and deliver his inclusive message. And after years of lamenting the widespread murder of Christians —ore so now, he has argued, than in ancient times —e wanted to meet with and show support for persecuted and suffering Christians.

And so Pope Francis ended his day in his role as protector and booster of an Egyptian Christian community that has been bloodied by repeated attacks by suicide bombers and Islamist extremists, including this past Palm Sunday, when bombs killed nearly 50 Coptic Orthodox Christians celebrating the holiday.

The pope, wearing white, met with his Coptic Orthodox counterpart, Pope Tawadros II, who was dressed in black. Amid stone arches and gold-leafed frescoes, Francis said their ever-closer bond was “ustained, in mysterious and quite relevant way, by a genuine ecumenism of blood.”e added, “heir innocent blood unites us.”

The Coptic Orthodox Church, which, according to tradition, was founded by the Apostle Mark in Alexandria a decade or so after the death of Jesus, split from Rome in 451 A.D. But a burst of dialogue in recent decades has drawn the two churches closer.

That solidarity was visible Friday night, in an emotional moment as the pope, along with chanting clerics and Orthodox patriarchs, prayed at the site of a December suicide bombing that killed 28 and marked the start of the Islamic State’ campaign against Christian churches here. At one point, Francis put his hand on a glass pane covering a bloodstained wall.

It was the climax of a busy day for the 80-year-old pope. (Upon leaving Rome, he predicted it would be “retty intense.”

This is his 18th trip outside Italy since his election as pope in 2013, and only the second visit by a modern pope to Egypt, after Pope John Paul II came here in 2000. Unlike that visit, security measures here seemed to separate the pope from the people of Cairo, as officials, already skeptical of public assemblies, cordoned off and essentially shut down the city in the areas he visited.

The pope’ remarks at the conference hosted by Al Azhar are likely to be remembered as Francis’efinitive effort to improve relations with Islam and mitigate the violence roiling the region.

With Grand Imam Tayeb seated beside him on a stage decorated with minarets, Francis said that more attention needed to be paid to educating the young “o counter effectively the barbarity of those who foment hatred and violence”nd warned that “vil only gives rise to more evil, and violence to more violence.”

He argued that education, which Al Azhar has large influence over in the Sunni world beyond Egypt’ borders, was crucial to preventing new generations of radicals. The center, which trains many of the Sunni world’ imams and oversees the education of millions of Egyptian children and college students and is funded by Mr. Sisi’ government, has made progress in removing extremist language from textbooks.

“his is a big moment in Catholic-Muslim dialogue,”aid the Rev. Tom Reese, a veteran Vatican  observer and senior fellow at Woodstock Theological Center at Georgetown University . “verybody in the Muslim world is going to know that this has happened.”

Perhaps speaking to the concerns of conservative Catholics worried that the pope would drift too far in his search for a Muslim interlocutor with real power, the pope made a point to emphasize that respect for one’ own identity and religious formation was a critical step to having the “ourage to accept differences.”t would help the two faiths walk together not as enemies but as “ellow travelers.”

“his was more than just a meeting between two people,”hmed Ramzy el Sabbagh, a cleric in the red and white skullcap worn by scholars at Al Azhar. “t was a meeting of religions.”

During his speech, Francis made a reference to St. Francis of Assisi and his visiting of Sultan al-Kamil of Egypt to promote civility even as crusaders sought to gain control of the Nile.

Alberto Melloni, the director of a liberal Catholic research institution, the John XXIII Foundation for Religious Studies in Bologna, said that in the days leading up to the speech, Francis repeatedly made reference to the saint’ visit centuries ago and saw his own mission in a similar vein. “aint Francis asked for his brothers nothing but the possibility to live amongst them,”aid Mr. Melloni, saying that the pope was essentially asking the same of Sheikh Tayeb.

But Francis, while aware of the historical aspect of his visit, clearly seemed to be pointing his message at the world powers today.

“emagogic forms of populism are on the rise. These certainly do not help to consolidate peace and stability,”e said. “o incitement to violence will guarantee peace, and every unilateral action that does not promote constructive and shared processes is in reality a gift to the proponents of radicalism.”

Declan Walsh contributed reporting.

* In Cairo, Francis Takes On ‘emagogic’opulism and Violence Masked as Piety 

* A Hidden Church in Cairo Pins Its Hopes on Good Will From the Pope’ Visit 

* Balancing Act for Pope in Egypt: Outreach to Muslims, and Speaking Out for Christians 

* Egypt Declares State of Emergency, as Attacks Undercut Promise of Security 

* Targeted by \b ISIS\b0 , Egyptian Christians Flee Violence 

* Attack on Coptic Cathedral in Cairo Kills Dozens 

Pope Francis arriving on Friday at the St. Peter and St. Paul Church in Cairo, which was target of a suicide bomb attack that killed 29 people in December. | Andreas Solaro/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | At a conference hosted by Sheikh Ahmed al-Tayeb, the grand imam of a Cairo mosque, the pope stressed the importance of unity among Christians, Muslims and all religions. | By EGYPT TV VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS 

Document NYTFEED020170428ed4s00and



World; Middle East
A Hidden Church in Cairo Pins Its Hopes on Good Will From the Pope’ Visit

By DECLAN WALSH 
1,399 words
28 April 2017
06:01
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

CAIRO —o hear the Coptic Catholic priest tell it, building a church in Cairo requires far more than bricks and mortar. He listed the other requirements: the patience of Job, the wiles of a fox and the quiet determination to pole-vault Egypt’ discriminatory regulations.

“ot easy,”aid the priest, Youhanna Saad, with a wry smile as he bounced his 5-year-old daughter on his knee. “he regulations were not fair. It made us cheat.”

For the past decade, his small Coptic Catholic congregation in a gritty north Cairo suburb has been trying to build a new church in the teeth of official resistance — common tale in Egypt, where the law panders to old prejudices. But Father Saad, a former schoolteacher, is almost there.

The deafening rattle of an electric saw often fills the church, which is hidden down a lane and sandwiched between two apartment buildings. Weekly Masses have already started, using plastic office chairs in place of wooden pews in a still-undecorated hall.

But Father Saad still lacks a vital element —overnment permission —hich leaves his church with the legal status of a religious speakeasy. It is a problem that he says he hopes to resolve with the visit of Pope Francis  to Egypt, which starts on Friday.

As publicity about the visit started to build two weeks ago, Father Saad took the plunge and made the official application to legalize his new church, hoping to capitalize on the wave of good will toward the pontiff. “t might work,”e mused. “r it might be another 10 years. You never know.”

That small drama points to the bigger issue confronting Francis as he lands in Cairo against a backdrop of swirling anxiety and turmoil.

Christians across the Middle East are under intense pressure. After years of persecution by Islamist militants, half of Iraq’ Christian population has fled, and a lonely beach in Libya was the setting for the 2015 beheading of 21 Egyptian Christians  in orange jumpsuits.

Egypt seemed to have escaped the worst of the violence. But in December, the Islamic State declared a campaign of sectarian bloodshed  and proceeded to attack the  Coptic cathedral in Cairo  on a Sunday in Advent and churches in Alexandria and Tanta  on Palm Sunday, killing some 75 people in all.

Yet the pope’ visit also highlights the more insidious prejudice still suffered by Egypt’ Christians in their daily lives, even as President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi has vowed to protect them and defend their rights.

Only about 250,000 of Egypt’ estimated nine million Christians are Catholic. Most, like Father Saad, belong to the Coptic Catholic Church, the largest of the six Eastern Rite churches in Egypt. Those churches are loyal to the pope, even though their teachings may diverge from those of Rome on issues that range from the esoteric (whether purgatory exists) to the pragmatic, like the Coptic church’ decision decades ago to allow married men like Father Saad to enter the priesthood.

He took his final vows two years ago. His elder daughters approve. “e could see that it was his dream to become a priest,”aid Dina, 18. “ think he’ a great priest.”

Merna, 16, chimed in: “ think he’ the best.”

Their father’ battle to build a new house of worship highlights the enduring discrimination against Christians codified in Egyptian law.

All churches must be licensed, but in practice permission is subject to strict regulations and, as often as not, the whims and prejudices of local officials. To get around them, Christians build illegal churches, which in turn have been a major trigger for sectarian violence in rural areas with large Christian populations.

In Minya, where Christians make up 30 percent of the population, rumors of secret churches often lead Muslim mobs to attack Christians and burn their homes. The perpetrators are often led by hard-line Salafist clerics or politicians. Such violence is less prevalent in Cairo, a freewheeling megacity where sheer size dilutes prejudice and, for the most part, Muslims and Christians live in harmony.

In Ezbet El-Nakhl, the suburb where Father Saad works, congregants said naked prejudice was rare. “ome people have sick ideas like refusing to eat with a Christian,”ageh Lahzy, a building contractor, said. “ut that’ just a tiny number. Daily life makes everyone tolerant.”

Yet even in the capital, the prospect of a new church can mean trouble. For 18 years Masses and other ceremonies were held in a converted apartment. In 2006, the hierarchy bought a house, in the name of a parishioner, with the goal of building a church.

But permission was never forthcoming. Worshipers, tiring of the journey to the cramped quarters, began drifting to other Christian denominations. So last year Father Saad started to build.

It was a stealth effort, he explained. At first he told the authorities he wanted to build a “ervices center”ith a health clinic and a kindergarten, which was true. What he neglected to mention was his plan to build a spacious church on the ground floor.

To move the project along, Father Saad hired a Muslim contractor, which caused the price to rise sharply. He visited the construction site quietly, not wishing to attract attention.

Then in August, Mr. Sisi’ government appeared to throw him a lifeline: a new law that contained a provision for the legalization of illegal churches. But the reform, which has been criticized by international human rights groups for not going far enough, still allows the authorities to refuse permission for a slew of reasons, including the threat of violence from Muslim neighbors.

So far the congregation has had no problems. On Sundays, worshipers file out in small groups to avoid scrutiny. Yet even the rickshaw drivers know it is a church, Father Saad said, so he and his congregation are bracing for possible trouble.

Already the neighbors have made their displeasure known. The nearest mosque, Father Saad said, which is about 300 feet away, moved their loudspeakers closer and cranked up the volume during daily prayers. But he cannot complain because his church is illegal.

It is also dangerous. Because the church lacks government permission, it has not received state protection after the recent Islamic State attacks. So while armed security officers guard a nearby Orthodox church, the door of Father Saad’ clandestine church is monitored by scouts, including his daughters.

They will be working as stewards at an outdoor Mass celebrated by Francis at a Cairo stadium on Saturday. Father Saad himself will accompany five busloads of worshipers, and he will pray that the Francis factor swings in his favor.

One day, he said, he hopes to see a cross mounted over his own church. “aybe,”e said. “ust maybe it is possible.”

Correction: April 28, 2017, Friday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article referred imprecisely to the size of the Coptic Catholic Church. It is the largest of the six Eastern Rite churches in Egypt, not the largest of the 23 such churches worldwide.

* Gunmen Kill Police Officer Near St. Catherine’ Monastery in Egypt 

* In a Shift, Trump Will Move Egypt’ Rights Record to the Sidelines 

* Widening Crackdown, Egypt Shutters Group That Treats Torture Victims 

* \b ISIS\b0  Claims Responsibility for Egypt Church Bombing and Warns of More to Come 

Youhanna Saad at his church in Ezbet El-Nakhl, a suburb of Cairo. Pope Francis’ visit to Egypt, which starts on Friday, prompted him to seek permission from the government for the church, which has been operating illegally. | David Degner for The New York Times | The street outside Father Saad’ church, which is sandwiched between two apartment buildings. | David Degner for The New York Times | An advertisement for the pope’ visit. His trip highlights the prejudice, both overt and insidious, suffered by Egypt’ Christians in their daily lives. | David Degner for The New York Times | Weekly Masses have already shifted from Father Saad’ old church, shown here, to his new one, where plastic office chairs are used in place of wooden pews in a still-undecorated hall. | David Degner for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170428ed4s001p5



world
Their Asylum Requests Denied, Thousands Stay in Sweden (Some for Years)

By MARTIN SELSOE SORENSEN and CHRISTINA ANDERSON 
1,318 words
28 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MALMO, Sweden — family whose members say they fled Albania to escape a blood feud was rejected for asylum by Swedish officials, who months later asked them to leave.

But so far, only one has been deported.

Sentila Kernaja, who turned 21 this week, three siblings and their disabled mother each collect 1,800 Swedish kronor, about $200, a month from the government. The government covers round-the-clock care for the mother, who is 42 and paralyzed from the waist down. The siblings attend a public high school, free of charge.

Ms. Kernaja cleans houses off the books, while inhabiting a legal limbo. “t’ ridiculous,”he said in an interview here in Malmo, Sweden’ third-largest city. “ told them to keep the money and give me a work permit.”

The family is among an estimated 18,000 people who live in Sweden even though their claims for asylum have been turned down. Their status has come under scrutiny after Rakhmat Akilov, a 39-year-old failed asylum seeker from Uzbekistan, drove a truck into a pedestrian shopping street in Stockholm on April 7 in the country’ worst terrorism attack in decades. (The toll from that attack rose to five on Friday, when a 66-year-old teacher died from her injuries.)

Though it takes pride in its humanitarian heritage and its generous social protections, Sweden is rethinking some of its policies.

It is not easy to get asylum in Sweden —ut it is easy to stay if one has been turned down.

Ms. Kernaja says her father died 16 years ago when the taxi he was driving was involved in a crash that killed three passengers. The passengers’elatives want revenge, she said, and have threatened Ms. Kernaja’ family.

She says they are too frightened to go home, and for now they are trying to lie low. But her 19-year-old brother was picked up in February during an identification check and sent home in March. Ms. Kernaja worries that she could be next.

The Albanian government acknowledges that dozens of families live in virtual seclusion, fearful of being killed if they leave their homes because of this ancient custom, which survives in a country where the rule of law is weak.

“ome of the most fundamental human rights and freedoms are violated, threatened or not implemented in our country due to the blood feud phenomenon,”a government report found.

However, asylum claims based on blood feuds are common and are difficult to prove.

Out of 18,000 failed asylum seekers in Sweden, 12,500 have gone underground, according to Patrik Engstrom, head of the Swedish Border Police.

“e have the capacity to deport at most 5,000 rejected applicants a year,”e said. “e’e a smallish law enforcement agency.”

The workload is increasing as Sweden continues to move through the 191,000 asylum applications it received in the last two years. Fifty thousand rejections are anticipated, according to government figures.

The police tried to track down Mr. Akilov, the suspect in the Stockholm rampage, without success, but even if they had found him, deporting him would have been difficult.

Six Uzbeks whose asylum applications were rejected in Norway were prosecuted and given long prison sentences when they were returned to Uzbekistan in 2014, according to Memorial, a human rights group.

“his is a very hard-core government that controls citizens very thoroughly, even abroad,”aid Madelaine Seidlitz, a senior legal adviser with Amnesty International’ Sweden office. “e know that most probably there are Uzbeks in Sweden who are reporting back to the regime.”

Maruf, 48, an Uzbek who has been living in Sweden since 2004, was approved for asylum last summer after seven and a half years living underground.

Under a European Union policy known as the Dublin Regulation, a migrant is supposed to stay —nd apply for asylum —n the first European Union country that she or he reaches and to wait there while the application is processed.

For Maruf, a slim, agile man of medium height with short hair and alert brown eyes, that country was Germany. He overstayed a tourist visa in Frankfurt in 2004 and eventually took a train to Sweden, where he lived underground until he could no longer be sent back to Germany under the Dublin Regulation.

Maruf asked that his surname not be used because he has two adult children still in Uzbekistan and fears for their safety.

Eventually, Maruf applied for asylum in Sweden, but when his claim was denied, he went underground again, this time for four years.

But during that period, the European Court of Human Rights said in 2012 that involuntary returns to Uzbekistan should be exercised only with extreme caution, given the country’ human rights record.

At that point, Maruf emerged from hiding and filed a new application for asylum. This time it was granted, because he been able to show that he was active in an Uzbek opposition party, he said.

John Stauffer, legal director for Civil Rights Defenders, a group in Stockholm, said that after the Stockholm attack, many Swedes were calling for stronger measures against rejected asylum seekers.

“f course, many of these people don’ have the right to be here,”e said. “ut our concern is that in finding these people, the police will use methods that will lead to ethnic profiling and discrimination.”

Fear of a crackdown has been coursing through the Uzbek community, said Fadi Al-Aieshy, an asylum lawyer in Stockholm. Almost 6,000 Uzbeks applied for asylum between 2000 and 2015, he said.

“enerally, Uzbeks are extremely scared because they run into problems when they go back to Uzbekistan,”e said. “t’ considered treason to apply for asylum.”

He added, “t’ quite easy to disappear in Sweden.”

Swedish employers often look the other way when it comes to illegal workers. Maruf said he supported himself by working off the books in construction.

On Thursday, the government unveiled a plan to allow the police to raid businesses if they think there is a chance that people are working there without immigration papers —ot only if they have reason to suspect a crime. The proposal would also double fines for those who employ people without the proper work permits.

The system also gives rejected asylum seekers an incentive to try again. Imad al-Tamimi, a Palestinian from the West Bank, had his asylum application rejected in 2010 and cooperated with the police, who wanted to deport him. But in spite of multiple efforts, the Palestinian Embassy was unable or unwilling to issue a passport to travel.

Anyone who is rejected and manages to stay in Sweden for four years earns the right to file a new asylum claim. Recently, Mr. Tamimi was again rejected. But after eight years, he says, “ cannot imagine myself going back.”

Sofie Rudh, a spokeswoman for the Swedish Migration Ministry, said the ministry was not disbursing welfare payments for families —ike the Kernajas —hose asylum claims had been denied. But such payments from other branches of government are not prohibited. Asked why, she replied, “wedish people are asking themselves this question, too.”

Martin Selsoe Sorensen reported from Malmo, and Christina Anderson from Stockholm.

PHOTOS: A school in Kladesholmen, Sweden, was turned into temporary housing for asylum seekers. About 18,000 people live in Sweden even though their claims for asylum have been turned down. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID RAMOS/GETTY IMAGES); Police vans blocked a street outside Stockholm District Court for the appearance of an Uzbek immigrant in a terrorism case. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FREDRIK SANDBERG/TT NEWS AGENCY, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)

* Suspect in Stockholm Attack Was an \b ISIS\b0  Recruit, Uzbek Official Says

* Stockholm Suspect Was Denied Asylum and Told to Leave in ’6

Document INHT000020170501ed4s0000k



Washington; SECT
2 U.S. Service Members Killed in Afghanistan, Pentagon Says

By HELENE COOPER; Mujib Mashal contributed reporting from Kabul, Afghanistan. 
577 words
28 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Two American service members were killed and a third was wounded Wednesday night in an operation in the same part of Afghanistan where the military dropped its most powerful conventional weapon two weeks ago, the Pentagon said.

The soldiers were taking part in a lengthy raid that was supported by airstrikes from American warplanes and that was targeting the Islamic State in Nangarhar Province, said Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman. A number of Islamic State fighters have been engaging in a long-running battle with Afghanistan security forces in the Achin district.

Achin is where the Pentagon deployed on April 13 what is nicknamed the ''mother of all bombs,'' aimed at Islamic State fighters who were hiding in caves and a tunnel complex. The Defense Department deemed the operation successful, but fighting has continued there and the Afghanistan military, supported by the Defense Department, has yet to clear the area of remaining Islamic State fighters.

Defense Department officials were waiting until immediate family was notified before releasing the names of the two soldiers killed. Officials said that a third soldier was wounded when they came under attack during the raid.

''The fight against ISIS-K is important for the world, but sadly, it is not without sacrifice,'' said Gen. John W. Nicholson, commander of United States Forces Afghanistan, using another name for the Islamic State fighters in Afghanistan. ''On behalf of all U.S. forces and our coalition partners, I offer our deepest sympathies to the families, friends and fellow service members of our fallen comrades.''

Defense officials have given few details about the extent of the damage from the massive bomb because the area largely remains an active combat zone. General Nicholson did not speak to President Trump, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis or the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., before deploying the bomb, an action that illustrates the increased freedom that American military field commanders have received in the Trump presidency.

But that freedom has also prompted criticism from some foreign policy experts and even some Pentagon officials who say that field commanders have not thought about the larger strategic implications of their actions.

The Pentagon still has not offered a public assessment of the damage done by the bombing, a routine step after major strikes in Syria and Iraq. Afghan officials initially said they thought only 36 Islamic State fighters had been killed, but they have since revised that number to just under 100.

An American military official in Kabul said on Thursday that the bomb was dropped north of an area called Momand Bridge, and the two soldiers were killed just south of the bridge.

Afghan television channels broadcast on Thursday what they said was the first video of the site of the bomb. In it, the tunnels used by Islamic State fighters look buried under rubble, with about 15 bodies strewn around.

The two soldiers killed Wednesday night bring to three the number of American service members killed in Afghanistan this year -- all in Nangarhar Province. The Army Staff Sgt. Mark R. De Alencar, 37 and a Green Beret, was killed after coming under fire in Achin on April 8.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Helene Cooper on Twitter @helenecooper .

Document NYTF000020170428ed4s00068



National Desk; SECTA
Digging Into Argument For a Wall on the Border

By ERIC SCHMITT and LINDA QIU; Ron Nixon contributed reporting. 
879 words
28 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
24
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- As a Friday night deadline approaches to prevent a government shutdown, one hot-button spending issue is a down payment to build a wall on the southern border, one of President Trump's signature national security goals.

Mr. Trump appeared to soften his demand late on Monday, saying he would settle for additional funds for border security. But then on Tuesday, he insisted again, ''The wall's going to get built, folks.''

In the run-up to this divisive debate, John F. Kelly, the homeland security secretary, has escalated his rhetoric about threats facing the United States.

''The risk is as threatening today as it was that September morning almost 16 years ago,'' Mr. Kelly, a retired four-star Marine Corps general, said in a speech last week at George Washington University. Mr. Kelly suggested that undocumented immigrants may not be the only threat coming across the border with Mexico, pointing to the possibility of terrorists using the same smuggling routes to infiltrate the United States.

''We have tremendous threats, whether it's drugs, people, potential terrorists coming up from the south,'' Mr. Kelly told CBS's ''Face the Nation'' last Sunday.

The secretary's comments raise several questions about the threat of terrorists sneaking across the border with the aid of cartels, the connection between drug smuggling and the recent surge in overdoses, and marijuana as a ''gateway drug.''

Here's what the experts say:

Is there a threat of ISIS or Qaeda terrorists entering through the southern border?

Not much, according to many terrorism specialists. Seamus Hughes, deputy director of George Washington University's program on extremism, said there had been few instances of would-be terrorists using the southern border to enter the United States.

In some cases, he said, the opposite had occurred: Homegrown American jihadis have crossed the southern border to get out of the United States and catch a plane from Mexico, in an effort to avoid being detected on no-fly lists.

Mr. Hughes pointed to the case of Cabdulaahi Ahmed Faarax, who is wanted by the F.B.I. for conspiring to support a terrorist organization in Somalia. A naturalized American citizen who lived in Minneapolis and worked as a taxi driver, Mr. Faarax went to Somalia to fight with the Shabab, a Qaeda affiliate, in 2007. He returned to the United States to try to recruit other fighters, and was last seen in October 2009 at a United States-Mexico border crossing. He is believed to be in Somalia.

Terrorism experts say the Mexican drug cartels have been loath to allow terrorists to cross the border through their territories into the United States, fearing that any American military and law enforcement response to that threat would significantly disrupt their lucrative businesses.

Are drugs smuggled across the border responsible for the surge in overdoses?

This is exaggerated. Cartels do smuggle in vast quantities of illicit drugs, and Mr. Kelly accurately said that 52,404 deaths were caused by a drug overdose in 2015, ''the highest number of drug-related deaths our country has ever seen.'' But it's misleading to attribute all of these to Mexican cartels.

Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shows that about 33,000 overdose deaths involved opioids. Prescription drugs like OxyContin and Vicodin were the cause of nearly 15,000 of these deaths. Synthetic opioids accounted for another 10,000 and heroin 13,000. (The categories do not add up to the total number of opioid overdoses because a death may involve more than one drug.)

Prescription drugs can be obtained in the United States, but a border wall would not necessarily stop the flow of illicit opioids. Fentanyl, for example, typically originates from China and is sometimes trafficked directly into the United States or through Canada, according to the Drug Enforcement Administration.

The most common way of transporting drugs like heroin into the United States, the D.E.A. reported in 2015, is stowing them in concealed compartments in vehicles through ports of entry. Other methods include using tunnels, drones, cargo trains and passenger buses -- none of which would be prevented by a wall.

Is marijuana a gateway drug?

Mr. Kelly characterized marijuana as ''potentially dangerous gateway drug'' but there is no scientific consensus on this question. Some studies have found that people who use marijuana are more likely to take other illicit drugs compared with those who do not, but that doesn't mean cannabis causes users to seek other drugs.

The main active component in marijuana, THC, dulls the brain's dopamine system, which can ''prime'' the brain and lead users to other drugs. But this is no different from those who smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol.

The National Institute on Drug Abuse notes that a majority of marijuana users do not use ''harder'' drugs. And poverty, social environments, trauma, mental illness and individual characteristics are also critical factors for drug abuse and addiction.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

John F. Kelly, homeland security secretary, cites ''tremendous threats'' on the border. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SUSAN WALSH/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170428ed4s0004o



World; Middle East
Balancing Act for Pope in Egypt: Outreach to Muslims, and Speaking Out for Christians

By JASON HOROWITZ 
1,378 words
27 April 2017
21:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

Pope Francis  departed from his prepared remarks at a special prayer service honoring Christian martyrs in Rome last weekend to tell the story of a Muslim man who watched Islamist terrorists cut the throat of his Christian wife because she refused to discard her crucifix.

“e, Muslim, had this cross of pain that he bore without rancor,”he pope said, his voice filled with emotion. “e sought refuge in the love of his wife, graced by martyrdom.”

That anecdote —alancing the brutal murder of a Christian by Islamist militants with a Muslim’ love for his wife —erves as a preview of the pope’ message when he visits Egypt  on Friday.

Francis is expected to highlight the plight of Christians amid recent violence in Egypt, while continuing his mission to reach out to Muslims. Even for a politically savvy pope, that is a delicate balancing act, on top of obvious security concerns in a country recently attacked by the Islamic State. Palm Sunday bombings  of two Christian churches killed more than 40 people, nearly killed the head of the Coptic Church and prompted President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi to declare a three-month state of emergency.

Francis will lend his support to Egypt’ roughly 250,000 Catholics and insist on the protection of minority rights, including those of its nearly 10 million Coptic Christians, in a meeting Friday with Mr. Sisi, according to Samir Khalil Samir, an Egyptian-born Jesuit priest who has seen the pope’ prepared remarks.

He will also meet with Sheikh Ahmed al-Tayeb, the grand imam of Al Azhar mosque, which is affiliated with a university that is a revered center of learning in Sunni Islam, and speak at a peace conference organized by the mosque. The pope finishes the day by meeting his Coptic Christian counterpart, Pope Tawadros II, who escaped one of the bombings on Palm Sunday.

“t’ an encounter of consolation, promotion and communion with the small Catholic community,”aid Cardinal Leonardo Sandri, the prefect for the Congregation for Eastern Churches, who is to join Francis on the trip. “ut it’ of great importance from an ecumenical point of view. And, of course, it is very important for dialogue with Islam, for the meeting with the sheikh of Al Ahzar.”

Like Pope John Paul II, who in 2000 became the first modern pope to visit Egypt , Francis is a politically attuned global player. It is perhaps no accident that he drew attention to his remarks about Christian martyrs last weekend by comparing the Greek refugee camp —here he said he met the Muslim husband of the slain Christian woman —o a “oncentration camp.”

His predecessor, Pope Benedict XVI, was less adroit. He stumbled into a public relations disaster  in 2006 at the University of Regensburg in Germany when he quoted a 14th century Byzantine emperor suggesting fanaticism was inherent to Islam. That set the tone for a rocky relationship with Islam.

But Pope Francis , who received Sheikh Tayeb last year at the Vatican  in a visit that restored relations, has a greater bank of good will because of his outreach to the Muslim world.

Francis has washed the feet of Muslims during the Holy Thursday Mass, and in 2016 he washed the feet of Muslim, Hindu, Catholic and Coptic Christian migrants — ritual that demonstrates humility and the notion that even the pope must serve his fellow man. During a trip last year to the Greek island of Lesbos, where he met the Muslim man who told him about the slaying of his Christian wife, he took 12 Muslim refugees back to Rome on the papal plane.

But he has also repeatedly, and clearly, drawn attention to the killings of Christians in Muslim countries like Egypt.

In 2013, during his first Easter season as pope, he asked the faithful to pray “specially for Christians who suffer persecution.”n 2014, he wrote a letter to all persecuted Christians in the Middle East, demanding “hat all religious leaders clearly speak out to condemn these crimes”nd he denounced “nvoking religion in order to justify”he crimes.

He spoke in support of “gyptian martyrs”n 2015 whose “hroats were cut as they pronounced Jesus’ame.”nd last year, he took the opportunity of the feast of St. Stephen, Christianity’ first martyr, to note that “he number of martyrs today is greater than in the early centuries.”

Some corners of the pope’ own church, though, think he has not gone far enough. They have balked at the logo for the trip to Egypt, which shows a cross and a crescent moon together. “r. Coexist,”ne conservative Catholic blog sniped.

His remarks to reporters after the killing  of a Catholic priest  by jihadists in France last year vexed many conservatives in the church. “ don’ think it is right to equate Islam with violence,”e told reporters. “f I have to talk about Islamic violence, I have to talk about Christian violence. Every day in the newspapers I see violence in Italy, someone kills his girlfriend, another kills his mother-in-law, and these are baptized Catholics.”

Francis has studiously maintained that aversion to criticism, even in private.

Last June, Father Samir, the Egyptian priest and a leading Catholic scholar of Islam, met with the pope to talk about Islam at the pope’ apartment in Vatican City. Before the meeting, Father Samir sent the pope articles he had written noting that the Quran contained both peaceful and violent passages.

When Father Samir broached the topic, he said the pope countered that his experiences with an imam in Argentina left him with the impression that Islam was peaceful and that he viewed his mission as re-establishing good relations with Muslims.

Father Samir said he gently countered that he himself could not be blind to the negative aspects of Islam, that both needed to be considered, but that the pope seemed to have little interest in the subject. “o he simply passed to other things,”ather Samir said in an interview, adding that “is knowledge of Islam is limited to the nice discussions he had with the imam.”

Despite his critique, Father Samir said he had seen an advance copy of the pope’ address to Mr. Sisi, which he considered strong and diplomatic for its emphasis on protecting the rights of all minorities.

That is a message top Vatican officials have emphasized.

“t is necessary to have a very strong protection of Christians; they are citizens with religious rights,”ardinal Sandri said. “specially from a point of view of religious freedom, we must consider all citizens the same.”

The Vatican released a video message on Tuesday of the pope greeting the Egyptian people ahead of his trip, in what Francis called a world “orn by blind violence, which has also afflicted the heart of your dear land.”

“ hope that this visit will be an embrace of consolation and of encouragement to all Christians in the Middle East,”e said, adding that he carried a message of reconciliation, “articularly in the Islamic world.”

Correction: April 27, 2017, Thursday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article mischaracterized the number of people in Egypt who follow Catholicism. The number 250,000 includes branches of Catholicism besides Roman Catholicism. An earlier version also described Al Azhar mosque incorrectly. It is affiliated with a university that is a revered center of learning in Sunni Islam, it is not Sunni Islam’ most influential training center of imams.

* Egypt Declares State of Emergency, as Attacks Undercut Promise of Security 

* Targeted by \b ISIS\b0 , Egyptian Christians Flee Violence 

* Attack on Coptic Cathedral in Cairo Kills Dozens 

A billboard in Cairo welcomed Pope Francis in advance of his planned arrival on Friday. | Amr Nabil/Associated Press | The authorities investigated a bombing inside Mar Girgis church in Tanta, Egypt, north of Cairo, this month. | European Pressphoto Agency | Pope Francis with Sheikh Ahmed al-Tayeb, grand imam of Al Azhar mosque, during an audience at the Vatican last year. | Max Rossi/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170427ed4r007hi



U.S.; Politics
Fact Check: The Trump Administration’ Argument for a Border Wall

By ERIC SCHMITT and LINDA QIU 
961 words
27 April 2017
21:50
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

WASHINGTON —s a Friday night deadline approaches to prevent a government shutdown, one hot-button spending issue is a down payment to build a wall on the southern border, one of President Trump’ signature national security goals.

Mr. Trump appeared to soften his demand late on Monday, saying he would settle for additional funds for border security. But then on Tuesday, he insisted again, “he wall’ going to get built, folks.”

In the run-up to this divisive debate, John F. Kelly, the homeland security secretary, has escalated his rhetoric about threats facing the United States.

“he risk is as threatening today as it was that September morning almost 16 years ago,”r. Kelly, a retired four-star Marine Corps general, said in a speech last week at George Washington University. Mr. Kelly suggested that undocumented immigrants may not be the only threat coming across the border with Mexico, pointing to the possibility of terrorists using the same smuggling routes to infiltrate the United States.

“e have tremendous threats, whether it’ drugs, people, potential terrorists coming up from the south,”r. Kelly told CBS’ “ace the Nation”ast Sunday.

The secretary’ comments raise several questions about the threat of terrorists sneaking across the border with the aid of cartels, the connection between drug smuggling and the recent surge in overdoses, and marijuana as a “ateway drug.”

Here’ what the experts say:

Is there a threat of ISIS or Qaeda terrorists entering through the southern border?

Not much, according to many terrorism specialists. Seamus Hughes, deputy director of George Washington University’ program on extremism, said there had been few instances of would-be terrorists using the southern border to enter the United States.

In some cases, he said, the opposite had occurred: Homegrown American jihadis have crossed the southern border to get out of the United States and catch a plane from Mexico, in an effort to avoid being detected on no-fly lists.

Mr. Hughes pointed to the case of Cabdulaahi Ahmed Faarax, who is wanted by the F.B.I. for conspiring to support a terrorist organization in Somalia. A naturalized American citizen who lived in Minneapolis and worked as a taxi driver, Mr. Faarax went to Somalia to fight with the Shabab, a Qaeda affiliate, in 2007. He returned to the United States to try to recruit other fighters, and was last seen in October 2009 at a United States-Mexico border crossing. He is believed to be in Somalia.

Terrorism experts say the Mexican drug cartels have been loath to allow terrorists to cross the border through their territories into the United States, fearing that any American military and law enforcement response to that threat would significantly disrupt their lucrative businesses.

Are drugs smuggled across the border responsible for the surge in overdoses?

This is exaggerated. Cartels do smuggle in vast quantities of illicit drugs, and Mr. Kelly accurately said that 52,404 deaths were caused by a drug overdose in 2015, “he highest number of drug-related deaths our country has ever seen.”ut it’ misleading to attribute all of these to Mexican cartels.

Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Preventionshows that about 33,000 overdose deaths involved opioids. Prescription drugs like OxyContin and Vicodin were the cause of nearly 15,000 of these deaths. Synthetic opioids accounted for another 10,000 deaths and heroin 13,000. (The categories do not add up to total opioid overdoses because a death may involve more than one drug.)

Prescription drugs can be obtained in the United States, but a border wall would not necessarily stop the flow of illicit opioids. Fentanyl, for example, typically originates from China and is sometimes trafficked directly into the United States or through Canada, according the Drug Enforcement Administration.

The most common way of transporting drugs like heroin into the United States, the D.E.A. reported in 2015, is stowing them in concealed compartments in vehicles through ports of entry. Other methods include using tunnels, drones, cargo trains and passenger buses —one of which would be prevented by a wall.

Is marijuana a gateway drug?

Mr. Kelly characterized marijuana as “otentially dangerous gateway drug”ut there is no scientific consensuson this question. Somestudies have found that people who use marijuana are more likely to take other illicit drugs compared with those who do not, but that doesn’ mean cannabis causes users to seek other drugs.

The main active component in marijuana, THC, dulls the brain’ dopamine system, which can “rime”he brain and lead users to other drugs. But this is no different from those who smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol.

The National Institute on Drug Abuse also notes that amajority of marijuana users do not use “arder”llicit drugs. Other factors like poverty, social environments, trauma, mental illness and individual characteristics are also critical factors for drug abuse and addiction.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Ron Nixon contributed reporting.

Correction: April 27, 2017, Thursday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misstated the name of an organization that researches drug use. It is the National Institute on Drug Abuse, not the National Institute of Drug Abuse.

* Wall ‘ill Get Built,’rump Insists, as He Drops Funding Demand

* Border Wall Could Cost 3 Times Estimates, Senate Democrats’eport Says

Border Patrol agents carrying bales of marijuana they found along the highway near the United States border with Mexico near Ryan, Texas, in March. | Rodrigo Abd/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170427ed4r007y5



World; Asia Pacific
2 U.S. Service Members Killed in Afghanistan, Pentagon Says

By HELENE COOPER 
630 words
27 April 2017
16:45
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —wo American service members were killed and a third was wounded Wednesday night in an operation in the same part of Afghanistan where the military dropped its most powerful conventional weapon two weeks ago, the Pentagon said.

The soldiers were taking part in a lengthy raid supported by airstrikes from American warplanes and targeting the Islamic State in Nangarhar Province, Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said. A number of Islamic State fighters have been engaging in a long-running battle with Afghanistan security forces in the Achin district.

Achin is where the Pentagon deployed on April 13 what is nicknamed the “mother of all bombs,”imed at Islamic State fighters who were hiding in caves and a tunnel complex. The Defense Department deemed the operation successful, but fighting has continued there and the Afghanistan military, supported by the Defense Department, has yet to clear the area of remaining Islamic State fighters.

Defense Department officials were waiting until immediate family was notified before releasing the names of the two soldiers killed. Officials said that a third soldier was wounded when they came under attack during the raid.

“he fight against ISIS-K is important for the world, but sadly, it is not without sacrifice,”aid Gen. John W. Nicholson, commander of United States Forces Afghanistan, using another name for the Islamic State fighters in Afghanistan. “n behalf of all U.S. forces and our coalition partners, I offer our deepest sympathies to the families, friends and fellow service members of our fallen comrades.”

Defense officials have given few details about the extent of the damage from the massive bomb because the area largely remains an active combat zone. General Nicholson did not speak to President Trump, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis or the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Joseph Dunford, before deploying the bomb, an action that signals the increased freedom which American military field commanders have received in the Trump presidency.

But that freedom has also prompted criticism from some foreign policy experts and even some Pentagon officials who say that field commanders have not thought about the larger strategic implications of their actions.

The Pentagon still has not offered a public assessment of how much damage was done by the bombing, a routine step after major strikes in Syria and Iraq. Afghan officials initially said that they believed only 36 Islamic State fighters had been killed, but they have since revised that number to just under 100.

An American military official in Kabul said Thursday that the massive bomb was dropped north of an area called Momand Bridge, and the two soldiers were killed just south of the bridge.

Afghan television channels broadcast Thursday what they said was the first video of the site of the bomb. In it, the tunnels used by Islamic State fighters look buried under rubble, with about 15 bodies strewn around.

The two soldiers killed Wednesday night bring to three the number of American service members killed in Afghanistan this year —ll in Nangarhar Province. Army Staff Sgt. Mark R. De Alencar, 37 and a Green Beret, was killed after coming under fire in Achin on April 8.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Helene Cooper on Twitter @helenecooper.Mujib Mashal contributed reporting from Kabul, Afghanistan.

* ‘other of All Bombs’illed Dozens of Militants, Afghan Officials Say

* U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs’n \b ISIS\b0  Caves in Afghanistan

The two American service members were killed Wednesday in Nangarhar Province, Afghanistan, where the “other of all bombs”as dropped two weeks ago, targeting Islamic State militants. | Noorullah Shirzada/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170427ed4r004s9



Foreign Desk; SECTA
On the Mosul Front, a Block-by-Block Fight Against  ISIS  and Time

By MICHAEL R. GORDON 
1,080 words
27 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Mr. Gordon, a military correspondent for The Times, is working with the Iraqi reporter Kamil Kakol on the front lines in Iraq.

Clambering onto a rooftop with a small group of soldiers from Iraq's counterterrorism service, we scanned the Islamic State's stronghold in western Mosul as one of its armored car bombs maneuvered toward the front line.

Within minutes, there was an enormous explosion -- a shoot of red flame and a funnel of black smoke that reached into the sky.

This time, at least, there were no friendly casualties. The Iraqi troops who were clawing their way forward in the streets below had piled enough debris ahead of them that the suicide driver was stopped short of his target. All over the city, you can see that kind of wreckage and ad hoc barriers, put up by both sides.

Every day, for weeks, the battle to take western Mosul from the Islamic State has looked like this: a block-by-block crawl as casualties mount.

The militants are contesting every move by the counterterrorism forces, and they are making full use of the hundreds of thousands of civilians still trapped in their strongholds.

''If the city was empty of civilians, we could have been done with our mission a long time ago,'' said Lt. Gen. Abdul-Wahab al-Saadi, a senior commander with the counterterrorism service.

The plight of civilians appears to be worsening by the day, adding to commanders' urgency to find some edge against the Islamic State here.

The Iraqis do not have the luxury of conducting a siege: Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi has told his generals that dragging out the Mosul operation, now in its seventh month, would work only to the advantage of the Islamic State, which many in the West call ISIS or ISIL, but the Iraqis call Daesh.

This was not the mission that American military commanders envisioned for the counterterrorism service when they established it after the United States invasion in 2003. The force's original mission was to conduct lightning raids against terrorists and insurgents.

''The CTS has made enormous sacrifices since 2014, and many of the old hand are dead, killed in Anbar Province and elsewhere,'' said David M. Witty, a retired colonel with the United States Army Special Forces and former adviser to the counterterrorism service, known as CTS.

The militants' basic strategy appears to be to focus much of their efforts on blunting the CTS attack, calculating that if they can stymie Iraq's most experienced fighting force, the Iraqi government's broader offensive will bog down. Now, the CTS is fighting on a southern front just to the west of Iraq's federal police and other Interior Ministry troops.

General Saadi, a senior CTS commander, invited me to come with him to the front in his armored Humvee. We carefully navigated past the wreckage of car bombs and hastily constructed barriers made of sand or abandoned cars.

Along the way, he showed me his tactical iPad, displaying the locations of all the friendly forces, his own position and the streets in the city.

When we started the drive, there was a smattering of civilians, some of whom had marked their houses with white flags. By the time we got to the Tanak section of the city, civilians were nowhere to be seen. Tanak was no longer a neighborhood -- it was terrain.

We got out of the vehicles in Tanak and entered an abandoned house with a small courtyard, where we encountered a small group of soldiers. None wore body armor; most seemed to favor bandannas over uniforms.

There were no advisers from the American-led coalition in sight. A small team, with mine-resistant ambush-protected vehicles, was monitoring the fight from Yarmouk.

The Iraqi soldiers established a machine-gun position on the roof to provide covering fire for soldiers pressing the fight below.

None of this was lost on ISIS, which flew a reconnaissance drone over and sent a scout on a motorcycle to try to find the Iraqis' position. Two American Black Hawk helicopters could be seen flying in the distance.

For hours, the two sides traded machine-gun fire. Young soldiers lugged heavy canisters of ammunition to the rooftop.

An aide to General Saadi, who used binoculars to monitor the fight and typed updates into the iPad, said that many of the Islamic State forces they had been battling were foreign fighters. From the bodies the Iraqis had recovered, he said, it appeared that many had not bathed in weeks.

''They don't have a social life,'' he said dismissively. ''They just come here to fight and die.''

Eventually, enough seemed to be enough, and an American airstrike was called in to quell some of the enemy resistance. An Iraqi machine-gunner poured on the fire.

ISIS would not be silenced. A sniper fired a round toward the covered landing where the stairwell reached our rooftop, figuring that an Iraqi spotter and other personnel might be lingering inside.

It was a good guess: That is where the general's aide and a few other journalists and I were sheltering. But we were low to the ground. The round was high and struck the back wall, splattering plaster, dust and tiny beads of glass into the air. One Iraqi cameraman took off his shirt to shake off the residue.

A battalion commander in a nearby counterterrorism unit was not so lucky that day: He was shot in the chest by a sniper and died.

On the drive back, we left the land of twisted wreckage and gradually rediscovered a small semblance of civilian life. There were small shops and children playing in the street. There was also a line of buses for residents looking to leave the city for refugee camps to the south.

General Saadi halted his Humvee and opened the heavily armored door to hand some food to an elderly beggar. But there was still more fighting to be done in the hours ahead, and tomorrow would be another day.

Kamil Kakol contributed reporting from Mosul, Iraq. Produced by Chris Cirillo, Andrew Rossback and Daphne Rustow.

Follow Michael R. Gordon on Twitter @gordonnyt .

An Iraqi special forces soldier fires at Islamic State militants as smoke from an airstrike billows in Mosul, Iraq, last week. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAYA ALLERUZZO/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170427ed4r0005n



Global Issues
The Learning Network; Lesson Plans
Examining How the Syrian Crisis Has Shaped the Lives of Young Refugees: A Guest Lesson Plan

By THE LEARNING NETWORK 
1,552 words
26 April 2017
14:13
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Note: Occasionally we partner with outside organizations who make especially good use of New York Times materials in their programming and curriculums. For example, this guest lesson on climate change was written by members of NASA’ Goddard Institute for Space Studies; this one about navigating life online was created by a writer at Common Sense Media; and this one about espionage was written by the y outh education director at the International Spy Museum.

Below, we feature a g uest lesson plan created by the Global Nomads Group, an international organization that creates interactive educational programs —nline platforms, video conferences, media and other learning materials —or students about global issues, to foster dialogue and understanding among the world’ youth . This lesson is designed to prepare students to participate in a live webcast on Wednesday, May 3, open to young people anywhere in the world who wish to participate.

_________

Background: As of December 2016, 4.8 million registered Syrian refugees had left their country. And 6.1 million more are internally displaced, which means they were forced to move within Syria. In other words, more than half of Syria’ 22 million citizens have left their homes because of the civil war that started in 2011. Youth are particularly vulnerable. Many young Syrians lost their security, homes and access to education.

These numbers can make the conflict seem too big or overwhelming to fix. But behind the statistics, there are stories of real people trying to build new homes for their families. There are youth working to improve their situations and the smaller challenges they face every day.

In this lesson plan, students will examine the effect of the Syrian crisis on the lives of young people from that country, especially those who are refugees. This lesson is part of a larger program organized by the Global Nomads Group, which includes this curriculum guide for teachers (PDF) as well as a live webcast involving Syrian refugee children and youth from around the world.

_________

Lesson Plan

Teacher’ Note: This lesson plan includes several suggestions so that teachers can choose the resources that will be most helpful and appropriate for their students. The resources listed include longer and shorter articles, as well as multimedia features such as slide shows and videos that require access to a computer and the internet to view. This guide also includes suggestions for ways to adapt the lesson to use specific resources.

Teachers are encouraged to:

■ Read the articles and watch the videos listed in steps 2 and 3 below in advance. Choose the stories of young Syrian refugees that will be interesting to your students.

■ Adapt plans and preparations for the lesson to give students enough time to read the articles, watch videos and use multimedia features you choose. This may include taking additional time (or more than one session) for the lesson.

■ Consider omitting any of the stories that may be too difficult or overwhelming for any of your students.

■ Consider choosing only one or two stories of Syrian young people for the entire class to explore together. (The stories of Hana Abdullah and Bayan Mohamed, listed below, are especially recommended in this case.)

________

1. Warm-up: Ask students to write a response to the following questions:

•hat do you know or have you heard about the crisis in Syria?

•ow do you think this war has affected Syrian young people?

Then, have students share their responses with the class.

Alternatively, if you plan on using the entire “eimagining Syria: Sharing Our Stories”urriculum, distribute Handout 1.1, Pre-program Assessment (PDF) and follow the instructions in the teacher curriculum guide.

2. Read and watch the stories of young Syrian refugees. Organize students into small groups. Explain that each group of students will focus on the story of a young Syrian refugee. Explain that they will read or watch the story, then research how the crisis in Syria has shaped that young person’ life and experience.

Give students time to read the articles or watch the videos.

Young Syrians Refugees: Six Stories

Hana Abdullah —“The Displaced: Hana”

Twelve-year-old Hana lives in a refugee settlement in Lebanon. She and others in her family work picking fruit and vegetables in nearby fields in the Bekaa Valley.

Bayan Mohammad —“Wonder and Worry as a Syrian Child Transforms”

A 10-year-old Syrian refugee resettles in Canada through a private sponsorship program in that country.

Hisham al-Najjar —“After Escape From Syria, Another Dangerous Foe: Diabetes”

A 5-year-old boy living with Type 1 diabetes and his family cope with their new circumstances as refugees in Jordan.

Yusra Mardini —“She Swam to Escape Syria. Now She’l Swim in Rio”

Yusra Mardini, a 16-year-old girl who left her home in the Daraya suburb of Damascus with her family in 2013, went on to compete as a swimmer on the International Olympic Committee’ refugee team in the 2016 summer games.

Lina Shamy —“I Went to Syria to Study. I Left in a Refugee Convoy.”

An architect and activist tells her story of studying in Aleppo, protesting the Assad regime, and ultimately fleeing the country.

Ahmad and Mohamed al-Haj Ali —“Why Is It So Difficult for Syrian Refugees to Get Into the U.S.?”

Seventeen-year-old twin boys, their parents and sister left Syria in 2012, ultimately settling in Aurora, Illinois.

Abdul Hadi Nasurah —“Syrian Refugees on the War, Their Camp, and Your Questions”

A 23-year-old Syrian man is among several refugees and residents of Za’tari Camp in Jordan who share their experiences and opinions with a New York Times reporter during an interactive video conference. Viewers in the United States, Brazil and other countries pose questions and comments in real time via social media, and the refugees with whom the reporter speaks respond.

________

3. Connecting information to stories. Ask students to write answers to the questions on Handout 1.2: Connecting information to stories, focusing on the experience of the refugee whose story they read or watched. They should make inferences based on information from the story, from the other resources below, and any other reliable sources they can find.

If there is enough time remaining in the lesson, ask each group to share what they have learned. They should begin with an introduction to the story of the young Syrian they read or watched, and then present answers to the questions they found as they reviewed the sources provided (or others they found).

Teachers’ote: Students may not find answers to all of the questions in the sources they read or viewed. Support them in answering as many questions as they can, but allow them to leave some unanswered if they cannot find reliable information to make inferences.

_________

4. Writing “nquiry questions and idea statements” Write these questions on the board, and ask students to finish them in ways that reflect their own opinions and perspectives.

A. Learning about the experiences of people from Syria (and those in the communities that host them), the five most important facts I learned were …

i. ___

ii. ___

iii. ___

iv. ___

v. ___

B. Something unexpected or surprising I heard or learned today was ...

C. One challenge or one opportunity I have in common with some of the Syrian youth in these stories is …

D. One challenge or one opportunity I face that is different from those facing Syrian youth in these stories is …

E. If I could ask [name of Syrian person from one of the stories] a question in person, I would ask …

Students can write their statements and questions individually, or working together in their small groups. Then they can share some of their reflections with the class.

________

Additional Learning Network Resources

Text to Text: Comparing Jewish Refugees of the 1930s With Syrian Refugees Today

Analyzing Trump’ Immigration Ban: A Lesson Plan

Growing Up in a Time of Fear: Confronting Stereotypes About Muslims and Countering Xenophobia

Tragedy in the Mediterranean: Learning About Europe’ Immigration Crisis

Analyzing Maps to Better Understand Global Current Events and History

The \b ISIS\b0  Threat: Teaching About the Complex War Raging in Iraq and Syria

The Fog of War: Helping Students Make Sense of Syria

Hana Abdullah left her home in Mabrouka, a small Syrian town, in 2011 at the beginning of the Syrian civil war, and moved with her extended family to a makeshift tent settlement in Lebanon’ Bekaa Valley. This photograph was taken on August 1, 2015, when Hana was 12 years old. | Lynsey Addario for The New York Times Magazine | Nisreen al-Najjar’ son Hisham, center, at home in Jordan. Hisham has Type 1 diabetes. Related Article | Nadia Bseiso for The New York Times | Yusra Mardini, who will compete on the refugee team at the Rio Games, trained at the Wasserfreunde Spandau 04 club in Berlin. Related Article | Gordon Welters for The New York Times | The Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan is one of the largest Syrian camps in the world. In the fall, we visited the camp live with our audience. Here’ what we heard from the refugees and from you. | By DEBORAH ACOSTA 

Document NYTFEED020170426ed4q002ut



Briefing
Tax Plan, Michael Flynn, Ivanka Trump: Your Wednesday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,168 words
26 April 2017
11:35
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•ax plan puts business first.

President Trump plans to unveil a tax blueprint today that would apply a vastly reduced, 15 percent rate to a wide array of businesses, including his own. But it may omit a contentious border tax on imports.

Markets rose on the news, but our economics reporters caution that it is too soon to say if the administration can deliver on its promises.

Part of the inspiration for the president’ plan was a sketch on a white cloth napkin in 1974.

•ow was your Tuesday?

It was a busy one for the administration:

•resident Trump dropped his demand for immediate funds for a border wall, easing the passage of a spending bill by Friday to avert a government shutdown.

•ichael Flynn, the former national security adviser, may have violated the law by not disclosing his business dealings with Russia, top lawmakers from both parties said.

• federal judge blocked the administration’ efforts to cut funds for “anctuary cities.”

•nd the president made an unequivocal statement of support for Israel at an annual Holocaust remembrance ceremony and promised to “onfront anti-Semitism.”

•itnessing a battle against ISIS.

Michael Gordon, a military correspondent for The Times, is on the front lines in Iraq, where the fight to retake western Mosul from the Islamic State continues.

He guides us through a city where the plight of thousands of civilians appears to be worsening by the day.

•orries beyond water.

If anxieties over tainted water in Flint, Mich., have eased, other problems remain.

Our reporter visited one block in the city and found people struggling with entrenched poverty and violence.

“ feel like Flint is falling,”ne resident said. “t just keeps on falling.”

•enn Station nightmare.

After two derailments, Amtrak is considering closing tracks at the station in Manhattan for an extended period to make repairs.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

In today’ show, we look at the man behind Uber, for better or worse.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•ore trouble at Fox News: Eleven current and former employees have filed a class-action lawsuit against the network, alleging racial discrimination and expanding on a complaint filed in March.

A Fox News spokeswoman denied the allegations, which came less than a week after the ouster of the network’ star host Bill O’eilly.

•early half of the largest U.S. corporations have set their own targets for emissions reductions, even as the Trump administration retreats from environmental commitments.

In the U.S., there are more than two jobs in the solar industry for each job in coal.

•espite the turmoil that has engulfed Wells Fargo in the past year, shareholders voted, tepidly, to keep all of the bank’ 15 directors.

• debt crisis in one town in China has raised fears of wider problems across the country.

•he Nasdaqpassed 6,000 for the first time on Tuesday, and other U.S. indexes were also up. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

•ne of the keys to success at work is taking time off.

•ecipe of the day: Eggs, chorizo and asparagus are a good option for any time of day.

Noteworthy

•“hat happened in this place is beyond our imagination.”

In today’ 360 video, we visit Auschwitz, where a major construction project is underway to preserve the memory of the Holocaust.

•mbrace your failures.

That’ the ethos of a museum that will open in Sweden in June.

In a collection that offers insight into the “isky business of innovation,”he Museum of Failure will showcase products that flopped, such as Harley-Davidson fragrance, Bic pens for women, and Coca-Cola Blak, a coffee-inspired drink.

•he spirit of Selena.

Fans of Selena Quintanilla-Péez, the Tejano singer who was murdered in 1995 at 23, have never stopped celebrating her life.

A photographer captured portraits of fans at a gathering in Los Angeles.

•amiliar fare in a new setting.

Our restaurant critic reviews Union Square Cafe, which tries to replicate the original mainstay at a new location in Gramercy Park.

•est of late-night TV.

The hosts had a lot to say after Ivanka Trump defended her father’ treatment of women and called him a “remendous champion”f families.

Back Story

Last weekend, protesters marched in defense of scientific inquiry, spurred by a president who casts doubt on climate change.

They might have been pleased by today’ tale, of a government that turned to a citizen-scientist for answers.

On this day in 1803, a shower of 2,000 to 3,000 meteorites fell on L’igle, France. The French Academy of Sciences sent Jean-Baptiste Biot, a physicist, to assess the origin of the debris.

Mr. Biot concluded that the meteorites didn’ resemble anything on Earth and, considering accounts of “a rain of stones thrown by the meteor,”ad to be from outer space.

He thus established the field of study called meteoritics. (Meteorology, the study of the atmosphere and its phenomena, was already claimed.)

Four years later, a meteor and its debris were seen in Connecticut, and two Yale scientists concluded they had come from space. President Thomas Jefferson greeted their findings with caution, however.

(A remark widely attributed to him on the matter is most likely apocryphal: that it was “asier to believe that two Yankee professors could lie than to admit that stones could fall from heaven.”

It wasn’ until later in the 19th century that meteorites’xtraterrestrial origins became widely accepted as scientific fact.

Thomas Lotito contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

Top lawmakers from both parties have said that Michael Flynn, President Trump’ former national security adviser, may have broken the law. | Drew Angerer/Getty Images | Officials at Amtrak, which owns and operates Penn Station, say the infrastructure at the terminal urgently needs an overhaul. | Todd Heisler/The New York Times | Natalia Loya, 16, at the fourth annual Selena Fan Gathering in Los Angeles. | Emily Berl for The New York Times | Panna cotta at Union Square Cafe, where our restaurant critic experienced more than a dash of déàu. | Francesco Sapienza for The New York Times | The March for Science in Washington on Saturday. | Hilary Swift for The New York Times | Nazi Germany’ largest death camp is under construction in order to preserve the memory of the Holocaust. | By STEFANIA ROUSSELLE, VEDA SHASTRI and JOSHUA THOMAS 

Document NYTFEED020170426ed4q00209



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Turkish Warplanes Target Kurdish Fighters Allied With U.S. in Iraq and Syria

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and KAMIL KAKOL; Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon. 
1,057 words
26 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq -- Turkish warplanes bombed Kurdish fighters in Iraq and Syria on Tuesday in an unusually intense operation that presented a new complication for the United States' military campaign against the Islamic State.

The Turkish military's targets included the Y.P.G., a Kurdish militia that has played an important role in the American-backed operations in Syria against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

Adding to the tensions in the region, Kurdish officials said one Turkish airstrike had mistakenly struck Kurdish pesh merga troops on Mount Sinjar in northwestern Iraq, killing at least five and wounding more, some critically.

The pesh merga in Iraq's autonomous region carried out the opening attacks in the offensive to retake Mosul from the Islamic State, and they have been an American ally in operations against the militants.

American officials said Turkey had informed the United States less than an hour in advance that it intended to carry out the bombing raids in the crowded airspace over northern Syria and Iraq. American officials said that they had asked Turkey not to proceed without proper coordination, but that the request was ignored.

Mark Toner, a State Department spokesman, said the United States was ''deeply concerned'' about the Turkish airstrikes, which were ''not approved'' by the United States-led coalition that is fighting the Islamic State.

''It was a surprise,'' Masrour Barzani, a top Kurdish security official in the Iraqi autonomous region, said of the Turkish attack on Mount Sinjar. ''This was the first time they have been bombing there. They had been mostly bombing border areas.''

''We asked for some clarification but have not received any answers yet,'' he said in an interview. ''I hope on the Turkish side it was a mistake.''

Iraq's Foreign Ministry denounced the attacks in the Sinjar area as a violation of the country's sovereignty.

The Turkish strikes pointed to continuing and deep tensions between the United States and Turkey over how to carry out the campaign against the Islamic State.

The United States and Turkey have been sharply at odds over the Y.P.G. militia. American military officials regard the group as an essential partner in the operation to isolate and retake Raqqa, Syria, the Islamic State's self-proclaimed capital, and they want to arm its fighters for that mission.

Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, who commands the American-led task force that is fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, told reporters during a February trip to Syria that Turkey had no reason to fear the Y.P.G. or the umbrella group it is a crucial part of, the Syrian Democratic Forces.

''The Turkish government is not really crazy that we are operating with the Syrian Democratic Forces, mostly because of their Kurdish and Y.P.G. components,'' General Townsend said. But the Kurdish fighters ''tell us they are not a threat to Turkey, and I believe that,'' he added.

The Turkish government, however, insists that the Y.P.G. is closely linked to the Kurdistan Workers' Party, a separatist group known as the P.K.K. That group is listed by Turkey, the United States and Europe as a terrorist organization.

American officials had hoped that Turkey would soften its stance after President Recep Tayyip Erdogan won a referendum this month that greatly increased his executive powers, a victory that brought a congratulatory phone call from President Trump. But any hope that Mr. Erdogan's position might reflect posturing before the vote appeared to vanish with the airstrikes.

The Turkish military said in a statement that it had struck ''terror nests'' in northeast Syria and northwest Iraq that Kurdish separatists were using to send weapons and plan attacks inside Turkey. ''The designated targets were hit,'' said the statement, which asserted that the bombing raids were ''based on international law.''

The division between Turkey and the United States was only highlighted when the Kurdish news media posted photographs of a United States military officer, in the company of Y.P.G. leaders, visiting the site in Syria that was bombed. Mr. Erdogan is scheduled to meet with Mr. Trump in Washington next month.

A statement issued by Ridor Kahlil, a spokesman for the Y.P.G., said 20 fighters were killed in the Turkish airstrikes. The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group, said the targets included a radio station east of Hasaka owned by the Y.P.G.

The Turkish airstrikes on Mount Sinjar began around 2 a.m. and lasted about an hour, Capt. Falah Abu Zeid, an officer with the Iraqi Kurdish pesh merga, said in a telephone interview. The bombing, he added, struck four Y.P.G. and P.K.K. headquarters in the area.

''If there were any fighters in those headquarters, it would have been impossible for them to survive because of the force of the shelling,'' he said.

But one of the missiles, he added, struck communications towers near a pesh merga headquarters, killing and wounding pesh merga fighters.

The Kurdish autonomous government in Iraq has long had an acrimonious relationship with the Y.P.G. and P.K.K., which, like Turkey, it regards as one and the same. The pesh merga offensive to retake Sinjar from the Islamic State in 2015 was delayed by tensions between the pesh merga and the P.K.K., who competed to take the lead in the battle. And it was noteworthy that Mr. Barzani, the Kurdish security official, did not call on Turkey to cease its airstrikes in Iraq but instead pointed the finger of blame at the P.K.K.

''The P.K.K. is the reason for all of these problems,'' he said. ''They are the reason the Turks are bombing. It is not a matter of whether we like it or not. The P.K.K. is dragging the Turks in.''

Follow Michael R. Gordon on Twitter @gordonnyt .

Y.P.G. fighters and Kurdish police officers viewed the aftermath of Turkish strikes near Derik, Syria, a northeastern Kurdish town known as Al Malikiyah in Arabic. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DELIL SOULEIMAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170426ed4q00065



magazine
Can Facebook Fix Its Own Worst Bug?; Feature

By FARHAD MANJOO 
5,909 words
25 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In early January, I went to see Mark Zuckerberg at MPK20, a concrete-and-steel building on the campus of Facebook’ headquarters, which sits across a desolate highway from the marshy salt flats of Menlo Park, Calif. The Frank Gehry-designed building has a pristine nine-acre rooftop garden, yet much of the interior — meandering open-plan hallway —ppears unfinished. There are exposed air ducts and I-beams scribbled with contractors’arks. Many of the internal walls are unpainted plywood. The space looks less like the headquarters of one of the world’ wealthiest companies and more like a Chipotle with standing desks. It’ an aesthetic meant to reflect —nd perhaps also inspire employee allegiance to —ne of Facebook’ founding ideologies: that things are never quite finished, that nothing is permanent, that you should always look for a chance to take an ax to your surroundings.

The mood in overwhelmingly liberal Silicon Valley at the time, days before Donald Trump’ inauguration, was grim. But Zuckerberg, who had recently returned from his 700-acre estate on the Hawaiian island of Kauai, is preternaturally unable to look anything other than excited about the future. “ey, guys!”e beamed, greeting me and Mike Isaac, a Times colleague who covers Facebook. Zuckerberg wore a short-sleeve gray T-shirt, jeans and sneakers, which is his Steve Jobsian daily uniform: Indoor Zuck.

Zuckerberg used to be a nervous speaker, but he has become much less so. He speaks quickly but often unloads full paragraphs of thought, and sometimes his arguments are so polished that they sound rehearsed, which happened often that morning. “016 was an interesting year for us,”e said as the three of us, plus a P.R. executive, sat around a couple of couches in the glass-walled conference room where he conducts many of his meetings. (There are many perks to working at Facebook, but no one, not even Zuckerberg, has a private office.) It was an understatement and a nod to the obvious: Facebook, once a mere app on your phone, had become a global political and cultural force, and the full implications of that transformation had begun to come into view last year. “f you look at the history of Facebook, when we started off, there really wasn’ news as part of it,”uckerberg went on. But as Facebook grew and became a bigger part of how people learn about the world, the company had been slow to adjust to its new place in people’ lives. The events of 2016, he said, “et off a number of conversations that we’e still in the middle of.”

Nearly two billion people use Facebook every month, about 1.2 billion of them daily. The company, which Zuckerberg co-founded in his Harvard dorm room 13 years ago, has become the largest and most influential entity in the news business, commanding an audience greater than that of any American or European television news network, any newspaper or magazine in the Western world and any online news outlet. It is also the most powerful mobilizing force in politics, and it is fast replacing television as the most consequential entertainment medium. Just five years after its initial public offering, Facebook is one of the 10 highest market-capitalized public companies in the world.

As recently as a year ago, Zuckerberg might have proudly rattled off these facts as a testament to Facebook’ power. But over the course of 2016, Facebook’ gargantuan influence became its biggest liability. During the U.S. election, propagandists —ome working for money, others for potentially state-sponsored lulz —sed the service to turn fake stories into viral sensations, like the one about Pope Francis’ndorsing Trump (he hadn’). And fake news was only part of a larger conundrum. With its huge reach, Facebook has begun to act as the great disseminator of the larger cloud of misinformation and half-truths swirling about the rest of media. It sucks up lies from cable news and Twitter, then precisely targets each lie to the partisan bubble most receptive to it.

After studying how people shared 1.25 million stories during the campaign, a team of researchers at M.I.T. and Harvard implicatedFacebook and Twitter in the larger failure of media in 2016. The researchers found that social media created a right-wing echo chamber: a “edia network anchored around Breitbart developed as a distinct and insulated media system, using social media as a backbone to transmit a hyperpartisan perspective to the world.”he findings partially echoed a long-held worry about social news: that people would use sites like Facebook to cocoon themselves into self-reinforcing bubbles of confirmatory ideas, to the detriment of civility and a shared factual basis from which to make collective, democratic decisions. A week and a half after the election, President Obama bemoaned “n age where there’ so much active misinformation and it’ packaged very well and it looks the same when you see it on a Facebook page or you turn on your television.”

After the election, Zuckerberg offered a few pat defenses of Facebook’ role. “’ actually quite proud of the impact that we were able to have on civic discourse over all,”e said when we spoke in January. Misinformation on Facebook was not as big a problem as some believed it was, but Facebook nevertheless would do more to battle it, he pledged. Echo chambers were a concern, but if the source was people’ own confirmation bias, was it really Facebook’ problem to solve?

It was hard to tell how seriously Zuckerberg took the criticisms of his service and its increasingly paradoxical role in the world. He had spent much of his life building a magnificent machine to bring people together. By the most literal measures, he’ succeeded spectacularly, but what had that connection wrought? Across the globe, Facebook now seems to benefit actors who want to undermine the global vision at its foundation. Supporters of Trump and the European right-wing nationalists who aim to turn their nations inward and dissolve alliances, trolls sowing cross-border paranoia, even ISIS with its skillful social-media recruiting and propagandizing —ll of them have sought in their own ways to split the Zuckerbergian world apart. And they are using his own machine to do it.

In Silicon Valley, current events tend to fade into the background. The Sept. 11 attacks, the Iraq war, the financial crisis and every recent presidential election occurred, for the tech industry, on some parallel but distant timeline divorced from the everyday business of digitizing the world. Then Donald Trump won. In the 17 years I’e spent covering Silicon Valley, I’e never seen anything shake the place like his victory. In the span of a few months, the Valley has been transformed from a politically disengaged company town into a center of anti-Trump resistance and fear. A week after the election, one start-up founder sent me a private message on Twitter: “ think it’ worse than I thought,”e wrote. “riginally I thought 18 months. I’e cut that in half.”ntil what? “pocalypse. End of the world.”

Trump’ campaign rhetoric felt particularly personal for an industry with a proud reliance upon immigrants. Stephen K. Bannon, Trump’ campaign chief executive and now chief White House strategist, once suggested that there were too many South Asian chief executives in tech. More than 15 percent of Facebook’ employees are in the United States on H-1B visas, a program that Trump has pledged to revamp. But the outcome also revealed the depth of the Valley’ disconnection with much of the rest of the country. “ saw an election that was just different from the way I think,”ays Joshua Reeves, a Bay Area native who is a co-founder of Gusto, a human-resources software start-up. “ have this engineering brain that wants to go to this analytical, rational, nonemotional way of looking at things, and it was clear in this election that we’e trending in a different direction, toward spirited populism.”

Underneath it all was a nagging feeling of complicity. Trump had benefited from a media environment that is now shaped by Facebook —nd, more to the point, shaped by a single Facebook feature, the same one to which the company owes its remarkable ascent to social-media hegemony: the computationally determined list of updates you see every time you open the app. The list has a formal name, News Feed. But most users are apt to think of it as Facebook itself.

If it’ an exaggeration to say that News Feed has become the most influential source of information in the history of civilization, it is only slightly so. Facebook created News Feed in 2006 to solve a problem: In the social-media age, people suddenly had too many friends to keep up with. At the time, Facebook was just a collection of profiles, lacking any kind of central organization. To figure out what any of your connections were up to, you had to visit each of their profiles to see if anything had changed. News Feed fixed that. Every time you open Facebook, it hunts through the network, collecting every post from every connection —nformation that, for most Facebook users, would be too overwhelming to process themselves. Then it weighs the merits of each post before presenting you with a feed sorted in order of importance: a hyperpersonalized front page designed just for you.

Scholars and critics have been warning of the solipsistic irresistibility of algorithmic news at least since 2001, when the constitutional-law professor Cass R. Sunstein warned, in his book “epublic.com,”f the urgent risks posed to democracy “y any situation in which thousands or perhaps millions or even tens of millions of people are mainly listening to louder echoes of their own voices.”In 2008, I piled on with my own book, “rue Enough: Learning to Live in a Post-Fact Society.” In 2011, the digital activist and entrepreneur Eli Pariser, looking at similar issues, gave this phenomenon a memorable name in the title of his own book: “he Filter Bubble.”

Facebook says its own researchers have been studying the filter bubble since 2010. In 2015, they published an in-house study, which was criticized by independent researchers, concluding that Facebook’ effect on the diversity of people’ information diet was minimal. News Feed’ personalization algorithm did filter out some opposing views in your feed, the study claimed, but the bigger effect was users’wn choices. When News Feed did show people views contrary to their own, they tended not to click on the stories. For Zuckerberg, the finding let Facebook off the hook. “t’ a good-sounding theory, and I can get why people repeat it, but it’ not true,”e said on a call with analysts last summer.

Employees got the same message. “hen Facebook cares about something, they spin up teams to address it, and Zuck will come out and talk about it all the time,”ne former executive told me. “ have never heard of anything close to that on the filter bubble. I never sensed that this was a problem he wanted us to tackle. It was always positioned as an interesting intellectual question but not something that we’e going to go focus on.”

Then, last year, Facebook’ domination of the news became a story itself. In May, Gizmodo reported that some editors who had worked on Facebook’ Trending Topics section had been suppressing conservative points of view. To smooth things over, Zuckerberg convened a meeting of conservative media figures and eventually significantly reduced the role of human editors. Then in September, Facebookdeleted a post by a Norwegian writer that included the photojournalist Nick Ut’ iconic photo of a naked 9-year-old girl, Phan Thi Kim Phuc, running in terror after a napalm attack during the Vietnam War, on the grounds that it ran afoul of Facebook’ prohibition of child nudity.

Facebook, under criticism, reinstated the picture, but the photo incident stuck with Zuckerberg. He would bring it up unbidden to staff members and to reporters. It highlighted, for him, the difficulty of building a policy framework for what Facebook was trying to do. Zuckerberg wanted to become a global news distributor that is run by machines, rather than by humans who would try to look at every last bit of content and exercise considered judgment. “t’ something I think we’e still figuring out,”e told me in January. “here’ a lot more to do here than what we’e done. And I think we’e starting to realize this now as well.”

It struck me as an unsatisfying answer, and it later became apparent that Zuckerberg seemed to feel the same way. On a Sunday morning about a month after the first meeting, I got a call from a Facebook spokesman. Zuckerberg wanted to chat again. Could Mike and I come back on Monday afternoon?

We met again in the same conference room. Same Zuck outfit, same P.R. executive. But the Zuckerberg who greeted us seemed markedly different. He was less certain in his pronouncements than he had been the month before, more expansive and questioning. Earlier that day, Zuckerberg’ staff had sent me a draft of a 5,700-word manifesto that, I was told, he spent weeks writing. The document, “Building Global Community,”rgued that until now, Facebook’ corporate goal had merely been to connect people. But that was just Step 1. According to the manifesto, Facebook’ “ext focus will be developing the social infrastructure for community —or supporting us, for keeping us safe, for informing us, for civic engagement, and for inclusion of all.”f it was a nebulous crusade, it was also vast in its ambition.

The last manifesto that Zuckerberg wrote was in 2012, as part of Facebook’ application to sell its stock to the public. It explained Facebook’ philosophy —hat he called “the hacker way”—nd sketched an unorthodox path for the soon-to-be-public company. “Facebook was not originally created to be a company,”e wrote. “t was built to accomplish a social mission: to make the world more open and connected.”

What’ striking about that 2012 letter, read through the prism of 2017, is its certainty that a more “pen and connected”orld is by definition a better one. “hen I started Facebook, the idea of connecting the world was not controversial,”uckerberg said now. “he default assumption was that the world was incrementally just moving in that direction. So I thought we can connect some people and do our part in helping move in that direction.”ut now, he said, whether it was wise to connect the world was “ctually a real question.”

Zuckerberg’ new manifesto never quite accepts blame for any of the global ills that have been laid at Facebook’ feet. Yet by the standards of a company release, it is remarkable for the way it concedes that the company’ chief goal —iring the globe —s controversial. “here are questions about whether we can make a global community that works for everyone,”uckerberg writes, “nd whether the path ahead is to connect more or reverse course.”e also confesses misgivings about Facebook’ role in the news. “iving everyone a voice has historically been a very positive force for public discourse because it increases the diversity of ideas shared,”e writes. “ut the past year has also shown it may fragment our shared sense of reality.”

At the time of our second interview, the manifesto was still only a draft, and I was surprised by how unsure Zuckerberg seemed about it in person. He had almost as many questions for us —bout whether we understood what he was trying to say, how we thought it would land in the media —s we had for him. When I suggested that it might be perceived as an attack on Trump, he looked dismayed. He noted several times that he had been noodling over these ideas since long before November. A few weeks earlier, there was media speculation, fueled by a postelection tour of America by Zuckerberg and his wife, that he was laying the groundwork to run against Trump in 2020, and in this meeting he took pains to shoot down the rumors. When I asked if he had chatted with Obama about the former president’ critique of Facebook, Zuckerberg paused for several seconds, nearly to the point of awkwardness, before answering that he had.

Facebook’ spokespeople later called to stress that Obama was only one of many people to whom he had spoken. In other words: Don’ read this as a partisan anti-Trump manifesto. But if the company pursues the admittedly airy aims outlined in “uilding Global Community,”he changes will echo across media and politics, and some are bound to be considered partisan. The risks are especially clear for changes aimed at adding layers of journalistic ethics across News Feed, which could transform the public’ perception of Facebook, not to mention shake the foundations of its business.

The Facebook app,and consequently News Feed, is run by one of Zuckerberg’ most influential lieutenants, a 34-year-old named Chris Cox, the company’ chief product officer. Ten years ago, Cox dropped out of a graduate program in computer science at Stanford to join Facebook. One of his first assignments was on the team that created News Feed. Since then, he has become an envoy to the media industry. Don Graham, the longtime publisher of The Washington Post who was for years a member of Facebook’ board, told me that he felt Cox, among Facebook staff, “as at the 99.9th percentile of interest in news. He thought it was important to society, and he wanted Facebook to get it right.”

For the typical user, Cox explained when I met him on a morning in October at MPK20, News Feed is computing the relative merits of about 2,000 potential posts in your network every time you open the app. In sorting these posts, Facebook does not optimize for any single metric: not clicks or reading time or likes. Instead, he said, “hat you really want to get to is whether somebody, at the end of the day, would say, ‘ey, my experience today was meaningful.’ ”ersonalizing News Feed, in other words, is a very big “ath problem,”ncorporating countless metrics in extraordinarily complicated ways. Zuckerberg calls it “ modern A.I. problem.”

Last summer, I sat in on two meetings in another glass-walled MPK20 conference room, in which News Feed’ engineers, designers, user-research experts and managers debated several small alterations to how News Feed displays certain kinds of posts. The conversations were far from exciting —eople in jeans on couches looking at PowerPoints, talking quietly about numbers —nd yet I found them mesmerizing, a demonstration of the profound cultural differences between how news companies like The Times work and how Facebook does. The first surprise was how slowly things move, contrary to the freewheeling culture of “he hacker way.”n one meeting, the team spent several minutes discussing the merits of bold text in a certain News Feed design. One blessing of making social software is that you can gauge any potential change to your product by seeing how your users react to it. That is also the curse: At Facebook, virtually every change to the app, no matter how small or obviously beneficial, is thoroughly tested on different segments of the audience before it’ rolled out to everyone.

The people who work on News Feed aren’ making decisions that turn on fuzzy human ideas like ethics, judgment, intuition or seniority. They are concerned only with quantifiable outcomes about people’ actions on the site. That data, at Facebook, is the only real truth. And it is a particular kind of truth: The News Feed team’ ultimate mission is to figure out what users want —hat they find “eaningful,”o use Cox and Zuckerberg’ preferred term —nd to give them more of that.

This ideal runs so deep that the people who make News Feed often have to put aside their own notions of what’ best. “ne of the things we’e all learned over the years is that our intuition can be wrong a fair amount of the time,”ohn Hegeman, the vice president of product management and a News Feed team member, told me. “here are things you don’ expect will happen. And we learn a lot from that process: Why didn’ that happen, and what might that mean?”ut it is precisely this ideal that conflicts with attempts to wrangle the feed in the way press critics have called for. The whole purpose of editorial guidelines and ethics is often to suppress individual instincts in favor of some larger social goal. Facebook finds it very hard to suppress anything that its users’ctions say they want. In some cases, it has been easier for the company to seek out evidence that, in fact, users don’ want these things at all.

Facebook’ two-year-long battle against “lickbait”s a telling example. Early this decade, the internet’ headline writers discovered the power of stories that trick you into clicking on them, like those that teasingly withhold information from their headlines: “Dustin Hoffman Breaks Down Crying Explaining Something That Every Woman Sadly Already Experienced.”y the fall of 2013, clickbait had overrun News Feed. Upworthy, a progressive activism site co-founded by Pariser, the author of “he Filter Bubble,”hat relied heavily on teasing headlines, was attracting 90 million readers a month to its feel-good viral posts.

If a human editor ran News Feed, she would look at the clickbait scourge and make simple, intuitive fixes: Turn down the Upworthy knob. But Facebook approaches the feed as an engineering project rather than an editorial one. When it makes alterations in the code that powers News Feed, it’ often only because it has found some clear signal in its data that users are demanding the change. In this sense, clickbait was a riddle. In surveys, people kept telling Facebook that they hated teasing headlines. But if that was true, why were they clicking on them? Was there something Facebook’ algorithm was missing, some signal that would show that despite the clicks, clickbait was really sickening users?

To answer these questions, Cox and his team hired survey panels of more than a thousand paid “rofessional raters”round the world who answer questions about how well News Feed is working. Starting in 2013, Facebook began adding first dozens and then hundreds and then thousands of data points that were meant to teach the artificial-intelligence system that runs News Feed how people were reacting to their feeds. Facebook noticed that people would sometimes click open a clickbaity story but spend very little time on it. In other cases, lots of people would click on a story but few would share or Like it. Headlines on stories that people seemed to reject often contained a set of signature phrases (“ou’l never believe,”“his one trick,”tc.) or they came from a set of repeat-offender publishers.

The more such signals Facebook incorporated into the feed, the more clickbait began to drop out of the feed. Since its 2013 peak, Upworthy’ traffic has declined; it now averages 17.5 million visitors a month. The site has since disavowed clickbait. “e sort of unleashed a monster,”eter Koechley, Upworthy’ co-founder, told a conference in 2015. “orry for that.”

Cox suggested that it was not exactly correct to say that Facebook, as a company, decided to fight clickbait. What actually happened was that Facebook found better ways to listen to users, who were themselves rejecting clickbait. “hat comes out of good-quality panels and measurement systems, rather than an individual decision saying, ‘ey, I really want us to care about clickbait,’ ”e says.

This approach —ooking for signs of user dissatisfaction —ould curb stories that constitute the most egregious examples of misinformation. Adam Mosseri, Facebook’ vice president in charge of News Feed, says that Facebook has begun testing an algorithm change that would look at whether people share an article after reading it. If few of the people who click on a story decide to share it, that might suggest people feel misled by it and it would get lower billing in the feed.

But the solution to the broader misinformation dilemma —he pervasive climate of rumor, propaganda and conspiracy theories that Facebook has inadvertently incubated —ay require something that Facebook has never done: ignoring the likes and dislikes of its users. Facebook believes the pope-endorses-Trump type of made-up news stories are only a tiny minority of pieces that appear in News Feed; they account for a fraction of 1 percent of the posts, according to Mosseri. The question the company faces now is whether the misinformation problem resembles clickbait at all, and whether its solutions will align as neatly with Facebook’ worldview. Facebook’ entire project, when it comes to news, rests on the assumption that people’ individual preferences ultimately coincide with the public good, and that if it doesn’ appear that way at first, you’e not delving deeply enough into the data. By contrast, decades of social-science research shows that most of us simply prefer stuff that feels true to our worldview even if it isn’ true at all and that the mining of all those preference signals is likely to lead us deeper into bubbles rather than out of them.

After the election, Margaret Sullivan, the Washington Post columnist and a former public editor of The Times, called on Facebook to hire an executive editor who would monitor News Feed with an eye to fact-checking, balance and editorial integrity. Jonah Peretti, the founder of BuzzFeed, told me that he wanted Facebook to use its data to create a kind of reputational score for online news, as well as explore ways of strengthening reporting through monetary partnerships.

“t some point, if they really want to address this, they have to say, ‘his is good information’nd ‘his is bad information,’ ”ays Emily Bell, the director for the Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia Journalism School. “hey have to say, ‘hese are the kinds of information sources that we want to privilege, and these others are not going to be banned from the platform, but they are not going to thrive.’n other words, they have to create a hierarchy, and they’e going to have to decide how they’e going to transfer wealth into the publishing market.”

There aren’ many technical reasons Facebook could not implement such plans. The hurdles are institutional and philosophical, and ultimately financial too. Late last year, Facebook outlined a modest effort to curb misinformation. News Feed would now carry warning labels: If a friend shares a viral story that has been flagged and shot down by one of Facebook’ fact-checking partners (including Snopes and PolitiFact), you’l be cautioned that the piece has been “isputed.”ut even that slight change has been met with fury on the right, with Breitbart and The Daily Caller fuming that Facebook had teamed up with liberal hacks motivated by partisanship. If Facebook were to take more significant action, like hiring human editors, creating a reputational system or paying journalists, the company would instantly become something it has long resisted: a media company rather than a neutral tech platform.

In many ways, the worry over how Facebook changes the news is really a manifestation of a grander problem with News Feed, which is simply dominance itself. News Feed’ aggressive personalization wouldn’ be much of an issue if it weren’ crowding out every other source. “o some degree I feel like the Pottery Barn Rule applies,”ays Pariser, the Upworthy chief executive. “hey play a critical role in our information circulatory system, and so —ucky them —ll of the problems therein are significantly on their shoulders.”

During our first meeting in January, I posed this question to Zuckerberg: “hen you see various problems in the media, do you say to yourself, ‘ run Facebook, I can solve that?’ ”

“m,”e started, and then paused, weighing his words as carefully as American presidents once did. “ot usually.”e argued that some of Facebook’ critics’roposed fixes for news on the service, such as hiring editors, were impractical due to Facebook’ scale and global diversity. Personalization, he said, remained a central tenet. “t really gets back to, like, what do people want at a deep level,”e said. “here’ this oversimplified narrative that a company can get very successful by just scratching a very superficial itch, and I don’ really think that’ right over the long term.”

Yet by our second meeting, Zuckerberg’ position seemed to have evolved. Facebook had by then announced plans for the Facebook Journalism Project, in which the company would collaborate with news companies on new products. Facebook also created a project to promote “ews literacy”mong its users, and it hired the former CNN news anchor Campbell Brown to manage the partnership between it and news companies. Zuckerberg’ tone toward critics of Facebook’ approach to news had also grown far more conciliatory. “ think it’ really important to get to the core of the actual problem,”e said. “ also really think that the core social thing that needs to happen is that a common understanding needs to exist. And misinformation I view as one of the things that can possibly erode common understanding. But sensationalism and polarization and other things, I actually think, are probably even stronger and more prolific effects. And we have to work on all these things. I think we need to listen to all the feedback on this.”

Still, in both our conversation and his new manifesto, Zuckerberg remained preoccupied with the kind of problems that could be solved by the kind of hyperconnectivity he believed in, not the ones caused by it. “here’ a social infrastructure that needs to get built for modern problems in order for humanity to get to the next level,”e said. “aving more people oriented not just toward short-term things but toward building the long-term social infrastructure that needs to get built across all these things in order to enable people to come together is going to be a really important thing over the next decades.”y way of example, he pointed to Safety Check, Facebook’ system for letting people tell their friends that they’e survived some kind of dangerous event, like a natural disaster or terrorist attack.

“e’e getting to a point where the biggest opportunities I think in the world ... problems like preventing pandemics from spreading or ending terrorism, all these things, they require a level of coordination and connection that I don’ think can only be solved by the current systems that we have,”uckerberg told me. What’ needed, he argues, is some global superstructure to advance humanity.

This is not an especially controversial idea; Zuckerberg is arguing for a kind of digital-era version of the global institution-building that the Western world engaged in after World War II. But because he is a chief executive and not an elected president, there is something frightening about his project. He is positioning Facebook —nd, considering that he commands absolute voting control of the company, he is positioning himself —s a critical enabler of the next generation of human society. A minor problem with his mission is that it drips with megalomania, albeit of a particularly sincere sort. With his wife, Priscilla Chan, Zuckerberg has pledged to give away nearly all of his wealth to a variety of charitable causes, including a long-term medical-research project to cure all disease. His desire to take on global social problems through digital connectivity, and specifically through Facebook, feels like part of the same impulse.

Yet Zuckerberg is often blasébout the messiness of the transition between the world we’e in and the one he wants to create through software. Building new “ocial infrastructure”sually involves tearing older infrastructure down. If you manage the demolition poorly, you might undermine what comes next. In the case of the shattering media landscape, Zuckerberg seems finally to have at least noticed this problem and may yet come up with fixes for it. But in the meantime, Facebook rushes headlong into murky new areas, uncovering new dystopian possibilities at every turn.

A few months after I spoke with Zuckerberg, Facebook held its annual developer conference in San Jose, Calif. At last year’ show, Zuckerberg introduced an expanded version of Facebook’ live streaming service which had been promised to revolutionize how we communicate. In the year since, Live had generated iconic scenes of protest, but it was also used to broadcast a terrorist attack in Munich and at least one suicide. Hours before Zuckerberg’ appearance at the conference, police announced that a Cleveland man who had killed a stranger and posted a video on Facebook had shot himself after a manhunt.

But as he took the stage in San Jose, Zuckerberg was ebullient. He started with a few dad jokes and threatened to read his long manifesto on stage. For a brief moment, there was a shift in tone: Statesman Zuck. “n all seriousness, this is an important time to work on building community,”e said. He offered Facebook’ condolences to the victim in Cleveland; the incident, he said, reminded Facebook that “e have a lot more to do.”

Just as quickly, though, Zuckerberg then pivoted to Facebook’ next marvel, a system for digitally augmenting your pictures and videos. The technical term for this is “ugmented reality.”he name bursts with dystopian possibilities —ake news on video rather than just text —ut Zuckerberg never mentioned them. The statesman had left the stage; before us stood an engineer.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Farhad Manjoo is a technology columnist for The New York Times. He is working on a book about what he calls the Frightful Five: Apple, Amazon, Google, Facebook and Microsoft —he five technology giants that are swallowing up the rest of the economy.

PHOTOS: The News Feed team at Facebook headquarters in Menlo Park, Calif. (MM40-MM41); Mark Zuckerberg at his desk. No one at the company has a private office. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SPENCER LOWELL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM42) DRAWING (DRAWING BY MIKE MCQUADE) (MM38-MM39)

* Inside Facebook’ (Totally Insane, Unintentionally Gigantic, Hyperpartisan) Political-Media Machine

* How the Internet Is Loosening Our Grip on the Truth

* Facebook Mounts Effort to Limit Tide of Fake News

Document INHT000020170428ed4p00006



dining
American Brandy Is Surging, Even in Whiskey Country

By CLAY RISEN 
1,821 words
25 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

LOUISVILLE, Ky. —hree years ago, Joe Heron, a pharmaceutical executive turned beverage-industry entrepreneur, moved here from Minneapolis to open a distillery. But unlike the dozens of other would-be whiskey barons setting up shop in Kentucky these days, Mr. Heron and his wife, Lesley, weren’ interested in making bourbon. They wanted to make brandy.

Mr. Heron, 54, who hails from South Africa and wears a wide, gray soul patch like an aging roadie’, was no stranger to the drinks market: He had already made a small fortune developing a health drink and a hard cider. But even he is surprised at how well his new company, Copper & Kings American Brandy Company, has done, with orders pouring in from 28 states.

Brandy has become a quiet giant of the liquor industry. More than 13 million cases were sold domestically in 2016, outpacing gin, Scotch and Irish whiskey, according to the Distilled Spirits Council of the United States. And most of that —ight million cases —as American brandy.

“eople ask, ‘s it hot?’ say, ‘t’ about to get white hot,’”r. Heron said on a recent tour of his distillery, a converted warehouse in this city’ Butchertown district, just east of downtown.

Though overshadowed by the bourbon boom, domestic brandy has a growing appeal. Adventurous young consumers, weaned on craft whiskey and beer, are eager to try something new. Bartenders love it because many classic cocktail recipes call for brandy, and new American expressions like Copper & Kings emphasize flavor and power over the more subtle notes found in Old World brandies like Cognac.

“t’ fruit forward, and it packs a punch,”aid Julia Momose, a cocktail consultant and former bartender at GreenRiver in Chicago.

Distilleries like Copper & Kings are opening, while older, more established producers like Germain-Robin and Osocalis Distillery, both in California, and Starlight Distillery in Indiana are finding a sudden uptick in interest.

Producers of other craft spirits, like Corsair Distillery in Tennessee and Finger Lakes Distilling in New York State are expanding into brandy. Even mass-market heavyweights like Christian Brothers Brandy and E&J Brandy are polishing their images in response to renewed interest: Christian Brothers, owned by Heaven Hill Distilleries, recently revamped its packaging, while this week Gallo, which owns E&J, already the best-selling brandy in the country, announced a new, premium brandy line called Argonaut, along with the reactivation of 20 traditional Cognac stills.

“t feels like it’ the right moment, when people are ready to try something new and different but that they’e still familiar with,”aid Chip Tate, the founder and former owner of Balcones Distilling, a whiskey maker in Waco, Tex., who is now distilling and aging brandy in a new venture called Tate & Company Distillery.

Broadly speaking, brandy is simply fermented, distilled fruit juice, and any fruit will do. Until Prohibition, apple, peach and pear brandies were some of the most popular drinks in America, though hundreds of distilleries made grape brandy (essentially, distilled wine) as well. Since then, American brandy has been dominated, and defined, by a few brands —hristian Brothers, E&J, Korbel —nd their thick, super-sweet style.

Perhaps the most famous brandy isn’ American at all: Cognac, which must be distilled and aged in the Cognac region of France. (Armagnac, another kind of French brandy, is made in Gascony.) Cognac producers follow strict rules, including a limited choice of varietals —rimarily ugni blanc, a mild grape also known as trebbiano.

American brandy faces none of those constraints. That freedom is drawing craft distillers who feel crowded out of the whiskey market and, at the same time, see an opportunity to remake American brandy as something other than a syrupy-sweet concoction.

“randy is the Wild West of American spirits,”aid Marko Karakasevic, the co-owner of Charbay Distillery in the Napa Valley, whose family has been making brandy and other spirits since the late 18th century in Serbia.

If there is a single definition of American brandy, it is a style built around robust flavors, in contrast to the muted elegance of Cognac.

“n Cognac, the soil is dominant, and they use a neutral grape, so all the character comes from the soil,”aid Hubert Germain-Robin, widely considered the godfather of modern American brandy. He grew up in an old Cognac-producing family in France, but as a young man, he took his skills to California. There, in 1982, he helped found the Germain-Robin distillery, where he turned out a series of cult-favorite brandies (coveted by, among others, Ronald Reagan).

“specially on the West Coast,”r. Germain-Robin said, “he fruit is very dominant.”

There are two clear camps among American brandy distillers: the innovators and the traditionalists.

Mr. Heron, of Copper & Kings, is an innovator, aiming to reorient the category toward younger, hipper audiences. His email signature reads “randy Rocks.”is three stills are named Isis, Magdalena and Sara, after women in Bob Dylan songs. And he trades barrels with some of the country’ leading craft breweries, like Jack’ Abby in Massachusetts and 3 Floyds Brewing Company in Indiana, for aging, infusing his brandies with malty, hoppy undertones.

“e don’ play by the old rules,”r. Heron said. “e’e looking for the finesse of a brandy with the muscle of a whiskey.”

Mr. Tate, 42, of Tate & Company in Texas, takes a similar approach. A self-taught coppersmith, he makes his own stills, with added features to personalize his brandy. (In fact, he earns extra money building stills for other companies.) And he embraces locally grown grapes; for the moment, his favorite is zinfandel, a choice unheard-of, let alone legal, in France.

“ don’ want to use the term irreverence, but distilling is inherently an artistic endeavor,”r. Tate said, adding, “e just step out and try something new,”nd hope that it won’ disappoint.

A much different story is being told in California by a geophysicist-turned-distiller named Daniel Farber. An erudite former New Yorker and former professor at the University of California, Santa Cruz, Mr. Farber, 54, took up distilling as a hobby in the 1980s, though he didn’ start selling brandy, under the Osocalis label, until 2002. Even today, he makes just two expressions, Rare and XO (along with an apple brandy), and he recently planted his own vineyards.

If Copper & Kings is punk rock, Osocalis is classical. Mr. Farber uses French-built Charentais stills, the same as Cognac makers, and he ages his brandy exclusively in French oak. For him, a good American brandy is a matter of interpretation and translation: taking Old World techniques and figuring out how they work in New World soils and climates, with New World grapes.

“ really love Cognac, Armagnac and Calvados,”e said, referring to a French style of apple brandy. “o for me it’ really about understanding the quality factors of traditional brandy and trying to obtain these qualities with the fruit, climate and soils we have in California.”

If there is any hesitation about American brandy, particularly among old-timers, it’ that they have seen this excitement before.

Many people thought American brandy would break through in the 1980s, and in 1982, the French spirits giant Réy Martin opened a dedicated brandy subsidiary, RMS, in Carneros, Calif. But production was delayed, and when the bottles finally appeared, they fizzled in the stores. RMS shut down in 2002, selling its stills to academic departments and start-ups around the country.

But there is reason to believe this time is different. In the ’0s, the liquor market hadn’ been primed by a decade of rapid growth in brown spirits and craft distilling. Palates hadn’ been trained for the nuances of a complex domestic spirit. And brandy, though always a solid sell in regional markets, was just a blip in the spirits business, compared with where it is today.

It is also increasingly popular with bartenders. Many popular classic cocktail recipes, like the Sidecar, call for brandy, but Cognac is expensive, and many American brands are too sweet. The new generation of craft brandies solves both problems.

“ometimes I get more out of an American brandy because it doesn’ have all the restrictions, so you get more and different flavors,”aid Christopher Marty, an owner and bartender at Best Intentions in Chicago.

The truly exciting thing about American brandy, though, is the range of variables —rape variety, yeast, soil, barrel, climate —hat can combine to produce a vast range of styles.

“t’ still in the infancy of American brandy,”r. Germain-Robin said. “t has so much potential. If people are distilling in the Finger Lakes or Virginia, we’e going to have many varieties. It’ unbelievable what we’e going to be able to do over time.”

A Few American Standouts

American brandies are nowhere near as well known as their French cousins. Here are some bottles that offer a good introduction.

OSOCALIS RARE ALAMBIC BRANDY, Soquel, Calif., 80 proof, $45

A blend of varietals with a heavy dose of pinot noir, séillon and colombard, aged for about six years. Citrus and spice notes dominate.

COPPER & KINGS BUTCHERTOWN BRANDY, Louisville, Ky., 124 proof, $55

A monster spirit drawn from a wide variety of grapes, bottled at cask strength and redolent of dark fruits and caramel.

CATOCTIN CREEK 1757VIRGINIA BRAND, Purcellville, Va., 80 proof, $50

Made from a blend of Virginia-grown grapes and aged for at least two years in French oak barrels, it is the most whiskeylike of the bunch, with notes of vanilla, spices and stewed cherries.

FINGER LAKES DISTILLING GRAPE BRANDY, Burdett, N.Y., 90 proof, $45

Made from upstate New York grapes and aged in used American oak barrels, with hints of vanilla, stone fruits and raisins.

CHARBAY BRANDY NO. 89, St. Helena, Calif., 92 proof, $250

One of the oldest, and priciest, American brandies, No. 89 —amed for 1989, the year it was distilled —s made from pinot noir and sauvignon blanc. It offers notes of banana, toasted coconut and cloves.

Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.

PHOTOS: Daniel Farber, of Osocalis Distillery in Soquel, Calif., with a glass of brandy. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (D1); Top left, Joe Heron of Copper & Kings American Brandy Company in Kentucky. Top right, Daniel Farber of Osocalis Distillery in California. Above, a still at Copper & Kings, where all three stills are named after women in Bob Dylan songs: Isis, Magdalena and Sara. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AARON BORTON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (D6)

* A Brandy for the Last Whig President

* The American Way of Drinking

Document INHT000020170428ed4p00005



Feature
Magazine
Can Facebook Fix Its Own Worst Bug?

By FARHAD MANJOO 
5,915 words
25 April 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In early January, I went to see Mark Zuckerberg at MPK20, a concrete-and-steel building on the campus of Facebook’ headquarters, which sits across a desolate highway from the marshy salt flats of Menlo Park, Calif. The Frank Gehry-designed building has a pristine nine-acre rooftop garden, yet much of the interior — meandering open-plan hallway —ppears unfinished. There are exposed air ducts and I-beams scribbled with contractors’arks. Many of the internal walls are unpainted plywood. The space looks less like the headquarters of one of the world’ wealthiest companies and more like a Chipotle with standing desks. It’ an aesthetic meant to reflect —nd perhaps also inspire employee allegiance to —ne of Facebook’ founding ideologies: that things are never quite finished, that nothing is permanent, that you should always look for a chance to take an ax to your surroundings.

The mood in overwhelmingly liberal Silicon Valley at the time, days before Donald Trump’ inauguration, was grim. But Zuckerberg, who had recently returned from his 700-acre estate on the Hawaiian island of Kauai, is preternaturally unable to look anything other than excited about the future. “ey, guys!”e beamed, greeting me and Mike Isaac, a Times colleague who covers Facebook. Zuckerberg wore a short-sleeve gray T-shirt, jeans and sneakers, which is his Steve Jobsian daily uniform: Indoor Zuck.

Zuckerberg used to be a nervous speaker, but he has become much less so. He speaks quickly but often unloads full paragraphs of thought, and sometimes his arguments are so polished that they sound rehearsed, which happened often that morning. “016 was an interesting year for us,”e said as the three of us, plus a P.R. executive, sat around a couple of couches in the glass-walled conference room where he conducts many of his meetings. (There are many perks to working at Facebook, but no one, not even Zuckerberg, has a private office.) It was an understatement and a nod to the obvious: Facebook, once a mere app on your phone, had become a global political and cultural force, and the full implications of that transformation had begun to come into view last year. “f you look at the history of Facebook, when we started off, there really wasn’ news as part of it,”uckerberg went on. But as Facebook grew and became a bigger part of how people learn about the world, the company had been slow to adjust to its new place in people’ lives. The events of 2016, he said, “et off a number of conversations that we’e still in the middle of.”

Nearly two billion people use Facebook every month, about 1.2 billion of them daily. The company, which Zuckerberg co-founded in his Harvard dorm room 13 years ago, has become the largest and most influential entity in the news business, commanding an audience greater than that of any American or European television news network, any newspaper or magazine in the Western world and any online news outlet. It is also the most powerful mobilizing force in politics, and it is fast replacing television as the most consequential entertainment medium. Just five years after its initial public offering, Facebook is one of the 10 highest market-capitalized public companies in the world.

As recently as a year ago, Zuckerberg might have proudly rattled off these facts as a testament to Facebook’ power. But over the course of 2016, Facebook’ gargantuan influence became its biggest liability. During the U.S. election, propagandists —ome working for money, others for potentially state-sponsored lulz —sed the service to turn fake stories into viral sensations, like the one about Pope Francis’ndorsing Trump (he hadn’). And fake news was only part of a larger conundrum. With its huge reach, Facebook has begun to act as the great disseminator of the larger cloud of misinformation and half-truths swirling about the rest of media. It sucks up lies from cable news and Twitter, then precisely targets each lie to the partisan bubble most receptive to it.

After studying how people shared 1.25 million stories during the campaign, a team of researchers at M.I.T. and Harvard implicatedFacebook and Twitter in the larger failure of media in 2016. The researchers found that social media created a right-wing echo chamber: a “edia network anchored around Breitbart developed as a distinct and insulated media system, using social media as a backbone to transmit a hyperpartisan perspective to the world.”he findings partially echoed a long-held worry about social news: that people would use sites like Facebook to cocoon themselves into self-reinforcing bubbles of confirmatory ideas, to the detriment of civility and a shared factual basis from which to make collective, democratic decisions. A week and a half after the election, President Obama bemoaned “n age where there’ so much active misinformation and it’ packaged very well and it looks the same when you see it on a Facebook page or you turn on your television.”

After the election, Zuckerberg offered a few pat defenses of Facebook’ role. “’ actually quite proud of the impact that we were able to have on civic discourse over all,”e said when we spoke in January. Misinformation on Facebook was not as big a problem as some believed it was, but Facebook nevertheless would do more to battle it, he pledged. Echo chambers were a concern, but if the source was people’ own confirmation bias, was it really Facebook’ problem to solve?

It was hard to tell how seriously Zuckerberg took the criticisms of his service and its increasingly paradoxical role in the world. He had spent much of his life building a magnificent machine to bring people together. By the most literal measures, he’ succeeded spectacularly, but what had that connection wrought? Across the globe, Facebook now seems to benefit actors who want to undermine the global vision at its foundation. Supporters of Trump and the European right-wing nationalists who aim to turn their nations inward and dissolve alliances, trolls sowing cross-border paranoia, even ISIS with its skillful social-media recruiting and propagandizing —ll of them have sought in their own ways to split the Zuckerbergian world apart. And they are using his own machine to do it.

In Silicon Valley, current events tend to fade into the background. The Sept. 11 attacks, the Iraq war, the financial crisis and every recent presidential election occurred, for the tech industry, on some parallel but distant timeline divorced from the everyday business of digitizing the world. Then Donald Trump won. In the 17 years I’e spent covering Silicon Valley, I’e never seen anything shake the place like his victory. In the span of a few months, the Valley has been transformed from a politically disengaged company town into a center of anti-Trump resistance and fear. A week after the election, one start-up founder sent me a private message on Twitter: “ think it’ worse than I thought,”e wrote. “riginally I thought 18 months. I’e cut that in half.”ntil what? “pocalypse. End of the world.”

Trump’ campaign rhetoric felt particularly personal for an industry with a proud reliance upon immigrants. Stephen K. Bannon, Trump’ campaign chief executive and now chief White House strategist, once suggested that there were too many South Asian chief executives in tech. More than 15 percent of Facebook’ employees are in the United States on H-1B visas, a program that Trump has pledged to revamp. But the outcome also revealed the depth of the Valley’ disconnection with much of the rest of the country. “ saw an election that was just different from the way I think,”ays Joshua Reeves, a Bay Area native who is a co-founder of Gusto, a human-resources software start-up. “ have this engineering brain that wants to go to this analytical, rational, nonemotional way of looking at things, and it was clear in this election that we’e trending in a different direction, toward spirited populism.”

Underneath it all was a nagging feeling of complicity. Trump had benefited from a media environment that is now shaped by Facebook —nd, more to the point, shaped by a single Facebook feature, the same one to which the company owes its remarkable ascent to social-media hegemony: the computationally determined list of updates you see every time you open the app. The list has a formal name, News Feed. But most users are apt to think of it as Facebook itself.

If it’ an exaggeration to say that News Feed has become the most influential source of information in the history of civilization, it is only slightly so. Facebook created News Feed in 2006 to solve a problem: In the social-media age, people suddenly had too many friends to keep up with. At the time, Facebook was just a collection of profiles, lacking any kind of central organization. To figure out what any of your connections were up to, you had to visit each of their profiles to see if anything had changed. News Feed fixed that. Every time you open Facebook, it hunts through the network, collecting every post from every connection —nformation that, for most Facebook users, would be too overwhelming to process themselves. Then it weighs the merits of each post before presenting you with a feed sorted in order of importance: a hyperpersonalized front page designed just for you.

Scholars and critics have been warning of the solipsistic irresistibility of algorithmic news at least since 2001, when the constitutional-law professor Cass R. Sunstein warned, in his book “epublic.com,”f the urgent risks posed to democracy “y any situation in which thousands or perhaps millions or even tens of millions of people are mainly listening to louder echoes of their own voices.”In 2008, I piled on with my own book, “rue Enough: Learning to Live in a Post-Fact Society.” In 2011, the digital activist and entrepreneur Eli Pariser, looking at similar issues, gave this phenomenon a memorable name in the title of his own book: “he Filter Bubble.”

Facebook says its own researchers have been studying the filter bubble since 2010. In 2015, they published an in-house study, which was criticized by independent researchers, concluding that Facebook’ effect on the diversity of people’ information diet was minimal. News Feed’ personalization algorithm did filter out some opposing views in your feed, the study claimed, but the bigger effect was users’wn choices. When News Feed did show people views contrary to their own, they tended not to click on the stories. For Zuckerberg, the finding let Facebook off the hook. “t’ a good-sounding theory, and I can get why people repeat it, but it’ not true,”e said on a call with analysts last summer.

Employees got the same message. “hen Facebook cares about something, they spin up teams to address it, and Zuck will come out and talk about it all the time,”ne former executive told me. “ have never heard of anything close to that on the filter bubble. I never sensed that this was a problem he wanted us to tackle. It was always positioned as an interesting intellectual question but not something that we’e going to go focus on.”

Then, last year, Facebook’ domination of the news became a story itself. In May, Gizmodo reported that some editors who had worked on Facebook’ Trending Topics section had been suppressing conservative points of view. To smooth things over, Zuckerberg convened a meeting of conservative media figures and eventually significantly reduced the role of human editors. Then in September, Facebookdeleted a post by a Norwegian writer that included the photojournalist Nick Ut’ iconic photo of a naked 9-year-old girl, Phan Thi Kim Phuc, running in terror after a napalm attack during the Vietnam War, on the grounds that it ran afoul of Facebook’ prohibition of child nudity.

Facebook, under criticism, reinstated the picture, but the photo incident stuck with Zuckerberg. He would bring it up unbidden to staff members and to reporters. It highlighted, for him, the difficulty of building a policy framework for what Facebook was trying to do. Zuckerberg wanted to become a global news distributor that is run by machines, rather than by humans who would try to look at every last bit of content and exercise considered judgment. “t’ something I think we’e still figuring out,”e told me in January. “here’ a lot more to do here than what we’e done. And I think we’e starting to realize this now as well.”

It struck me as an unsatisfying answer, and it later became apparent that Zuckerberg seemed to feel the same way. On a Sunday morning about a month after the first meeting, I got a call from a Facebook spokesman. Zuckerberg wanted to chat again. Could Mike and I come back on Monday afternoon?

We met again in the same conference room. Same Zuck outfit, same P.R. executive. But the Zuckerberg who greeted us seemed markedly different. He was less certain in his pronouncements than he had been the month before, more expansive and questioning. Earlier that day, Zuckerberg’ staff had sent me a draft of a 5,700-word manifesto that, I was told, he spent weeks writing. The document, “Building Global Community,”rgued that until now, Facebook’ corporate goal had merely been to connect people. But that was just Step 1. According to the manifesto, Facebook’ “ext focus will be developing the social infrastructure for community —or supporting us, for keeping us safe, for informing us, for civic engagement, and for inclusion of all.”f it was a nebulous crusade, it was also vast in its ambition.

The last manifesto that Zuckerberg wrote was in 2012, as part of Facebook’ application to sell its stock to the public. It explained Facebook’ philosophy —hat he called “the hacker way”—nd sketched an unorthodox path for the soon-to-be-public company. “Facebook was not originally created to be a company,”e wrote. “t was built to accomplish a social mission: to make the world more open and connected.”

What’ striking about that 2012 letter, read through the prism of 2017, is its certainty that a more “pen and connected”orld is by definition a better one. “hen I started Facebook, the idea of connecting the world was not controversial,”uckerberg said now. “he default assumption was that the world was incrementally just moving in that direction. So I thought we can connect some people and do our part in helping move in that direction.”ut now, he said, whether it was wise to connect the world was “ctually a real question.”

Zuckerberg’ new manifesto never quite accepts blame for any of the global ills that have been laid at Facebook’ feet. Yet by the standards of a company release, it is remarkable for the way it concedes that the company’ chief goal —iring the globe —s controversial. “here are questions about whether we can make a global community that works for everyone,”uckerberg writes, “nd whether the path ahead is to connect more or reverse course.”e also confesses misgivings about Facebook’ role in the news. “iving everyone a voice has historically been a very positive force for public discourse because it increases the diversity of ideas shared,”e writes. “ut the past year has also shown it may fragment our shared sense of reality.”

At the time of our second interview, the manifesto was still only a draft, and I was surprised by how unsure Zuckerberg seemed about it in person. He had almost as many questions for us —bout whether we understood what he was trying to say, how we thought it would land in the media —s we had for him. When I suggested that it might be perceived as an attack on Trump, he looked dismayed. He noted several times that he had been noodling over these ideas since long before November. A few weeks earlier, there was media speculation, fueled by a postelection tour of America by Zuckerberg and his wife, that he was laying the groundwork to run against Trump in 2020, and in this meeting he took pains to shoot down the rumors. When I asked if he had chatted with Obama about the former president’ critique of Facebook, Zuckerberg paused for several seconds, nearly to the point of awkwardness, before answering that he had.

Facebook’ spokespeople later called to stress that Obama was only one of many people to whom he had spoken. In other words: Don’ read this as a partisan anti-Trump manifesto. But if the company pursues the admittedly airy aims outlined in “uilding Global Community,”he changes will echo across media and politics, and some are bound to be considered partisan. The risks are especially clear for changes aimed at adding layers of journalistic ethics across News Feed, which could transform the public’ perception of Facebook, not to mention shake the foundations of its business.

The Facebook app, and consequently News Feed, is run by one of Zuckerberg’ most influential lieutenants, a 34-year-old named Chris Cox, the company’ chief product officer. Ten years ago, Cox dropped out of a graduate program in computer science at Stanford to join Facebook. One of his first assignments was on the team that created News Feed. Since then, he has become an envoy to the media industry. Don Graham, the longtime publisher of The Washington Post who was for years a member of Facebook’ board, told me that he felt Cox, among Facebook staff, “as at the 99.9th percentile of interest in news. He thought it was important to society, and he wanted Facebook to get it right.”

For the typical user, Cox explained when I met him on a morning in October at MPK20, News Feed is computing the relative merits of about 2,000 potential posts in your network every time you open the app. In sorting these posts, Facebook does not optimize for any single metric: not clicks or reading time or likes. Instead, he said, “hat you really want to get to is whether somebody, at the end of the day, would say, ‘ey, my experience today was meaningful.’ ”ersonalizing News Feed, in other words, is a very big “ath problem,”ncorporating countless metrics in extraordinarily complicated ways. Zuckerberg calls it “ modern A.I. problem.”

Last summer, I sat in on two meetings in another glass-walled MPK20 conference room, in which News Feed’ engineers, designers, user-research experts and managers debated several small alterations to how News Feed displays certain kinds of posts. The conversations were far from exciting —eople in jeans on couches looking at PowerPoints, talking quietly about numbers —nd yet I found them mesmerizing, a demonstration of the profound cultural differences between how news companies like The Times work and how Facebook does. The first surprise was how slowly things move, contrary to the freewheeling culture of “he hacker way.”n one meeting, the team spent several minutes discussing the merits of bold text in a certain News Feed design. One blessing of making social software is that you can gauge any potential change to your product by seeing how your users react to it. That is also the curse: At Facebook, virtually every change to the app, no matter how small or obviously beneficial, is thoroughly tested on different segments of the audience before it’ rolled out to everyone.

The people who work on News Feed aren’ making decisions that turn on fuzzy human ideas like ethics, judgment, intuition or seniority. They are concerned only with quantifiable outcomes about people’ actions on the site. That data, at Facebook, is the only real truth. And it is a particular kind of truth: The News Feed team’ ultimate mission is to figure out what users want —hat they find “eaningful,”o use Cox and Zuckerberg’ preferred term —nd to give them more of that.

This ideal runs so deep that the people who make News Feed often have to put aside their own notions of what’ best. “ne of the things we’e all learned over the years is that our intuition can be wrong a fair amount of the time,”ohn Hegeman, the vice president of product management and a News Feed team member, told me. “here are things you don’ expect will happen. And we learn a lot from that process: Why didn’ that happen, and what might that mean?”ut it is precisely this ideal that conflicts with attempts to wrangle the feed in the way press critics have called for. The whole purpose of editorial guidelines and ethics is often to suppress individual instincts in favor of some larger social goal. Facebook finds it very hard to suppress anything that its users’ctions say they want. In some cases, it has been easier for the company to seek out evidence that, in fact, users don’ want these things at all.

Facebook’ two-year-long battle against “lickbait”s a telling example. Early this decade, the internet’ headline writers discovered the power of stories that trick you into clicking on them, like those that teasingly withhold information from their headlines: “Dustin Hoffman Breaks Down Crying Explaining Something That Every Woman Sadly Already Experienced.”y the fall of 2013, clickbait had overrun News Feed. Upworthy, a progressive activism site co-founded by Pariser, the author of “he Filter Bubble,”hat relied heavily on teasing headlines, was attracting 90 million readers a month to its feel-good viral posts.

If a human editor ran News Feed, she would look at the clickbait scourge and make simple, intuitive fixes: Turn down the Upworthy knob. But Facebook approaches the feed as an engineering project rather than an editorial one. When it makes alterations in the code that powers News Feed, it’ often only because it has found some clear signal in its data that users are demanding the change. In this sense, clickbait was a riddle. In surveys, people kept telling Facebook that they hated teasing headlines. But if that was true, why were they clicking on them? Was there something Facebook’ algorithm was missing, some signal that would show that despite the clicks, clickbait was really sickening users?

To answer these questions, Cox and his team hired survey panels of more than a thousand paid “rofessional raters”round the world who answer questions about how well News Feed is working. Starting in 2013, Facebook began adding first dozens and then hundreds and then thousands of data points that were meant to teach the artificial-intelligence system that runs News Feed how people were reacting to their feeds. Facebook noticed that people would sometimes click open a clickbaity story but spend very little time on it. In other cases, lots of people would click on a story but few would share or Like it. Headlines on stories that people seemed to reject often contained a set of signature phrases (“ou’l never believe,”“his one trick,”tc.) or they came from a set of repeat-offender publishers.

The more such signals Facebook incorporated into the feed, the more clickbait began to drop out of the feed. Since its 2013 peak, Upworthy’ traffic has declined; it now averages 17.5 million visitors a month. The site has since disavowed clickbait. “e sort of unleashed a monster,”eter Koechley, Upworthy’ co-founder, told a conference in 2015. “orry for that.”

Cox suggested that it was not exactly correct to say that Facebook, as a company, decided to fight clickbait. What actually happened was that Facebook found better ways to listen to users, who were themselves rejecting clickbait. “hat comes out of good-quality panels and measurement systems, rather than an individual decision saying, ‘ey, I really want us to care about clickbait,’ ”e says.

This approach —ooking for signs of user dissatisfaction —ould curb stories that constitute the most egregious examples of misinformation. Adam Mosseri, Facebook’ vice president in charge of News Feed, says that Facebook has begun testing an algorithm change that would look at whether people share an article after reading it. If few of the people who click on a story decide to share it, that might suggest people feel misled by it and it would get lower billing in the feed.

But the solution to the broader misinformation dilemma —he pervasive climate of rumor, propaganda and conspiracy theories that Facebook has inadvertently incubated —ay require something that Facebook has never done: ignoring the likes and dislikes of its users. Facebook believes the pope-endorses-Trump type of made-up news stories are only a tiny minority of pieces that appear in News Feed; they account for a fraction of 1 percent of the posts, according to Mosseri. The question the company faces now is whether the misinformation problem resembles clickbait at all, and whether its solutions will align as neatly with Facebook’ worldview. Facebook’ entire project, when it comes to news, rests on the assumption that people’ individual preferences ultimately coincide with the public good, and that if it doesn’ appear that way at first, you’e not delving deeply enough into the data. By contrast, decades of social-science research shows that most of us simply prefer stuff that feels true to our worldview even if it isn’ true at all and that the mining of all those preference signals is likely to lead us deeper into bubbles rather than out of them.

After the election, Margaret Sullivan, the Washington Post columnist and a former public editor of The Times, called on Facebook to hire an executive editor who would monitor News Feed with an eye to fact-checking, balance and editorial integrity. Jonah Peretti, the founder of BuzzFeed, told me that he wanted Facebook to use its data to create a kind of reputational score for online news, as well as explore ways of strengthening reporting through monetary partnerships.

“t some point, if they really want to address this, they have to say, ‘his is good information’nd ‘his is bad information,’ ”ays Emily Bell, the director for the Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia Journalism School. “hey have to say, ‘hese are the kinds of information sources that we want to privilege, and these others are not going to be banned from the platform, but they are not going to thrive.’n other words, they have to create a hierarchy, and they’e going to have to decide how they’e going to transfer wealth into the publishing market.”

There aren’ many technical reasons Facebook could not implement such plans. The hurdles are institutional and philosophical, and ultimately financial too. Late last year, Facebook outlined a modest effort to curb misinformation. News Feed would now carry warning labels: If a friend shares a viral story that has been flagged and shot down by one of Facebook’ fact-checking partners (including Snopes and PolitiFact), you’l be cautioned that the piece has been “isputed.”ut even that slight change has been met with fury on the right, with Breitbart and The Daily Caller fuming that Facebook had teamed up with liberal hacks motived by partisanship. If Facebook were to take more significant action, like hiring human editors, creating a reputational system or paying journalists, the company would instantly become something it has long resisted: a media company rather than a neutral tech platform.

In many ways, the worry over how Facebook changes the news is really a manifestation of a grander problem with News Feed, which is simply dominance itself. News Feed’ aggressive personalization wouldn’ be much of an issue if it weren’ crowding out every other source. “o some degree I feel like the Pottery Barn Rule applies,”ays Pariser, the Upworthy chief executive. “hey play a critical role in our information circulatory system, and so —ucky them —ll of the problems therein are significantly on their shoulders.”

During our first meeting in January, I posed this question to Zuckerberg: “hen you see various problems in the media, do you say to yourself, ‘ run Facebook, I can solve that?’ ”

“m,”e started, and then paused, weighing his words as carefully as American presidents once did. “ot usually.”e argued that some of Facebook’ critics’roposed fixes for news on the service, such as hiring editors, were impractical due to Facebook’ scale and global diversity. Personalization, he said, remained a central tenet. “t really gets back to, like, what do people want at a deep level,”e said. “here’ this oversimplified narrative that a company can get very successful by just scratching a very superficial itch, and I don’ really think that’ right over the long term.”

Yet by our second meeting, Zuckerberg’ position seemed to have evolved. Facebook had by then announced plans for the Facebook Journalism Project, in which the company would collaborate with news companies on new products. Facebook also created a project to promote “ews literacy”mong its users, and it hired the former CNN news anchor Campbell Brown to manage the partnership between it and news companies. Zuckerberg’ tone toward critics of Facebook’ approach to news had also grown far more conciliatory. “ think it’ really important to get to the core of the actual problem,”e said. “ also really think that the core social thing that needs to happen is that a common understanding needs to exist. And misinformation I view as one of the things that can possibly erode common understanding. But sensationalism and polarization and other things, I actually think, are probably even stronger and more prolific effects. And we have to work on all these things. I think we need to listen to all the feedback on this.”

Still, in both our conversation and his new manifesto, Zuckerberg remained preoccupied with the kind of problems that could be solved by the kind of hyperconnectivity he believed in, not the ones caused by it. “here’ a social infrastructure that needs to get built for modern problems in order for humanity to get to the next level,”e said. “aving more people oriented not just toward short-term things but toward building the long-term social infrastructure that needs to get built across all these things in order to enable people to come together is going to be a really important thing over the next decades.”y way of example, he pointed to Safety Check, Facebook’ system for letting people tell their friends that they’e survived some kind of dangerous event, like a natural disaster or terrorist attack.

“e’e getting to a point where the biggest opportunities I think in the world ... problems like preventing pandemics from spreading or ending terrorism, all these things, they require a level of coordination and connection that I don’ think can only be solved by the current systems that we have,”uckerberg told me. What’ needed, he argues, is some global superstructure to advance humanity.

This is not an especially controversial idea; Zuckerberg is arguing for a kind of digital-era version of the global institution-building that the Western world engaged in after World War II. But because he is a chief executive and not an elected president, there is something frightening about his project. He is positioning Facebook —nd, considering that he commands absolute voting control of the company, he is positioning himself —s a critical enabler of the next generation of human society. A minor problem with his mission is that it drips with megalomania, albeit of a particularly sincere sort. With his wife, Priscilla Chan, Zuckerberg has pledged to give away nearly all of his wealth to a variety of charitable causes, including a long-term medical-research project to cure all disease. His desire to take on global social problems through digital connectivity, and specifically through Facebook, feels like part of the same impulse.

Yet Zuckerberg is often blasébout the messiness of the transition between the world we’e in and the one he wants to create through software. Building new “ocial infrastructure”sually involves tearing older infrastructure down. If you manage the demolition poorly, you might undermine what comes next. In the case of the shattering media landscape, Zuckerberg seems finally to have at least noticed this problem and may yet come up with fixes for it. But in the meantime, Facebook rushes headlong into murky new areas, uncovering new dystopian possibilities at every turn.

A few months after I spoke with Zuckerberg, Facebook held its annual developer conference in San Jose, Calif. At last year’ show, Zuckerberg introduced an expanded version of Facebook’ live streaming service which had been promised to revolutionize how we communicate. In the year since, Live had generated iconic scenes of protest, but it was also used to broadcast a terrorist attack in Munich and at least one suicide. Hours before Zuckerberg’ appearance at the conference, police announced that a Cleveland man who had killed a stranger and posted a video on Facebook had shot himself after a manhunt.

But as he took the stage in San Jose, Zuckerberg was ebullient. He started with a few dad jokes and threatened to read his long manifesto on stage. For a brief moment, there was a shift in tone: Statesman Zuck. “n all seriousness, this is an important time to work on building community,”e said. He offered Facebook’ condolences to the victim in Cleveland; the incident, he said, reminded Facebook that “e have a lot more to do.”

Just as quickly, though, Zuckerberg then pivoted to Facebook’ next marvel, a system for digitally augmenting your pictures and videos. The technical term for this is “ugmented reality.”he name bursts with dystopian possibilities —ake news on video rather than just text —ut Zuckerberg never mentioned them. The statesman had left the stage; before us stood an engineer.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Farhad Manjoo is a technology columnist for The New York Times. He is working on a book about what he calls the Frightful Five: Apple, Amazon, Google, Facebook and Microsoft —he five technology giants that are swallowing up the rest of the economy.

* Inside Facebook’ (Totally Insane, Unintentionally Gigantic, Hyperpartisan) Political-Media Machine

* How the Internet Is Loosening Our Grip on the Truth

* Facebook Mounts Effort to Limit Tide of Fake News

Mark Zuckerberg. | Spencer Lowell for The New York Times. Illustration by Mike McQuade. | The News Feed team at Facebook headquarters in Menlo Park, Calif. | Spencer Lowell for The New York Times | Mark Zuckerberg at his desk. No one at the company has a private office. | Spencer Lowell for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170425ed4p002mk



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Blacklists 271 Workers at Syrian Agency After Chemical Attack

By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVIS 
862 words
25 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration on Monday imposed sanctions on 271 employees of the Syrian government agency it said was responsible for producing chemical weapons and ballistic missiles, an effort to impose a sweeping punishment after a sarin attack on civilians this month.

The sanctions on members of President Bashar al-Assad's Scientific Studies and Research Center more than doubles the number of Syrian individuals and entities whose property has been blocked by the United States and who are barred from financial transactions with American people or companies.

Steven Mnuchin, the secretary of the Treasury, described it as one of the largest actions his department's Office of Foreign Assets Control had ever undertaken. It seeks to punish those behind this month's chemical weapons attack in Khan Sheikhoun and previous ones carried out by Mr. Assad's government, and to deter others contemplating similar actions.

''The United States is sending a strong message with this action that we will not tolerate the use of chemical weapons by any actor, and we intend to hold the Assad regime accountable for its unacceptable behavior,'' Mr. Mnuchin told reporters at the White House. ''The Treasury Department, together with the Department of State and our international partners, will continue to relentlessly pursue and shut down the financial networks of any individuals involved with Syria's production or use of chemical weapons.''

It is not clear what impact the restrictions will have, given that they only apply to business, financial holdings or transactions involving United States people or companies. Administration officials said they had focused on highly educated Syrian officials with deep expertise in chemistry who were thought to have the ability to travel extensively and possibly to use the American financial system.

''We wouldn't be doing this if we didn't think it was impactful,'' Mr. Mnuchin said. ''It's quite impactful.''

It was the second time the United States government has imposed sanctions on Syrians for the government's use of chemical weapons. In January, the Treasury Department blacklisted 18 Syrians, including six connected to the scientific studies center, after an investigation by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the international body that polices chemical weapons, determined that the government had been responsible for three chlorine gas attacks.

The Syrian government has portrayed the Scientific Studies and Research Center as a medical and agricultural study agency, but the United States government has long considered it a training ground and secret laboratory network for engineers developing chemical and biological weapons.

Britain applauded the American action, calling it a strong message that the use of chemical weapons is unacceptable.

''The abhorrent attack on Khan Sheikhoun is a stark reminder that the international community must work together to deter the future use of chemical weapons in any circumstances,'' Boris Johnson, the British foreign secretary, said in a statement. ''Sanctions send a clear signal that actions have consequences and seek to deter others from a similar acts of barbarism.''

Syria agreed in a 2013 deal brokered by Russia to destroy its chemical weapons arsenal and get rid of material that could be used to resume the manufacture of such weapons.

But American officials have said this month's attack indicated that the Assad government still had the capacity to make and use chemical weapons.

On Monday, one official said that assault and at least one other this month suggested that Syria had an ongoing chemical weapons program and called into question declarations the government had made to the contrary.

Republicans who had long criticized the Obama administration for doing too little to prevent the Assad regime's atrocities also praised the sanctions.

''They represent another stark departure from the Obama administration's dithering on Syria, which only worsened the bloodshed and created a vacuum for ISIS,'' said Representative Ed Royce, Republican of California and the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, referring to the Islamic State. He said he would push forward with Democrats on legislation that would ''give the White House additional leverage to hold Assad -- as well as his Russian and Iranian backers -- accountable.''

A report issued by the National Security Council this month that included a declassified account of the Khan Sheikhoun attack said American intelligence had indicated that ''personnel historically associated with Syria's chemical weapons program'' were at Shayrat airfield in March and on the day of the assault.

That airfield is believed to have been used by Syrian government warplanes to carry out the attack. President Trump ordered missile strikes on the airfield days later.

An administration official declined to say whether any of those figures were part of the group targeted with sanctions on Monday, citing the need to protect intelligence sources and methods, but asserted that those being blacklisted were believed to be responsible for attacks.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Steven Mnuchin, left, the secretary of the Treasury, announced sanctions on Monday in response to a sarin attack in Syria. (PHTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170425ed4p0005s



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Outspoken Maldives Blogger Who Challenged Radical Islamists Is Killed

By HASSAN MOOSA and KAI SCHULTZ; Hassan Moosa reported from Malé and Kai Schultz from New Delhi. Geeta Anand contributed reporting from Mumbai, India. 
1,006 words
24 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

MALÉ Maldives -- A liberal blogger who wrote satirical critiques of the Maldivian government and the spread of radical Islam died Sunday after being stabbed in the stairway of his apartment building.

The blogger, Yameen Rasheed, 29, had complained repeatedly to the police about receiving death threats, he said in an interview with The New York Times this year, adding that the police often failed to return his calls or dropped his complaints without investigation.

''In my case, I get multiple kinds of death threats from different people, because I write and do the campaign,'' he said. Mr. Rasheed was a coordinator of a campaign to find his friend Ahmed Rilwan Abdulla, a journalist for The Maldives Independent who was abducted in 2014.

The police said that Mr. Rasheed was found with multiple stab wounds in his apartment building in the capital, Malé shortly before 3 a.m. He was rushed to Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital and died soon after.

The Republic of Maldives, a nation of nearly 1,200 islands southwest of India, is best known as a spectacular vacation destination. But the country, with fewer than 400,000 people, has also become a source of recruits for the Islamic State. The government said at least 49 Maldivians had traveled to Syria to fight with the group, also known as ISIS; a 2015 study by an international security firm said the number was about 200.

The population, which is predominantly Sunni Muslim, has traditionally been liberal in its interpretation of Islam, with women rarely covering their heads. But a more conservative strain of Islam has spread in recent years under the increasing influence of Saudi Arabia, which sends religious leaders to the Maldives and offers scholarships to Maldivian students to study at Saudi universities.

A spokeswoman for the hospital, Zeenath Ali Habeeb, said Mr. Rasheed had been brought in at 3:15 a.m. with multiple stab wounds, having lost a lot of blood. He was unconscious and had a very weak pulse, she said, and he died while being treated.

His father, Hussain Rasheed, told the local news media that his son had been stabbed 16 times in the chest, neck and head.

Mr. Rasheed was best known for satirical Twitter posts and weekly posts on his popular blog, The Daily Panic, which riffed on the week's headlines, often criticizing the government's use of religion to appeal to the public.

He was also a coordinator of the Find Moyameehaa campaign, which was started after Mr. Abdulla was abducted almost three years ago.

Last year, Mr. Rasheed wrote on Twitter that he had reported receiving death threats to the police and had not received a response. Mr. Rasheed posted screenshots of the many threats he received on his social media accounts.

''We condemn this action in the harshest terms,'' President Abdulla Yameen said in a statement. ''All resources of the state will be utilized to bring the perpetrators of this heinous crime to justice.''

Mr. Yameen said he had ordered a review of the procedures for investigating threats against journalists to make sure they are acted upon ''swiftly'' and in a ''manner that ensures safety for everyone.''

Three former presidents of the Maldives appealed for a speedy and thorough investigation into Mr. Rasheed's death.

''A brave voice, brutally silenced,'' former President Mohamed Nasheed said on Twitter. ''Only an impartial & open investigation with international participation can provide justice.''

Atul Keshap, the American ambassador to the Maldives and Sri Lanka, also called for an investigation, adding that he was ''still waiting for answers'' about Mr. Abdulla's abduction in 2014.

Amnesty International noted that the killing of Mr. Rasheed took place against the backdrop of the Maldivian authorities' growing restrictions on public debate.

''This crackdown has intensified in recent weeks and must end immediately,'' the organization said. ''Authorities should protect those who speak out, not try to criminalize them.''

In his interview with The Times in January, Mr. Rasheed described how bloggers like himself and Mr. Abdulla were targeted by radicalized gangs in the Maldives, from which jihadists recruit fighters for the Islamic State.

Mr. Rasheed said Mr. Abdulla's abduction followed a pattern of increasingly hostile actions against those who question how Islam is practiced in the Maldives. A couple of months before the abduction, a mob kidnapped several men affiliated with a Facebook group calling for secularism, accused them of homosexuality and atheism, and forced them to cite parts of the Quran before being released.

Mr. Rasheed said that nearly all of the 20 members of the group committed to finding Mr. Abdulla had received death threats, from people who brandished knives in public or through text messages. The messages were often graphic and called for their beheading.

Friends described Mr. Rasheed as soft-spoken, funny and fiercely committed to finding Mr. Abdulla and seeking justice for his family. Celine Peroni, Mr. Rasheed's girlfriend, said he was ''just the smartest, wittiest and sweetest person I've ever met.''

Ms. Peroni said she and Mr. Rasheed had often talked about the death threats, which intensified in December when his name began circulating as a person of interest within extremist groups. She asked him to take cabs home at night, and Mr. Rasheed was always careful to walk in view of CCTV cameras.

Recently, however, Mr. Rasheed ''was feeling more relaxed,'' Ms. Peroni said, and the couple had booked a summer vacation to Sri Lanka. He had even started walking home again instead of taking cabs, she said.

''He was aware of the threats, but cautious,'' she said. ''He wanted the voice of the truth to be heard, despite the risks.''

Yameen Rasheed, who wrote satirical critiques of the Maldivian government and radical Islam, died Sunday after being stabbed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ADAM DEAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170424ed4o0004j



World; Asia Pacific
Outspoken Maldives Blogger Who Challenged Radical Islamists is Killed

By HASSAN MOOSA and KAI SCHULTZ 
998 words
23 April 2017
20:52
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MALÉ Maldives — liberal blogger who wrote satirical critiques of the Maldivian government and the spread of radical Islam died Sunday after being stabbed in the stairway of his apartment building.

The blogger, Yameen Rasheed, 29, had complained repeatedly to police about receiving death threats, he said in an interview with The New York Times earlier this year, adding that the police often failed to return his calls or dropped his complaints without investigation.

“n my case, I get multiple kinds of death threats from different people, because I write and do the campaign,”e said. Mr. Rasheed was a coordinator of a campaign to find his friend Ahmed Rilwan Abdulla, a journalist for The Maldives Independent who was abducted in 2014.

The police said that Mr. Rasheed was found with multiple stab wounds in his apartment building in the capital, Malé shortly before 3 a.m. He was rushed to Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital and died soon after.

The Republic of Maldives, a nation of nearly 1,200 islands southwest of India, is best known as a spectacular vacation destination. But the country of fewer than 400,000 people has also become a source of recruits for the Islamic State. The government said at least 49 Maldivians had traveled to Syria to fight with the group, also known as ISIS; a 2015 study by an international security firm said the number was about 200.

The population, which is predominantly Sunni Muslim, has traditionally been liberal in its interpretation of Islam, with women rarely covering their heads. But a more conservative strain of Islam has spread in recent years under the increasing influence of Saudi Arabia, which sends religious leaders to the Maldives and offers scholarships to Maldivian students to study at Saudi universities.

A spokeswoman for the hospital, Zeenath Ali Habeeb, said Mr. Rasheed was brought in at 3:15 a.m. with multiple stab wounds, having lost a lot of blood. He was unconscious and had a very weak pulse, she said, and he died while being treated.

His father, Hussain Rasheed, told the local news media that his son had been stabbed 16 times in the chest, neck and head.

Mr. Rasheed was best known for satirical tweets and weekly posts on his popular blog, The Daily Panic, which riffed on the week’ headlines, often criticizing the government’ use of religion to appeal to the public.

He was also a coordinator of the Find Moyameehaa campaign, which was started after Mr. Abdulla was abducted almost three years ago.

Last year, Mr. Rasheed tweeted that he had reported receiving death threats to the police and had not received a response. Mr. Rasheed posted screenshots of the many threats he received on his social media accounts.

“e condemn this action in the harshest terms,”resident Abdulla Yameen said in a statement. “ll resources of the state will be utilized to bring the perpetrators of this heinous crime to justice.”

Mr. Yameen said he had ordered a review of the procedures around investigating threats against journalists to make sure they are acted upon “wiftly”nd in a “anner that ensures safety for everyone.”

Three former presidents of the Maldives appealed for a speedy and thorough investigation into Mr. Rasheed’ death.

“ brave voice, brutally silenced. Only an impartial & open investigation with international participation can provide justice”or Mr. Rasheed, former President Mohamed Nasheed said on Twitter.

Atul Keshap, the American ambassador to the Maldives and Sri Lanka, also called for an investigation, adding that he was “till waiting for answers”bout Mr. Abdulla’ abduction in 2014.

Amnesty International noted that the killing of Mr. Rasheed took place against the backdrop of growing restrictions by the authorities on public debate.

“his crackdown has intensified in recent weeks and must end immediately,”he organization said. “uthorities should protect those who speak out, not try to criminalize them.”

In his interview with The Times in January, Mr. Rasheed described how bloggers like himself and Mr. Abdulla were targeted by radicalized gangs in the Maldives, from which jihadists recruit fighters for the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

Mr. Rasheed said Mr. Abdulla’ abduction followed a pattern of increasingly hostile actions against those who question how Islam is practiced in the Maldives. A couple of months before the abduction, a mob kidnapped several men affiliated with a Facebook group calling for secularism, accusing them of homosexuality and atheism, and forcing them to cite parts of the Quran before being released.

Mr. Rasheed said that nearly all of the 20 members of the group committed to finding Mr. Abdulla had received death threats, from people who brandished knives in public or through text messages. The messages were often graphic and called for their beheading.

Friends described Mr. Rasheed as soft-spoken, funny and fiercely committed to finding Mr. Abdulla and seeking justice for his family. Celine Peroni, Mr. Rasheed’ girlfriend, said he was “ust the smartest, wittiest and sweetest person I’e ever met.”

Ms. Peroni said she and Mr. Rasheed had often talked about the death threats, which intensified last December when his name began circulating as a person of interest within extremist groups. She asked him to take cabs home at night, and Mr. Rasheed was always careful to walk in view of CCTV cameras.

Recently, however, Mr. Rasheed “as feeling more relaxed,”s. Peroni said, and the couple had booked a summer vacation to Sri Lanka. He had even started walking home again instead of taking cabs, she said.

“e was aware of the threats, but cautious,”he said. “e wanted the voice of the truth to be heard, despite the risks.”

Hassan Moosa reported from Malé Maldives, and Kai Schultz from New Delhi. Geeta Anand contributed reporting from Mumbai, India.

Yameen Rasheed in Malé the Maldives, in February. | Adam Dean for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170423ed4n002bd



Foreign Desk; SECTA
After  ISIS , Smoking to Feel Free

Photographs and Text by RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
580 words
23 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

He was the only man I saw when we entered the nearly empty village in northern Iraq, which had just recently been liberated from the Islamic State. The first thing he did when he approached our car was ask my colleague for a light. That's when I noticed the pack of cigarettes sticking out of Mohamed Ahmed Saleh's shirt pocket.

Just over a week after the terror group was flushed out of his hometown, Mr. Saleh was making a visual statement. He wanted people to know that he's a smoker, a crime that until recently would have earned him 20 lashes.

Mr. Saleh is a cow herder living in Badoosh, a district of gently rolling hills 15 miles northwest of Mosul. He launched into a diatribe about the Islamic State, which had imposed its ultrastrict version of Islam on his village during the almost three years it occupied the area. Among his many complaints was that the group had criminalized one of his daily pleasures: smoking.

I'm no fan of smoking and avoid bars because I can't stand the smell of secondhand smoke, but it was obvious that smoking for this man equaled freedom.

Mr. Saleh described the lengths he had taken to find cigarettes under the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, and the thrill it had given him to break its rules.

Akhtamar Classic, he said, was the only brand smuggled into territory controlled by ISIS. A pack used to cost 750 dinars, or 63 cents. Under the militants, it spiked to 20,000 dinars, or $17. He said he couldn't afford $17. So he and four trusted friends pooled money to buy one pack of 20 cigarettes. He showed me how he would break each slim cigarette into three pieces to make them last longer.

Mr. Saleh said he and his buddies used to go out into the fields with their cows and smoke, covering their faces like this to reduce the smoke.

Then they would brush their teeth and spritz one another with perfume before heading back. One time at a checkpoint, he said, an Islamic State guard stuck his head through the window of their car and sniffed them.

The day the Islamic State was forced out of the area, he said, he chain-smoked four packs. Now he proudly keeps a pack with him at all times.

''I just like to walk around holding it in my hand because I can,'' he said, showing off how he now holds his cigarette between his fingers.

In the next house we visited, a young man walked in with a carton of the same brand of cigarettes.

He, too, described pooling money with four or five friends to afford the cigarettes during the occupation. One carton like this used to cost more than $100, which he said was approximately the monthly pay of an Islamic State fighter.

During my day in the area, I interviewed six people who said they had smoked in defiance of the ban. The young man with the carton told me that he smoked because he was addicted, but that it was also his own form of resistance.

Dispatch From Badoosh, Iraq

Mohamed Ahmed Saleh with a cigarette in Badoosh, an Iraqi village that had recently been liberated from the Islamic State. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RUKMINI CALLIMACHI/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170423ed4n0009f



Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Paperback Row

By JOUMANA KHATIB 
453 words
23 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
24
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Six new paperbacks to check out this week.

A RAGE FOR ORDER: THE MIDDLE EAST IN TURMOIL, FROM TAHRIR SQUARE TO ISIS, by Robert F. Worth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $15.) A masterly account of the 2011 Arab Spring uprisings, and the region's decline into violence and anarchy, by a former New York Times foreign correspondent. Our reviewer, Kenneth M. Pollack, called the book ''a marvel of storytelling, with the chapters conjuring a poignancy fitting for the subject.''

THE MIRROR THIEF, by Martin Seay. (Melville House, $17.99.) Linked narratives brimming with delightful, esoteric detail unfold in three Venices: 16th-century Italy; 1950s Venice Beach, Calif.; and the Venetian casino in Las Vegas in 2003. A card counter, the man hired to track him down and an oblique book of poems weave through a series of schemes in this novel, with a structure that recalls David Mitchell's ''Cloud Atlas.''

FREE SPEECH: TEN PRINCIPLES FOR A CONNECTED WORLD, by Timothy Garton Ash. (Yale University, $22.) Protected speech is under siege on a wide front and is caught up in a number of modern controversies, from the role of government surveillance to the criminalization of hate speech and the prosecution of whistle-blowers. Garton Ash examines 10 such cases, framed with his call for ''more free speech but also better speech.''

THE NEST, by Cynthia D'Aprix Sweeney. (Ecco/HarperCollins, $16.99.) A $2 million trust fund is set aside for the Plumb siblings, who are each counting on their share to rescue them from financial straits. But months before they are set to receive the money, Leo, the eldest, squanders a majority of the sum after a car accident; the ensuing family drama of ''first-world problems proves to be an enjoyable comedy of manners as Sweeney artfully skewers family dynamics,'' our reviewer, Patricia Park, wrote.

LAROSE, by Louise Erdrich. (Harper Perennial, $15.99.) While hunting buck, Landreaux does the worst thing imaginable: He accidentally kills his best friend's child. As penance, he offers his own son, LaRose, to the grieving parents, setting in motion a powerful story of ancestry, justice and forgiveness.

JOE GOULD'S TEETH, by Jill Lepore. (Vintage, $16.) Gould -- a New York eccentric friendly with many of the early 20th century's best-known artists -- decided to record everything anyone said to him, aiming to ''widen the sphere of history as Walt Whitman did that of poetry.'' The project, known as ''The Oral History of Our Time,'' acquired a near-mythic status -- and then some wondered if it ever existed at all. Lepore, a New Yorker staff writer and Harvard historian, sets out to discover the manuscript's fate.

Document NYTF000020170423ed4n0008r



NONFICTION
Book Review Desk; SECTBR
War Paint

By JONATHAN ALTER 
1,502 words
23 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
17
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

PORTRAITS OF COURAGE

A Commander in Chief's Tribute to America's Warriors

By George W. Bush

Illustrated. 191 pp. Crown Publishers. $35.

As a cub reporter in 1967, Richard Cohen (now a political columnist for The Washington Post) covered an exhibition of Dwight D. Eisenhower's paintings and asked the former president about their symbolism.

''Let's get something straight here, Cohen,'' Ike snapped. ''They would have burned this [expletive] a long time ago if I weren't the president of the United States.''

The same might have been said of former President George W. Bush's paintings of his pets -- and his embarrassing if psychologically compelling self-portraits in the bathroom -- that were hacked in 2013 from family emails by ''Guccifer,'' a Romanian hacker. This was a first. Who leaks paintings?

Their value lay only in their presidential provenance. In the Amazon TV series ''Alpha House'' (disclosure: I was a producer), Garry Trudeau makes sport of a fictional Republican senator carefully hanging his treasured bathtub-feet ''Bush'' as if it were a masterpiece. This while former President Jimmy Carter was selling one of his paintings at a Carter Center charity auction for $750,000.

In the introduction to his new coffee-table book of oil paintings, Bush readily -- perhaps pre-emptively -- admits that he's a ''novice.'' Three years after leaving the White House, he set out to adopt the pastime of Winston Churchill, who painted to relieve the ''Black Dog'' of depression. But age 66 is awfully late to achieve proficiency, especially for a man with a famously short attention span. Bush recalls playfully informing his first art instructor, Gail Norfleet, of his objectives. ''Gail, there's a Rembrandt trapped in this body,'' he told her. ''Your job is to liberate him.''

Norfleet and Bush's other talented tutors fell short of that ideal, but they did liberate an inner Bush we -- and maybe he -- never knew existed: An evocative and surprisingly adept artist who has dramatically improved his technique while also doing penance for one of the greatest disasters in American history.

After staring at the haunting close-up portraits of wounded warriors and reading the searing accounts of their suffering, I'm beginning to understand why this beautifully published book went to No. 1 on The Times's nonfiction best-seller list. It's not that people are suddenly nostalgic for Bush; historians consistently rank him near the bottom in their lists of American presidents and -- despite lasting achievements on treating AIDS globally and a prescription drug benefit for Medicare -- he will very likely remain there, even if he rises past President Trump some day. (Trump hasn't gotten us into a $1 trillion war or presided over an economic meltdown -- so far.) And it's not just that Trump has set the bar of character and decency so low that Bush barely needs to lift his cowboy boot to step over it. His charming family, warm relationship with the Obamas, and welcome defense of the press and other threatened democratic institutions aren't sufficient explanations, either.

A better answer might lie in the words of Marine Corps Sgt. Andy Hatcher, who enlisted a month before 9/11 and was ambushed on Thanksgiving Day 2004 in the Second Battle of Falluja. Hatcher lost his right foot and most of the hearing in his right ear. He also suffered traumatic brain injury, though a less severe form of that signature wound of the Iraq War than afflicted other veterans. ''My father is a Vietnam vet,'' Hatcher said. ''He was treated incredibly differently than I was.''

The success of ''Portraits of Courage'' (with the proceeds to help vets) is something more than just another ''Thank you for your service.'' It testifies to our genuine, bipartisan determination to do it better this time -- to support healing in all of its forms, even from the president who most made that healing necessary. It reflects our fascination with how leaders process pain and regret. And whether or not we backed Bush's 2003 invasion of Iraq (as I wrongly did), commemorating the more than 40,000 brave Americans who left a piece of themselves behind in Iraq and Afghanistan seems a fitting if tiny step toward bridging the civilian-military divide. Bush writes of the veterans he met that ''looking them in the eye and saluting them as their commander in chief'' was the greatest honor of his presidency and that he will continue to actively honor them for the rest of his life. This was not something that Presidents Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon did much of with Vietnam veterans after leaving office.

Presidents who send soldiers into battle cannot easily confess that it was in vain. In his memoir ''Decision Points,'' Bush concedes that American forces were withdrawn too quickly but not that responding to 9/11 by attacking a dictator who had nothing to do with it was a colossal error. He can't admit that he has little to show for his dream of democratizing the Middle East, beyond continuing chaos.

And yet, bearing unflinching witness to the horrific consequences of historic folly should always be welcome. Atonement is not accountability, much less redemption, but it's a start. Bush mostly avoids Veterans Day-style platitudes and sugarcoats nothing, not even stories about a veteran who wounded a fellow soldier with friendly fire and one shot by an Afghan security guard who was supposed to be an ally.

The former president met the 96 men and two women he painted in military hospitals and at the Warrior 100K mountain bike rides and Warrior Open golf outings sponsored by the Bush Institute. Their inspiring stories of recovery -- most would not have survived in earlier wars -- cannot soften the horrors they endured. Bush's colorful brush strokes (he painted from photographs) capture the faces of soldiers like Army Capt. Jae Barclay, who underwent 30 surgeries after his vehicle struck an I.E.D. in Afghanistan; Lt. Col. Kent Solheim, whose right leg was amputated amid 34 surgeries, after which he returned for two more deployments; and Master Sgt. Israel del Toro Jr., ''DT,'' whom Bush first met when he was in a medically induced coma after his Humvee was hit by a bomb that severed his fingers and nose and severely burned 80 percent of his body. He was given little chance of survival, and when he beat those odds, doctors told him he would never walk or breathe on his own. After more than 100 surgeries, DT represented the United States in cycling and powerlifting at the 2016 Invictus Games and won the gold medal in the shot put.

The wounded warriors who don't like Bush and haven't recovered well were unlikely to have become friendly enough with him to have their portraits painted. But most of his subjects suffered nightmares, depression and ''PTS.'' (He leaves ''disorder'' off the end of post-traumatic stress, presumably because the clinical distinction between PTS and PTSD can be fuzzy.) The stories are gruesome but also occasionally amusing. Lt. Col. Ken Dwyer told Bush and the golf legend Lee Trevino how he took his prosthetic eye out of its socket and presented it to an umpire at his son's baseball game with the comment: ''Here, you seem to need this a lot more than I do.''

The only weak part of this book is the ingratiating foreword by Gen. Peter Pace, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. ''President Bush asked tough questions -- and continued to ask them until he had all the information he needed,'' Pace writes. This is precisely what Bush did not do -- on incomplete plans for the postwar occupation, insufficient American troop levels, the disbanding of the Iraqi Army (one of the factors that led to ISIS) and many other matters. ''Once he made a decision, he would resource it properly,'' Pace claims. Tell that to the men who were killed or wounded because of unconscionable delays in obtaining proper body armor. Pace is right about one thing: The book is a ''message of love'' from a former president to the troops.

In 2003, I argued that Iraq was the right war with the wrong commander in chief. I had it nearly backward. It was the wrong war -- for which history will forever blame Bush -- but with the right commander in chief, at least for the noble if narrow purpose of creatively honoring veterans through art. Contra Ike, these portraits -- an unexpected asterisk to the Bush legacy -- would not have been burned, even if the artist had never been president.

Jonathan Alter, a former columnist for Newsweek who has written books on Franklin D. Roosevelt and Barack Obama, is working on a biography of Jimmy Carter.

DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS BY PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH.; LT. COL. KENT GRAHAM SOLHEIM, U.S. ARMY; SGT. FIRST CLASS MICHAEL R. RODRIGUEZ, U.S. ARMY; SGT. LESLIE ZIMMERMAN, U.S. ARMY.) 

Document NYTF000020170423ed4n0003e



World; Middle East
After  ISIS , Smoking Openly to Feel Free

Photographs and Text by RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
564 words
22 April 2017
15:59
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

He was the only man I saw when we entered the nearly empty village in northern Iraq, which had just recently been liberated from the Islamic State. The first thing he did when he approached our car was ask my colleague for a light. That’ when I noticed the pack of cigarettes sticking out of Mohamed Ahmed Saleh’ shirt pocket.

Just over a week after the terror group was flushed out of his hometown, Mr. Saleh was making a visual statement. He wanted people to know that he’ a smoker, a crime that until recently would have earned him 20 lashes.

Mr. Saleh is a cow herder living in Badoosh, a district of gently rolling hills 15 miles northwest of Mosul. He launched into a diatribe about the Islamic State, which had imposed its ultrastrict version of Islam on his village during the almost three years it occupied the area. Among his many complaints was that the group had criminalized one of his daily pleasures: smoking.

I’ no fan of smoking and avoid bars because I can’ stand the smell of secondhand smoke, but it was obvious that smoking for this man equaled freedom.

Mr. Saleh described the lengths he had taken to find cigarettes under the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL, and the thrill it had given him to break its rules.

Akhtamar Classic, he said, was the only brand smuggled into territory controlled by ISIS. A pack used to cost 750 dinars, or 63 cents. Under the militants, it spiked to 20,000 dinars, or $17. He said he couldn’ afford $17. So he and four trusted friends pooled money to buy one pack of 20 cigarettes. He showed me how he would break each slim cigarette into three pieces to make them last longer.

Mr. Saleh said he and his buddies used to go out into the fields with their cows and smoke, covering their faces like this to reduce the smoke.

Then they would brush their teeth and spritz one another with perfume before heading back. One time at a checkpoint, he said, an Islamic State guard stuck his head through the window of their car and sniffed them.

The day the Islamic State was forced out of the area, he said, he chain-smoked four packs. Now he proudly keeps a pack with him at all times.

“ just like to walk around holding it in my hand because I can,”e said, showing off how he now holds his cigarette between his fingers.

In the next house we visited, a young man walked in with a carton of the same brand of cigarettes.

He, too, described pooling money with four or five friends to afford the cigarettes during the occupation. One carton like this used to cost more than $100, which he said was approximately the monthly pay of an Islamic State fighter.

During my day in the area, I interviewed six people who said they had smoked in defiance of the ban. The young man with the carton told me that he smoked because he was addicted, but that it was also his own form of resistance.

Dispatch From Badoosh, Iraq

* Celebrating Easter in an Iraqi Town That Has Lost Its Christians

Document NYTFEED020170422ed4m0035x



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Militant Tied To  ISIS  Chief Was Killed In U.S. Raid

By ERIC SCHMITT 
654 words
22 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- United States Special Operations forces carried out a ground raid in Syria this month that killed a militant who was known as ''a close associate'' of the Islamic State's leader and who had helped plot a deadly attack on a nightclub in Istanbul on New Year's Day, the military said on Friday.

American troops killed the insurgent, Abdurakhmon Uzbeki, on April 6 in an operation in Mayadin, Syria. He was targeted for his role in the Islamic State's external terrorist-attack plotting, said Col. John Thomas, a spokesman for the military's Central Command.

''He facilitated the movement of ISIS foreign terror fighters and funds,'' Colonel Thomas said in a Friday briefing to reporters by telephone from the command's headquarters in Tampa, Fla., using the acronym for the Islamic State. Colonel Thomas said it took until now to confirm that Mr. Uzbeki was killed in the raid two weeks ago.

In describing Mr. Uzbeki as ''a close associate'' of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the shadowy leader of the terrorist organization, Colonel Thomas said the militant was ''known to interact with him in various ways over time.'' Colonel Thomas declined to elaborate.

Soon after the attack in Istanbul, in which 39 people died, the Turkish authorities arrested the suspected gunman. He was identified as Abdulgadir Masharipov, an Uzbek citizen born in 1983, and he later confessed to the shooting. But Turkish officials maintained that Mr. Masharipov received help in carrying out the plot.

The American counterterrorism operation was conducted by the so-called expeditionary targeting force, a group of commandos from the secretive Joint Special Operations Command who target Islamic State leaders and fighters in Iraq and Syria. The operation underscored how the military -- both under President Barack Obama and now President Trump -- is using risky commando missions and not just airstrikes to battle the militants.

The targeting force has intensified its drone strikes and raids in Syria in recent months against the Islamic State's external operations planners, who have inspired, supported and directed attacks beyond their declared caliphate and into the West.

In early January, American commandos killed a midlevel Islamic State leader whom they were trying to capture and interrogate in Deir al-Zour Province, which is largely under Islamic State control, in eastern Syria. When the helicopter-borne troops intercepted a vehicle carrying the Islamic Sate leader, a firefight broke out, and the suspect and another person in the car were killed. No Americans were injured.

The Pentagon announced in December that a United States airstrike in Raqqa, in northern Syria, had killed three Islamic State operatives who were involved in mounting terrorist attacks in Europe, including the deadly assaults in Paris in November 2015.

And last August, a strike by an armed Reaper drone killed Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, the Islamic State's spokesman. At the time, Pentagon officials called the strike a sign of progress by the military's Special Operations forces and the Central Intelligence Agency in what was then a two-year conflict, using information from spies on the ground and sensors in the sky to strike at Islamic State leaders.

Until his death, Mr. Adnani led the Islamic State's external operations branch, and he in turn relied on two lieutenants. Those men have been identified by other members of the group by their noms de guerre, Abu Souleymane and Abu Ahmad, and their real identities remain debated.

Beyond these figures, little is publicly known about the hierarchy of the branch of the Islamic State responsible for projecting terrorism abroad. The Pentagon and intelligence agencies, however, have become increasingly confident that their analysts have been able to map with growing understanding the network of militants who hold those jobs.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170422ed4m0004n



CONTRIBUTING OP-ED WRITER
OpEd; SECT
How Do You Say 'Hail Mary' in French?

By PAMELA DRUCKERMAN 
1,096 words
22 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

PARIS -- I've lately been telling French people about the Hail Mary pass. I explain that it's a desperate move in American football: You're running out of time to score, so you lob the ball toward the end zone and hope for the best.

The 'ail Marie -- as I've been pronouncing it -- is the best metaphor I've found for the French elections this Sunday. The country that gave us the Enlightenment, Cartesian logic, the Napoleonic Code and possibly reason itself may be about to just throw a ball into the distance and see what happens.

Proof of this is the sudden rise of Jean-Luc Méenchon, until recently an angry ex-Trotskyist on the left wing's colorful fringe. He probably never thought his policy ideas -- like cutting the workweek to 32 hours (from a punishing 35), letting everyone retire at 60, and possibly leaving the European Union and joining an alliance with Venezuela and Cuba -- would need to pass a reality test.

Now he's one of the four candidates who are neck-and-neck, in a race where a third of voters say they might still change their minds. Thursday night's shooting on the Champs-Éysés -- apparently another act of terrorism here -- makes the results even more uncertain.

In response to the attack, each candidate appealed to a different side of the French psyche. The xenophobic nationalist Marine Le Pen warned of ''uninterrupted terrorism'' and claimed she has a ''battle plan to protect France.'' Françis Fillon, of the mainstream right-wing party, pledged to make more room in prisons. The centrist Emmanuel Macron vowed to create an anti-ISIS task force, then quoted a line about bravery from ''Les Miséables.'' Mr. Méenchon called for sang-froid and decided that the campaign cocktail parties he'd convened around the country should go on.

Until now, security had been just one of many campaign themes. A worker at my local supermarket told me he became a Méenchoniste because the candidate promised a sixth week of annual vacation. He added that he knew Mr. Méenchon would be ''catastrophic'' for the French economy, then gave me a guilty look.

I'd been worried about the French election for a while. For months, Ms. Le Pen had been leading the polls for the first round of voting. But after an American campaign in which the winner's policies were conveyed in three-word chants like ''Build a wall'' and ''Lock her up,'' I was reassured that French elections are usually rational affairs. In the lead-up to the vote, each candidate unveils a detailed ''programme'' explaining positions on everything from nuclear energy to school lunches.

It can feel like you're comparison shopping for a flat-screen TV: Newspapers run charts showing each candidate's stand on different issues. It's not unusual to hear a French voter say she won't commit until she has read the programs.

Despite the usual parade of programs, this year's election seems less like a reasoned debate and more like an avant-garde circus. Posters for Françis Asselineau, a minor candidate who wants France to leave the European Union at once, simply say, ominously, ''Vote your intuition.''

Many French voters are already doing that, which means the future of Europe might hinge on pets. An undecided 20-something told me last week that she was waiting to hear the candidates' views on animals. I assumed she was just an exceptionally committed cat owner, until I saw a poll in which 39 percent of respondents said that animal policy could influence their votes, up from 29 percent in 2012.

How did it come to this, in the birthplace of Voltaire? A special issue of Philosophie Magazine, now on newsstands, explains that anti-Enlightenment thinkers have always popped up here. ''They don't believe in progress,'' a headline warns. ''They don't trust democracy. They're back.''

It helps to have an electorate that's more schooled in philosophy than economics. The pro-business newspaper L'Opinion warned on Thursday that there's so much magical thinking on economic matters right now, ''we're not very far from a psychosis.''

France is also recovering from the five-year presidency of Françis Hollande, who neither solved the country's problems nor satisfied its need for a regal figurehead. Now voters are searching for a president who embodies France.

Mr. Méenchon, ''with his little black jacket, he is the left,'' the political scientist Pascal Perrineau said. ''He incarnates it.''

The center-right Mr. Fillon may have faced some pesky corruption charges. But Mr. Fillon, the son of a provincial notary, looks just like ''the son of a provincial notary,'' Mr. Perrineau said, a reassuringly familiar image that helped him rebound into a competitive third place. Mr. Fillon might benefit most from Thursday night's attack: He's hard-line, but still seems like someone you could invite for dinner.

If -- as expected -- no one wins a majority on Sunday, the two front-runners will compete in a runoff two weeks later. The possibility of a showdown between Mr. Méenchon and Ms. Le Pen has added to the surreal mood.

''Up until this campaign you always thought that you couldn't have two nut cases in the second round,'' said Catherine Fieschi, who researches the French electorate as head of the consulting company Counterpoint. ''Now there's a sense of, 'this has all become absurd and nonsensical, and if you're going to concoct such an absurd campaign, then we as voters feel entitled to behave absurdly.' ''

There's hope in the form of the pragmatic Mr. Macron. He doesn't fit into an established French political type, but by a slim margin, he has edged ahead of Ms. Le Pen to become the front-runner in Sunday's vote. (Current polls show that if he goes head-to-head against Ms. Le Pen in Round 2, he will crush her.) An eager volunteer handed me Mr. Macron's program on the street the other day, and I practically applauded on the Méro while reading it.

I'm hoping that, alone in the voting booth, faced with the gravity of their choice, French voters will, too.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Pamela Druckerman is the author of ''Bringing Up Béé One American Mother Discovers the Wisdom of French Parenting'' and a contributing opinion writer.

Document NYTF000020170422ed4m0003x



World; Middle East
U.S. Raid Killed a ‘lose Associate’f Islamic State Leader, Military Says

By ERIC SCHMITT 
755 words
22 April 2017
02:19
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —nited States Special Operations forces carried out a ground raid in Syria this month that killed a militant who was known as “ close associate”f the Islamic State’ leader and who had helped plot a deadly attack on a nightclub in Istanbul on New Year’ Day, the military said on Friday.

American troops killed the insurgent, Abdurakhmon Uzbeki, on April 6 in an operation in Mayadin, Syria. He was targeted for his role in the Islamic State’ external terrorist-attack plotting, said Col. John Thomas, a spokesman for the military’ Central Command.

“e facilitated the movement of \b ISIS\b0  foreign terror fighters and funds,”olonel Thomas said in a Friday briefing to reporters by telephone from the command’ headquarters in Tampa, Fla., using the acronym for the Islamic State. Colonel Thomas said it took until now to confirm that Mr. Uzbeki was killed in the raid two weeks ago.

In describing Mr. Uzbeki as “ close associate”f Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the shadowy leader of the terrorist organization, Colonel Thomas said the militant was “nown to interact with him in various ways over time.”olonel Thomas declined to elaborate.

Soon after the attack in Istanbul, in which 39 people died, the Turkish authorities arrested the suspected gunman. He was identified as Abdulgadir Masharipov, an Uzbek citizen born in 1983, and he later confessed to the shooting. But Turkish officials maintained that Mr. Masharipov received help in carrying out the plot.

The American counterterrorism operation was conducted by the so-called expeditionary targeting force, a group of commandos from the secretive Joint Special Operations Command who target Islamic State leaders and fighters in Iraq and Syria. The operation underscored how the military —oth under President Barack Obama and now President Trump —s using risky commando missions and not just airstrikes to battle the militants.

The targeting force has intensified its drone strikes and raids in Syria in recent months against the Islamic State’ external operations planners, who have inspired, supported and directed attacks beyond their declared caliphate and into the West.

In early January, American commandos killed a midlevel Islamic State leader whom they were trying to capture and interrogate in Deir al-Zour Province, which is largely under Islamic State control, in eastern Syria. When the helicopter-borne troops intercepted a vehicle carrying the Islamic Sate leader, a firefight broke out, and the suspect and another person in the car were killed. No Americans were injured.

The Pentagon announced in December that a United States airstrike in Raqqa, in northern Syria, had killed three Islamic State operatives who were involved in mounting terrorist attacks in Europe, including the deadly assaults in Paris in November 2015.

And last August, a strike by an armed Reaper drone killed Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, the Islamic State’ spokesman. At the time, Pentagon officials called the strike a sign of progress by the military’ Special Operations forces and the Central Intelligence Agency in what was then a two-year conflict, using information from spies on the ground and sensors in the sky to strike at Islamic State leaders.

Until his death, Mr. Adnani led the Islamic State’ external operations branch, and he in turn relied on two lieutenants. Those men have been identified by other members of the group by their noms de guerre, Abu Souleymane and Abu Ahmad, and their real identities remain debated.

Beyond these figures, little is publicly known about the hierarchy of the branch of the Islamic State responsible for projecting terrorism abroad. The Pentagon and intelligence agencies, however, have become increasingly confident that their analysts have been able to map with growing understanding the network of militants who hold those jobs.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* On Trump’ Syria Strategy, One Voice Is Missing: Trump’

* U.S. Strike on Syria Brings Fleeting Hope to Those Caught in Brutal Conflict

* Suspect in Istanbul Nightclub Attack Confesses, Officials Say

* Nightclub Massacre in Istanbul Exposes Turkey’ Deepening Fault Lines

A woman laid flowers at a makeshift memorial in front of the Reina nightclub in Istanbul in January. On April 6, United States Special Operations forces carried out a ground raid in Syria that killed Abdurakhmon Uzbeki, an ISIS militant who had helped plot the attack on the nightclub. | Ozan Kose/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170422ed4m0008d



Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Why Giuliani Was Granted a Meeting With Turkey's President

By BENJAMIN WEISER and PATRICK KINGSLEY 
1,421 words
21 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

In late February, as the United States and the rest of the world were adjusting to President Trump and Turkey was focused on a push by its president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan , to expand his power, Mr. Erdogan agreed to an unusual meeting with some American visitors.

The guests included Rudolph W. Giuliani , a former New York City mayor who had acted as a surrogate for Mr. Trump during his campaign, and another prominent lawyer, Michael B. Mukasey, who served as attorney general in President George W. Bush's administration.

The purpose of the visit by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey was rather extraordinary: They hoped to reach a diplomatic deal under which Turkey might further aid the United States' interests in the region. In return, the United States might release the two men's client, Reza Zarrab, a Turkish gold trader being held in a Manhattan jail whose case had attracted Mr. Erdogan's interest.

Mr. Mukasey, in court papers made public on Wednesday, characterized the meeting as part of an effort to seek ''a state-to-state resolution of this case,'' and he hinted at some progress, saying, ''Senior officials in both the U.S. government and the Turkish government remain receptive to pursuing the possibility of an agreement.''

Plea bargaining, even for the best-connected of defendants, is normally conducted by defense lawyers and prosecutors, often in courthouse corridors or drab government offices. But the efforts being made on behalf of Mr. Zarrab show the way that political access and diplomatic overtures can also be employed.

Mr. Zarrab, 33, is a well-known figure in Turkey, where he moved as an infant after being born in Iran (he is a citizen of both countries). He is married to a Turkish pop star and is regarded as a member of Mr. Erdogan's circle of friends and associates. Photographs show Mr. Erdogan's wife, Emine, attending at least one charity event alongside Mr. Zarrab and his wife.

Mr. Zarrab had also amassed ''a considerable fortune,'' according to American prosecutors, who say his holdings included ownership in a private airplane and about 20 properties, boats, luxury automobiles and millions of dollars' worth of artwork.

In 2013, Mr. Zarrab was detained by the Turkish authorities in a wide-ranging corruption investigation of businessmen with close ties to Mr. Erdogan, who was then Turkey's prime minister. But Mr. Zarrab used his influence with the Turkish government to win his release from prison, American prosecutors have said.

They raised the issue of what they called Mr. Zarrab's ''corrupt political connections'' last year when they argued that he should not get bail in New York, where he faces charges that include conspiring to violate the United States' sanctions on Iran. He has pleaded not guilty.

Mr. Erdogan, taking a personal interest in the case, said last year that there were ''malicious'' intentions in the prosecution, and he also raised the matter with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr . during talks at the United Nations, according to Turkish news reports.

''We have to seek justice, for he is our citizen,'' Mr. Erdogan said of Mr. Zarrab in September.

The subject of Mr. Zarrab came up again three weeks ago during a visit to Ankara, Turkey, by Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson . During that visit, Turkey's foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, accused Preet Bharara, then the United States attorney in Manhattan, whose office first charged Mr. Zarrab, of being a pawn of anti-Turkish forces.

Mr. Bharara, who was fired by President Trump last month, had characterized Mr. Cavusoglu's remarks as ''political propaganda.'' On Thursday, after The New York Times reported on the strategy by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey to turn the case involving Mr. Zarrab into a matter of international diplomacy, Mr. Bharara said on Twitter , ''One just hopes that the rule of law, and its independent enforcement, still matters in the United States and at the Department of Justice.''

The efforts on Mr. Zarrab's behalf come as Mr. Erdogan gains even more power in Turkey, after a hotly disputed referendum that expanded his authoritarian rule and drew a congratulatory phone call from Mr. Trump on Monday.

Mr. Erdogan and Mr. Trump have made overtures to each other that suggest Turkey and the United States could become closer allies.

The new court filing, by Mr. Zarrab's lead lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, includes affidavits from Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey that make it clear they hope to get Mr. Erdogan to accept the notion that a diplomatic deal could be of mutual interest to Turkey and the United States. They wrote in the affidavits that a resolution that would be favorable for Mr. Zarrab could be ''part of some agreement between the United States and Turkey that will promote the national security interests of the United States.''

Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey said it was ''hardly surprising'' that senior Turkish and United States officials were receptive to a possible deal, considering that none of the transactions in which Mr. Zarrab is accused of participating ''involved weapons or nuclear technology, or any other contraband,'' and that ''Turkey is situated in a part of the world strategically critical to the United States.''

Some analysts in Turkey have suggested that if Mr. Zarrab were to be freed or returned to that country, Mr. Erdogan might be more inclined to fall in line with American interests in the Middle East.

Sinan Ulgen, a former Turkish diplomat and the chairman of the Center for Economics and Foreign Policy Studies , a liberal-leaning Turkish think tank, said the strategy implied that ''allowing a free pass to Zarrab and company would create good will in Ankara that Washington could use to advance its own regional agenda,'' with clearer support or at least less interference from the Turkish government.

Mr. Erdogan, for example, might be less resistant to American plans to retake Raqqa, Syria -- the capital of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS -- in collaboration with a Syrian Kurdish faction. Turkey regards that faction, known as the P.Y.D., as the Syrian offshoot of a proscribed militant group that operates on Turkish soil.

A swift end to the case against Mr. Zarrab, Mr. Ulgen said, might mean ''Turkey would be much less resistant to the U.S.'s missions in Syria, and primarily its support to the P.Y.D.''

The United States also needs Turkey to continue to allow anti-ISIS bombing missions to fly out of an air base in the southern part of the country.

Analysts supportive of Mr. Erdogan's government contend that Mr. Zarrab's fate is of limited interest to the Turkish state. In the view of these analysts, the charges against him are spurious and were concocted in order to smear the Turkish president.

''This Zarrab issue is not a state issue in Turkey,'' said Hasan Yalcin, strategic research director at Seta, a government-friendly think tank in Ankara. ''It's not an issue that the Turkish state is focusing on; it's just speculation that the Turkish state is related to Zarrab.''

State news media in Turkey reported recently that Istanbul's chief prosecutor had opened an investigation into Mr. Bharara and 16 other United States-linked individuals in what Western diplomats regarded as retaliation for the Zarrab case.

The affidavits by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey were filed by Mr. Brafman, the defense lawyer, at the request of Judge Richard M. Berman of Federal District Court. Judge Berman initially said the affidavits could be filed under seal and ex parte, meaning the government would also not be able to see them. He subsequently directed that they be filed publicly, Mr. Brafman said.

''The affidavits speak for themselves,'' he said, declining to comment further.

Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey wrote that both Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Mr. Bharara had been apprised ''in general terms'' before the meetings with Mr. Erdogan and other Turkish officials. They said they had also discussed their roles with, and had been briefed by, a State Department representative in Turkey before seeing Mr. Erdogan.

Copies of Mr. Zarrab's retainer agreements with Mr. Giuliani's and Mr. Mukasey's law firms were also filed with the court but were not unsealed.

Rudolph W. Giuliani has discussed Mr. Zarrab with American and Turkish officials. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KEVIN HAGEN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Reza Zarrab (A24) 

Document NYTF000020170421ed4l0007d



world
Do U.S. Strikes Send a ‘essage’o Rivals? There’ No Evidence; The Interpreter

By MAX FISHER 
1,598 words
21 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In the Trump administration’ telling, its missile strike on a Syrian airfield and its dropping of the so-called mother of all bombs over Afghanistan were more than military missions.

They were a signal of American resolve, and of President Trump’ willingness to use force, that would deter adversaries worldwide.

“he world witnessed the strength and resolve of our new president in actions taken in Syria and Afghanistan,”ice President Mike Pence said in a speech in South Korea, adding, “orth Korea would do well not to test his resolve.”

Sebastian Gorka, a deputy assistant to the president, went further, saying the American attack on a Syrian air base served as a warning to leaders in Russia, Iran and North Korea: “ith just one strike, that message was sent to all those capitals, all those people.”

The notion that military action in one part of the world will deter adversaries in all others, long common in stump speeches and on cable news chatter, has at times profoundly influenced American foreign policy.

There is only one problem: Repeated investigation has found that this notion is baseless.

Jonathan Mercer, a University of Washington political scientist who studies so-called signaling in foreign policy, said this line of reasoning “rives me crazy.”

His entire field of study, he added, had never found evidence that would support the administration’ claims.

Jennifer Lind, a Dartmouth College political scientist, said those claims relied on a set of assumptions about resolve and credibility that, though widely held in Washington, had been extensively debunked.

“f someone says, ‘ecause we dropped the MOAB, North Korea will think again before they mess with us,’his is just that person’ intuition,”he said, referring to the bomb used in Afghanistan. She added, “here’ no theory or evidence there.”

When Signals Work, and Don’

Signals, Dr. Mercer said, can work —hen they are precise and are backed up by action demonstrating capability and intent to follow through.

For instance, the American pledge to defend South Korea from a North Korean invasion is made credible by basing thousands of troops in the likely line of fire. Those troops are part of the signal.

North Korea considers this credible not because of a vague sense that American leaders hold to their word or are personally tough, but from demonstrable cause and effect. North Korea knows that an invasion would kill those American troops, which would force the United States to counterattack.

The administration seems to be operating on a much looser theory of signaling: that strikes in Syria or Afghanistan will create a global reputation for Mr. Trump’ resolve and willingness to use force, granting greater American leverage over all adversaries.

Mr. Pence has suggested this extends even to body language. He told The Washington Post of his decision to step outside during a visit to the demilitarized zone between South and North Korea: “ thought it was important that people on the other side of the DMZ see our resolve in my face.”

But Dr. Lind and Dr. Mercer said research on signaling has found several reasons that this view doesn’ hold up.

Clear Enough to Persuade

One problem is that it is not clear what the strikes in Syria and Afghanistan are intended to say to adversaries like North Korea and Russia.

Are they threats that the United States will use military force against those states as well, or just that Mr. Trump is temperamentally inclined to use force? If they are threats of force, under what circumstances would additional force be carried out?

While ambiguity can be useful in foreign policy in some situations, action intended to change an adversary’ calculus needs to clear a higher bar, research suggests. States tend to disregard any signals they cannot read, instead relying on signals about which they are more sure.

If Americans cannot agree about the message intended by striking Syria, Dr. Mercer said, faraway North Korean or Russian leaders will not have any clearer sense.

The American strikes in Syria and Afghanistan bear little resemblance to any conceivable plan for attacking North Korea, either in terms of how the operation would work or the dangers it would face, leaving analysts puzzled at suggestions that the former demonstrated a willingness to conduct the latter.

Lawrence Freedman, emeritus professor of war studies at King’ College London, wrote on Twitter that both were “ow-risk strikes with limited impact,”dding that it was “ncredible to suggest”hat these were comparable to the “isks/consequences of action against N. Korea.”

Making a Signal Believable

Even if adversaries can deduce the signal’ meaning, that does not mean they will believe it. States, according to research by Robert Jervis, a Columbia University political scientist, are biased toward assuming other states’ehavior will remain consistent. To overcome that bias and force a state like North Korea to change its assessment of American intentions would require a more concrete signal.

If Mr. Pence hoped to imply that the United States might bomb North Korea as it had Afghanistan, his message was undercut by a stream of signals that conveyed, in the far clearer terms of action, that Washington would seek to avoid a war with North Korea as it always had.

The disposition of American troops in nearby Japan or Guam, the tenor of relations with South Korea, and dozens of other day-to-day American actions all send signals. Virtually all suggest that American policy remains unchanged.

This week’ story of the lost American aircraft carrier, Dr. Mercer said, demonstrates how hard it is to change an adversary’ calculus. When Mr. Trump claimed a carrier was racing toward the Korean Peninsula to deter Pyongyang, but photos later showed the carrier heading in the opposite direction, did this undermine American credibility?

For better or worse, Dr. Mercer suggested, foreign leaders will most likely see it as confirming whatever they already believed about American commitments under Mr. Trump.

“hink of it like a Rorschach test,”r. Mercer said, adding that the episode was “o strange that everyone can read into whatever they like or find most plausible.”

‘eputations Do Not Matter’

The administration’ claims appear premised on the belief that nations and leaders have reputations that apply globally. If the United States proves its resolve in one context, the thinking goes, this will give it greater credibility everywhere.

But repeated studies have found no evidence for this belief.

A 1984 Yale University study examined 54 instances in which a country’ pledge to defend an ally was tested. If reputation mattered, then countries that stood down would face more challengers in the future, and countries that followed through would face fewer challengers. But the study found no such correlations, suggesting that reputation played no role in determining how adversaries behaved.

Dr. Mercer, in 2013, published a study using similar metrics to determine whether individual leaders have reputations that shape how adversaries respond.

“road and deep evidence dispels that notion,”r. Mercer concluded. “s the record shows, reputations do not matter.”

Dr. Lind said studies had found that “ne’ reputation for keeping past threats and promises does not affect credibility of threats and promises even in the same region.”

There is “o evidence,”he added, “hat dropping a bomb in location A affects credibility in location A, let alone location B.”

Stubborn Assumptions

These notions predate the Trump administration and have contributed to some of the most consequential miscalculations in modern American foreign policy.

In the 1950s, American policy makers believed it necessary to intervene in the Korean War, in part, to prove their willingness to stand up for European allies. Historical examination later showed that European and Soviet leaders saw the intervention as irrelevant to American pledges in Europe.

A generation later, policy makers concluded that intervening in Vietnam would signal American resolve and deter communist ambitions globally. Soviet records, released decades later, showed Moscow considered the intervention baffling and of no bearing on its policies.

Even policy makers who are aware of these misconceptions have struggled to signal successfully.

Charles A. Duelfer, a senior State Department official during Iraq’ 1990 invasion of Kuwait and the subsequent American intervention, was an author of a study with Stephen Benedict Dyson, a political scientist, on how the United States and Iraq had stumbled into conflict.

The war, they found, was largely a result of miscommunication. Saddam Hussein, Iraq’ leader, believed he had signaled his intention to invade Kuwait and received no red light from the United States, which he considered a partner. The Americans misread his signals, as well as the calculus, clear in retrospect, that led him into Kuwait.

Mr. Duelfer and Mr. Dyson wrote that the episode highlighted the difficulty of signaling across nations as well as the stakes of getting it wrong, which they conclude happens frequently and sometimes with catastrophic consequences.

Even under the best of circumstances, Dr. Mercer said, “ignals rarely speak for themselves.”

The Interpreter is a column by Max Fisher and Amanda Taub exploring the ideas and context behind major world events. Follow them on Twitter @Max_Fisher and @amandataub.

* A Giant U.S. Bomb Carries an Even Bigger Message

* U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs’n \b ISIS\b0  Caves in Afghanistan

* With Strike Aimed at Halting More Gas Attacks, U.S. Tries to Send Syrians Message

* Acting on Instinct, Trump Upends His Own Foreign Policy

Document INHT000020170423ed4l00007



opinion
How Do You Say ‘ail Mary’n French?; Contributing Op-Ed Writer

By PAMELA DRUCKERMAN 
1,111 words
21 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

PARIS —’e lately been telling French people about the Hail Mary pass. I explain that it’ a desperate move in American football: You’e running out of time to score, so you lob the ball toward the end zone and hope for the best.

The ’il Marie —s I’e been pronouncing it —s the best metaphor I’e found for the French elections this Sunday. The country that gave us the Enlightenment, Cartesian logic, the Napoleonic Code and possibly reason itself may be about to just throw a ball into the distance and see what happens.

Proof of this is the sudden rise of Jean-Luc Méenchon, until recently an angry ex-Trotskyist on the left wing’ colorful fringe. He probably never thought his policy ideas —ike cutting the workweek to 32 hours (from a punishing 35), letting everyone retire at 60, and possibly leaving the European Union and joining an alliance with Venezuela and Cuba —ould need to pass a reality test.

Now he’ one of the four candidates who are neck-and-neck, in a race where a third of voters say they might still change their minds. Thursday night’ shooting on the Champs-Éysés —pparently another act of terrorism here —akes the results even more uncertain.

In response to the attack, each candidate appealed to a different side of the French psyche. The xenophobic nationalist Marine Le Pen warned of “ninterrupted terrorism”nd claimed she has a “attle plan to protect France.”rançis Fillon, of the mainstream right-wing party, pledged to make more room in prisons. The centrist Emmanuel Macron vowed to create an anti-ISIS task force, then quoted a line about bravery from “es Miséables.”r. Méenchon called for sang-froid and decided that the campaign cocktail parties he’ convened around the country should go on.

Until now, security had been just one of many campaign themes. A worker at my local supermarket told me he became a Méenchoniste because the candidate promised a sixth week of annual vacation. He added that he knew Mr. Méenchon would be “atastrophic”or the French economy, then gave me a guilty look.

I’ been worried about the French election for a while. For months, Ms. Le Pen had been leading the polls for the first round of voting. But after an American campaign in which the winner’ policies were conveyed in three-word chants like “uild a wall”nd “ock her up,” was reassured that French elections are usually rational affairs. In the lead-up to the vote, each candidate unveils a detailed “rogramme”xplaining positions on everything from nuclear energy to school lunches.

It can feel like you’e comparison shopping for a flat-screen TV: Newspapers run charts showing each candidate’ stand on different issues. It’ not unusual to hear a French voter say she won’ commit until she has read the programs.

Despite the usual parade of programs, this year’ election seems less like a reasoned debate and more like an avant-garde circus. Posters for Françis Asselineau, a minor candidate who wants France to leave the European Union at once, simply say, ominously, “ote your intuition.”

Many French voters are already doing that, which means the future of Europe might hinge on pets. An undecided 20-something told me last week that she was waiting to hear the candidates’iews on animals. I assumed she was just an exceptionally committed cat owner, until I saw a poll in which 39 percent of respondents said that animal policy could influence their votes, up from 29 percent in 2012.

How did it come to this, in the birthplace of Voltaire? A special issue of Philosophie Magazine, now on newsstands, explains that anti-Enlightenment thinkers have always popped up here. “hey don’ believe in progress,” headline warns. “hey don’ trust democracy. They’e back.”

It helps to have an electorate that’ more schooled in philosophy than economics. The pro-business newspaper L’pinion warned on Thursday that there’ so much magical thinking on economic matters right now, “e’e not very far from a psychosis.”

France is also recovering from the five-year presidency of Françis Hollande, who neither solved the country’ problems nor satisfied its need for a regal figurehead. Now voters are searching for a president who embodies France.

Mr. Méenchon, “ith his little black jacket, he is the left,”he political scientist Pascal Perrineau said. “e incarnates it.”

The center-right Mr. Fillon may have faced some pesky corruption charges. But Mr. Fillon, the son of a provincial notary, looks just like “he son of a provincial notary,”r. Perrineau said, a reassuringly familiar image that helped him rebound into a competitive third place. Mr. Fillon might benefit most from Thursday night’ attack: He’ hard-line, but still seems like someone you could invite for dinner.

If —s expected —o one wins a majority on Sunday, the two front-runners will compete in a runoff two weeks later. The possibility of a showdown between Mr. Méenchon and Ms. Le Pen has added to the surreal mood.

“p until this campaign you always thought that you couldn’ have two nut cases in the second round,”aid Catherine Fieschi, who researches the French electorate as head of the consulting company Counterpoint. “ow there’ a sense of, ‘his has all become absurd and nonsensical, and if you’e going to concoct such an absurd campaign, then we as voters feel entitled to behave absurdly.’”

There’ hope in the form of the pragmatic Mr. Macron. He doesn’ fit into an established French political type, but by a slim margin, he has edged ahead of Ms. Le Pen to become the front-runner in Sunday’ vote. (Current polls show that if he goes head-to-head against Ms. Le Pen in Round 2, he will crush her.) An eager volunteer handed me Mr. Macron’ program on the street the other day, and I practically applauded on the Méro while reading it.

I’ hoping that, alone in the voting booth, faced with the gravity of their choice, French voters will, too.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Pamela Druckerman is the author of “ringing Up Béé One American Mother Discovers the Wisdom of French Parenting”nd a contributing opinion writer.

* The Suspense Is Almost Too Much for the French

* The French Disconnection

Document INHT000020170421ed4l0000g



World; Asia Pacific
Taliban Attack Afghan Army Base, Killing Dozens

By MUJIB MASHAL and NAJIM RAHIM 
840 words
21 April 2017
15:34
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan —ozens of soldiers were killed when Taliban gunmen and suicide bombers in military uniforms stormed an Afghan Army base in northern Afghanistan on Friday, Afghan and Western officials said.

The attack on the 209th Corps in Balkh province began around 1 p.m., in a crowded area where soldiers, most of them unarmed, were leaving Friday prayers or eating lunch.

A Western military official in Kabul, who did want to be publicly identified because he is not authorized to speak to the media, said the number of deaths could reach 70 or more. Zabiullah Kaker, a member of the Balkh provincial council, said people inside the army corps had told him at least 66 soldiers were killed in the attack and 74 others wounded.

But Ahmad Javid Salim, a spokesman for the Afghan Army’ commando forces who was at the scene of the attack, said at least 20 Afghan Army soldiers were killed and 30 others wounded.

Six assailants dressed in military uniforms drove in two army vehicles past the first checkpoint, according to Lt. Col. Abdul Qahar Aram, a spokesman for the corps. At the second checkpoint, one of the suicide bombers blew up his explosives, allowing the militants to enter, take up positions and start firing at soldiers, who were leaving Friday prayers, which are performed in a large common setting, or making their way to lunch.

“he dining room and the mosque are close to each other,”aid Colonel Aram. “t was lunchtime —hey entered both the mosque and the dining room.”

The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack through a spokesman, Zabihullah Mujahid. In a message posted on Twitter, Mr. Mujahid said the assailants were led by four soldiers inside the base who had long been Taliban infiltrators.

Hashem Azimi, a member of Balkh provincial council, agreed that the attackers seemed to have help from the inside where, he said, at least five infiltrators joined them after they had breached the security measures.

“he two ranger vehicles had pretended that they were coming back from operations at some front line —hey were all covered in dust,”r. Azimi said. “hen they reached the gates of the army corps, they started firing and one of them got off the vehicle and blew himself up.”

The attack came weeks after militants entered the Afghan army’ main hospital in Kabul, and killed more than 50 people in a siege that lasted nearly seven hours. The Islamic State claimed responsibility for that carnage. In that attack too, security officials said, the militants had inside help.

While the Islamic State has been getting attention in recent days because of the American military’ use of its largest conventional bomb against an ISIS cave complex in eastern Afghanistan, the Taliban remains the biggest security threat to the country. The group has expanded its territory over the past couple years, and threatens several cities.

Such a major breach of security at the army corps in Balkh, even before the start of the insurgents’pring offensive, is a major concern to Afghan forces who are already struggling in the fight against the Taliban. In 2016, more than 6,700 Afghan forces were killed in battle.

Analysts and officials with the American-led coalition forces, who are training and assisting the Afghan forces, have been very critical of the inept leadership and widespread corruption in the ranks, which is contributing to the large number of casualties. Gen. John W. Nicholson, the commander of the American and NATO forces here, has expressed his need for a few thousand more American troops on the group to assist and train the Afghan forces.

Analysts said the repeated ability of a few militants to cause tremendous bloodshed in highly secure areas was an especially troubling sign ahead of the Taliban’ spring offensive. Jawed Kohistani, an Afghan security analyst, said the Balkh attack seemed to be in retaliation for Afghan special forces going on the offensive in recent weeks and targeting local Taliban leaders in night raids. Such daring attacks as Friday’, he said, are possible because of infiltrators and by the Taliban’ careful study of the Afghan security forces and their weaknesses.

“ou know the attack was carried out on Friday, which is a national holiday, in the afternoon, which is the time of Friday prayer, ”aid Mr. Kohistani, adding, “n Friday, the military preparation of soldiers for responding to possible attack is decreased, the checking of the personnel also decreases and the enemy was aware of that.”

“he gap, weakness and problem is in management, in the intelligence agency, and the carelessness of high-ranking officials,”e said.

Mujib Mashal reported from Kabul, and Najim Rahim from Kunduz, Afghanistan. Fahim Abed contributed reporting from Kabul.

* After Deadly Attack on Kabul Hospital, ‘verywhere Was Full of Blood’

* Suicide Bomber in Afghanistan Rams Car at Militia Base, Officials Say

* Afghan Security Reforms Falter, With Tough Fighting Ahead

Document NYTFEED020170421ed4l0048t



Contributing Op-Ed Writer
Opinion
How Do You Say ‘ail Mary’n French?

By PAMELA DRUCKERMAN 
1,118 words
21 April 2017
20:23
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

PARIS —’e lately been telling French people about the Hail Mary pass. I explain that it’ a desperate move in American football: You’e running out of time to score, so you lob the ball toward the end zone and hope for the best.

The ’il Marie —s I’e been pronouncing it —s the best metaphor I’e found for the French elections this Sunday. The country that gave us the Enlightenment, Cartesian logic, the Napoleonic Code and possibly reason itself may be about to just throw a ball into the distance and see what happens.

Proof of this is the sudden rise of Jean-Luc Méenchon, until recently an angry ex-Trotskyist on the left wing’ colorful fringe. He probably never thought his policy ideas —ike cutting the workweek to 32 hours (from a punishing 35), letting everyone retire at 60, and possibly leaving the European Union and joining an alliance with Venezuela and Cuba —ould need to pass a reality test.

Now he’ one of the four candidates who are neck-and-neck, in a race where a third of voters say they might still change their minds. Thursday night’ shooting on the Champs-Éysés —pparently another act of terrorism here —akes the results even more uncertain.

In response to the attack, each candidate appealed to a different side of the French psyche. The xenophobic nationalist Marine Le Pen warned of “ninterrupted terrorism”nd claimed she has a “attle plan to protect France.”rançis Fillon, of the mainstream right-wing party, pledged to make more room in prisons. The centrist Emmanuel Macron vowed to create an anti-ISIS task force, then quoted a line about bravery from “es Miséables.”r. Méenchon called for sang-froid and decided that the campaign cocktail parties he’ convened around the country should go on.

Until now, security had been just one of many campaign themes. A worker at my local supermarket told me he became a Méenchoniste because the candidate promised a sixth week of annual vacation. He added that he knew Mr. Méenchon would be “atastrophic”or the French economy, then gave me a guilty look.

I’ been worried about the French election for a while. For months, Ms. Le Pen had been leading the polls for the first round of voting. But after an American campaign in which the winner’ policies were conveyed in three-word chants like “uild a wall”nd “ock her up,” was reassured that French elections are usually rational affairs. In the lead-up to the vote, each candidate unveils a detailed “rogramme”xplaining positions on everything from nuclear energy to school lunches.

It can feel like you’e comparison shopping for a flat-screen TV: Newspapers run charts showing each candidate’ stand on different issues. It’ not unusual to hear a French voter say she won’ commit until she has read the programs.

Despite the usual parade of programs, this year’ election seems less like a reasoned debate and more like an avant-garde circus. Posters for Françis Asselineau, a minor candidate who wants France to leave the European Union at once, simply say, ominously, “ote your intuition.”

Many French voters are already doing that, which means the future of Europe might hinge on pets. An undecided 20-something told me last week that she was waiting to hear the candidates’iews on animals. I assumed she was just an exceptionally committed cat owner, until I saw a poll in which 39 percent of respondents said that animal policy could influence their votes, up from 29 percent in 2012.

How did it come to this, in the birthplace of Voltaire? A special issue of Philosophie Magazine, now on newsstands, explains that anti-Enlightenment thinkers have always popped up here. “hey don’ believe in progress,” headline warns. “hey don’ trust democracy. They’e back.”

It helps to have an electorate that’ more schooled in philosophy than economics. The pro-business newspaper L’pinion warned on Thursday that there’ so much magical thinking on economic matters right now, “e’e not very far from a psychosis.”

France is also recovering from the five-year presidency of Françis Hollande, who neither solved the country’ problems nor satisfied its need for a regal figurehead. Now voters are searching for a president who embodies France.

Mr. Méenchon, “ith his little black jacket, he is the left,”he political scientist Pascal Perrineau said. “e incarnates it.”

The center-right Mr. Fillon may have faced some pesky corruption charges. But Mr. Fillon, the son of a provincial notary, looks just like “he son of a provincial notary,”r. Perrineau said, a reassuringly familiar image that helped him rebound into a competitive third place. Mr. Fillon might benefit most from Thursday night’ attack: He’ hard-line, but still seems like someone you could invite for dinner.

If —s expected —o one wins a majority on Sunday, the two front-runners will compete in a runoff two weeks later. The possibility of a showdown between Mr. Méenchon and Ms. Le Pen has added to the surreal mood.

“p until this campaign you always thought that you couldn’ have two nut cases in the second round,”aid Catherine Fieschi, who researches the French electorate as head of the consulting company Counterpoint. “ow there’ a sense of, ‘his has all become absurd and nonsensical, and if you’e going to concoct such an absurd campaign, then we as voters feel entitled to behave absurdly.’”

There’ hope in the form of the pragmatic Mr. Macron. He doesn’ fit into an established French political type, but by a slim margin, he has edged ahead of Ms. Le Pen to become the front-runner in Sunday’ vote. (Current polls show that if he goes head-to-head against Ms. Le Pen in Round 2, he will crush her.) An eager volunteer handed me Mr. Macron’ program on the street the other day, and I practically applauded on the Méro while reading it.

I’ hoping that, alone in the voting booth, faced with the gravity of their choice, French voters will, too.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Pamela Druckerman is the author of “ringing Up Béé One American Mother Discovers the Wisdom of French Parenting”nd a contributing opinion writer.

* The French Disconnection

A hologram of Jean-Luc Méenchon projected at a campaign event in France. | Thierry Zoccolan/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170421ed4l007er



World; Europe
Suspect in Borussia Dortmund Plot Hoped to Profit Off Attack, Officials Say

By MELISSA EDDY 
1,253 words
21 April 2017
08:49
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BERLIN — 28-year-old German-Russian citizen was arrested on Friday and accused of trying to blow up the Borussia Dortmund team bus as part of a plot straight out of a James Bond movie to injure and kill the club’ players, drive down its share price and make a huge profit.

Germany’ elite antiterrorism unit arrested the man, identified only as Sergei W. in keeping with German privacy laws, at his home near the southwestern city of Tüingen early in the morning, federal prosecutors said.

After more than a week of speculation in which the attack was attributed to Islamist terrorists, the far right and the far left, he was charged with attempted murder, inflicting serious bodily harm and carrying out an explosion.

Frauke Köler, the spokeswoman for federal prosecutors, said the purchase of “uspicious options”elated to Borussia Dortmund shares on the morning of the attack, April 11, served as a tip to investigators.

She did not say how investigators became aware of the purchase. Borussia Dortmund shares fell no more than 7 percent at any point after the attack, and they even rose above their pre-bombing price on the day after.

After taking out a short-term loan “orth several tens of thousands of euros,”s. Köler said, the suspect purchased 15,000 put options, which would have entitled him to sell shares at a predetermined price at any point over the next six days —nd the more the stock price dropped, the more lucrative his gains.

Investigators traced the IP address for the purchases to a hotel in Dortmund where the team had been staying before its Champions League quarterfinal match against A.S. Monaco, prosecutors said.

In March, Sergei W. booked a rooftop room, with a clear view of the hedges below where three bombs loaded with shards of metal had been planted. He chose dates for both matches, from April 9 to 13 and 16 to 20, not knowing when the teams would be playing in Dortmund and Monaco.

The bus, painted in the club’ traditional black and yellow, was heavily damaged in the attack in Dortmund, about 60 miles east of the Netherlands border. A piece of shrapnel was found embedded in the headrest of a seat, suggesting the toll could have been much greater had the bombs gone off seconds earlier.

Given the strength of the explosives, the suspect appeared to have sought to cripple the team, betting on a plunging share price that would have allowed him to sell at a substantial profit.

“e could have counted on a considerable fall in the value of the shares, when players had been seriously injured or killed”n the attack, prosecutors said, but they declined to name a specific figure, citing the continuing investigation.

Christian W. Röl, a German financial investor and author, cited the 2006 James Bond film “Casino Royale,”n which the villain is a terrorist financier who seeks to destroy a plane in a short-selling bet against an airline company as an example for the suspect’ plan.

“f it had worked and the team had been hit hard enough that it would have been forced to withdraw from the match and from the tournament, or would have had to reorganize if five or six players had been injured over a long period of time or even killed, then most likely Borussia Dortmund shares could have plunged brutally,”e said. “hen, of course, there would be considerable gains to be made.”

The only player wounded was Marc Bartra, 26, a defender from Spain, who was hit by broken glass and sustained injuries to his right arm and wrist that required surgery, the team said. A police officer was also injured by the blasts.

The attack rattled Germans, coming a year after the country was struck by a series of violent acts by extremists pledging loyalty to the Islamic State, and targeting one of the country’ most successful and longstanding clubs for the de facto national sport.

Many were quick to attribute the attack to Islamic extremists, especially after three letters with identical content were found at the site calling for Germany to pull back from the Western military coalition against the Islamic State and by closing Ramstein Air Base, the main hub for American and NATO military forces in Germany.

But doubts were immediately raised about their authenticity by experts on terrorism and Islam. Over the next 10 days, two other letters claiming to come from right-wing and left-wing political groups emerged, casting further doubt on the veracity of a possible link to Islamic extremists.

Thomas de Maizièe, Germany’ interior minister, praised investigators and the police for their work. He called the motive for the attack “espicable,”oting that the suspect had played on public fears surrounding Islamic extremists for the purpose of personal financial gain.

“t is interesting that someone with a criminal motive here would pose as if he were a terrorist in an especially insidious way to play with peoples’ears,”r. de Maizièe said.

Two people were questioned last week in connection with the bombing, and although the authorities said both men had an “slamist background,”either was found to have played a role in the attack.

One of the men is a 26-year-old Iraqi who remains in detention; the authorities have identified him as the leader of an Islamic State unit who came to Germany last year as part of the wave of migration that has brought more than a million people to the country. The other, a 28-year-old German man in the nearby town of Unna, was released after no evidence was found connecting him to the attack.

Marcel Schmelzer, the club’ captain, said in a statement that it was important for the players to know the motivation behind the attack, which had left them rattled before a crucial match. “or everyone who was sitting on the bus, this would be important information that would make the ability to process this much easier,”e said.

The match was rescheduled for the next night in Dortmund. Monaco won, 3-2, and went on to oust the German team from the competition in the second leg, winning at home, 3-1.

“e had the impression they had the courage to focus fully on sport,”homas Tuchel, Dortmund’ coach, said on Friday. Nevertheless, the players lacked the doggedness needed to pull off a win, and Mr. Tuchel admitted he was reluctant to push too hard after what the team had been through.

Dortmund’ next game is Saturday, against Borussia Möchengladbach, and then the team will play Bayern Munich —he club’ archrival and Germany’ best team —n the semifinal of the national cup tournament.

“very player has his right to take the time he needs to process this,”r. Tuchel said. “or this reason, the next game is only in parenthesis.”

Follow Melissa Eddy on Twitter @meddynyt.

* Iraqi Held After Borussia Dortmund Attack Is Suspected of \b ISIS\b0  Ties

* Letter Found After Borussia Dortmund Bus Attack Demands Pullback in Syria

* Explosions Hit Borussia Dortmund’ Bus in Germany, Wounding a Player

* Terror Raids in Germany Reap More Doubts Than Results

* German Terrorism Case Highlights Europe’ Security Challenges

The Borussia Dortmund team bus was damaged in an explosion in Germany on April 11. | Maja Hitij/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170421ed4l0028l



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Trump Rejects U.S. Role In Libya, Rebuffing Italy

By GLENN THRUSH 
500 words
21 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
13
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

President Trump said on Thursday that he would not give the American military a direct role in helping stabilize war-ravaged Libya, rejecting years of pleading by Italy for more assistance in stemming African migrant traffic into Europe.

Mr. Trump's comments came during a White House news conference with Prime Minister Paolo Gentiloni of Italy, who implored the United States to step up its ''critical'' involvement in Libya, a former Italian colony.

''We need a stable and unified Libya,'' Mr. Gentiloni, who has been in office since November, said, discussing a conflict that has sent thousands of asylum seekers across the Mediterranean to Italy and other European countries. ''A divided country, and in conflict, would make civility worse.''

In his scripted opening remarks, Mr. Trump thanked Italy's leaders ''for your leadership on seeking stabilization in Libya, and for your crucial efforts to deny ISIS a foothold in the Mediterranean,'' adding, ''You fought hard.'' Ansar al-Shariah, an affiliate of ISIS -- the Islamic State extremist group, based in Syria and Iraq -- has been operating in Libya since 2012.

But the president -- who was not wearing an earpiece that would have allowed him to understand Mr. Gentiloni's challenge, issued in Italian -- quickly contradicted his guest.

''I do not see a role in Libya,'' Trump said. ''I think the United States has, right now, enough roles. We're in a role everywhere.''

Mr. Trump did not, however, rule out involvement in the effort to root out Islamic militants in Libya and other countries in North Africa and the Middle East.

''I do see a role in getting rid of ISIS. We're being very effective in that regard,'' he said. ''We are effectively ridding the world of ISIS. I see that as a primary role, and that's what we're going to do, whether it's in Iraq or in Libya or anywhere else. And that role will come to an end at a certain point.''

The conflict in Libya -- which began with the killing of the country's longtime dictator, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, in 2011 -- has divided the desert nation into warring regions, with Islamic State-linked fighters dominating the western part of the country.

In 2016, President Barack Obama said that not preparing for the chaos that was certain to follow the United States' military intervention in Libya was probably the worst mistake of his presidency.

The meeting on Thursday was Mr. Trump's first with Mr. Gentiloni, and took place a month before the president's planned visit to Sicily for a Group of 7 summit meeting, a gathering of the world's seven most developed economies.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

President Trump met with Prime Minister Paolo Gentiloni of Italy for the first time at the White House on Thursday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170421ed4l0006v



National Desk; SECTA
Berkeley Reschedules Coulter, but She Vows to Keep Original Date for Speech

By THOMAS FULLER and STEPHANIE SAUL; Thomas Fuller reported from Berkeley, and Stephanie Saul from New York. 
1,192 words
21 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
14
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BERKELEY, Calif. -- The University of California, Berkeley, said Thursday that it would permit the conservative author Ann Coulter to speak on campus in early May, just one day after it canceled her appearance that had been scheduled for next week.

But Ms. Coulter rejected the university's offer, saying it came with ''burdensome'' conditions, and insisted that she would show up and speak as originally scheduled next Thursday.

And late Thursday night, a lawyer for the Berkeley College Republicans, which invited Ms. Coulter to campus, threatened to sue the university unless it permits the speech to go ahead.

At a news conference on Thursday, Nicholas B. Dirks, the chancellor, said Berkeley had canceled that event because the police had ''very specific intelligence'' of threats ''that could pose a grave danger to the speaker'' and others if it had allowed Ms. Coulter to appear next Thursday. Some recent speeches at Berkeley and other colleges have attracted violent protests.

The university had said Wednesday that it would try to reschedule her appearance in September, but on Thursday Mr. Dirks said it had found ''an appropriate, protectable venue that is available on the afternoon of May 2.''

He said the university would reveal the location when it completed the details. ''It can accommodate a substantial audience,'' he added.

Ms. Coulter had vowed to defy the administration and speak at Berkeley anyway, and that appeared to force the university to reschedule her appearance sooner than it had wanted to. ''Ms. Coulter's announcement that she intends to come to this campus on April 27 without regard for the fact that we don't have a protectable venue available on that date is of grave concern,'' Mr. Dirks said in a statement. ''At the same time, we respect and support Ms. Coulter's own First Amendment rights.''

That was still not good enough for Ms. Coulter and the College Republicans. The primary reason, said Naweed Tahmas, the club president, is that the university is requiring that the speech end by 3 p.m. Some colleges have asked provocative speakers to appear in the afternoons, rather than the evenings, to try to minimize the potential for violence.

In a letter, Harmeet K. Dhillon, a San Francisco lawyer, demanded not only that the speech be permitted to go forward next Thursday, but also that the university provide a centrally located venue during evening hours.

Mr. Dhillon said he was representing both the College Republicans and the Young America's Foundation, a national conservative organization that is paying the bulk of Ms. Coulter's fee. In making his demands, Mr. Dhillon pointed out that the university had recently permitted Maria Echaveste, a former adviser to President Bill Clinton, to present a lecture that began at 6:45 p.m.

''It is ironic that U.C. Berkeley, known to many Americans as the birthplace of the free speech movement, is now leading the vanguard to silence conservative speech on campus,'' Mr. Dhillon wrote in the letter, addressed to the university's interim vice president for academic affairs, Stephen C. Sutton.

Additionally, May 2 falls during what Mr. Tahmas called the university's ''dead week,'' between the end of classes and final exams, when many students leave campus.

On Twitter, Ms. Coulter said she intended to appear on campus next Thursday ''as I was invited to do and have a contract to do.''

I'm speaking at Berkeley on April 27th, as I was invited to do and have a contract to do. https://t.co/thkiODIsSi -- Ann Coulter (@AnnCoulter) April 20, 2017

Appearing on Sean Hannity's Fox News program on Thursday night, Ms. Coulter said she was not available on May 2, and with her usual acidity, she accused Berkeley of mishandling the situation and attacked the opponents of her speech.

''These are the people who were against Trump,'' she said. ''These are the people who were behind Princeton putting out a pamphlet on what pronouns can be used and young men being falsely accused of rape by these witches on college campuses.''

Berkeley did not immediately respond to her vow to keep the original date.

The original decision to cancel next week's talk had been criticized not just by Ms. Coulter, but also by groups and thinkers across the political spectrum who saw it as a letdown for free speech.

''Free speech is what universities are all about,'' Robert Reich, a labor secretary in the Clinton administration and now a professor of public policy at Berkeley, wrote on his website. ''If universities don't do everything possible to foster and protect it, they aren't universities. They're playpens.''

After the university announced it would let Ms. Coulter speak on May 2, he wrote, ''I'm glad the university has reversed course.''

Mr. Reich also let it be known what he thought of the speaker: ''How can students understand the vapidity of Coulter's arguments without being allowed to hear her make them, and question her about them?''

The Berkeley campus and surrounding areas have been the scenes of clashes in recent months between small, militant right-wing and anarchist groups based in the San Francisco Bay Area.

On Saturday, the police arrested more than 20 people after skirmishes off campus between supporters and opponents of President Trump.

In February, a speech by the incendiary right-wing writer Milo Yiannopoulos, also sponsored by the College Republicans, was canceled after masked protesters smashed windows, set fires and pelted the police with rocks. The cancellation prompted Mr. Trump to post on Twitter, ''If U.C. Berkeley does not allow free speech and practices violence on innocent people with a different point of view -- NO FEDERAL FUNDS?''

Elsewhere, the police clashed with protesters on Tuesday at Auburn University, where the white nationalist leader Richard Spencer was speaking. The university had canceled the event on the grounds it could turn violent, but a federal judge ruled that the speech should proceed because there was no evidence that Mr. Spencer advocated violence.

Ms. Coulter, a longtime conservative pundit and author, has often delighted in provoking liberals with comments many have deemed offensive.

In a Fox News interview in 2012, she said that single women ''look to the government to be their husbands and give them, you know, prenatal care, and preschool care and kindergarten care and school lunches.''

In 2015, she said: ''If you don't want to be killed by ISIS, don't go to Syria. If you don't want to be killed by a Mexican, there's nothing I can tell you.''

Ms. Coulter's speaking fee at Berkeley is $20,000, and of that, $17,000 is being paid by the Young America's Foundation.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Ann Coulter rejected Berkeley's offer of a new speaking date, saying the conditions were ''burdensome.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDY CARPENEAN/LARAMIE BOOMERANG, VIA A.P.) 

Document NYTF000020170421ed4l0003n



World; Asia Pacific
Trump Unleashes the Generals. They Don’ Always See the Big Picture.

By ERIC SCHMITT and HELENE COOPER 
1,504 words
21 April 2017
02:37
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —hen Adm. Harry B. Harris Jr., the military’ top commander in the Pacific, ordered the aircraft carrier Carl Vinson “o sail north”rom Singapore this month, he was oblivious to the larger —nd incorrect —mpression that he was rushing a naval strike force to confront an increasingly belligerent North Korea.

Four days later, when Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr. dropped the most powerful conventional weapon in the American arsenal on Islamic State fighters in a tunnel complex in eastern Afghanistan, he not only seized headlines around the world but also unintentionally signaled to dictators in Syria and North Korea that they might be the next target of what the Pentagon called the “other of all bombs.”

Instead of simply achieving tactical objectives, the timing of their actions surprised their bosses at the Pentagon, upset edgy allies and caught the White House flat-footed. Taken together, the episodes illustrate how even the military’ most seasoned four-star field commanders can fail to consider the broader political or strategic ramifications of their operational decisions, and it prompted some current and former senior officials to suggest that President Trump’ decision to unshackle the military from Obama-era constraints to intensify the fight against terrorists risked even more miscues ahead.

“here are lots of decisions that military commanders make every day on their own without asking ‘other, may I?’”aid Robert M. Scher, a former senior Pentagon official. “ut they have to realize and take into account that their actions can have strategic impact outside of their areas of responsibility.”

American officials said on Thursday that General Nicholson did not request permission from Mr. Trump, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis or Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, before dropping the giant bomb, a GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast, or MOAB.

It does not appear the White House was aware of the location of the carrier group when the press secretary, Sean Spicer, or the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, made their public comments about it. White House officials said both men were relying on talking points supplied by the Pentagon.

General Nicholson already had the necessary authority to bomb the tunnel complex and had it during the Obama administration as well, American officials said.

But current and former Defense Department officials said that it was likely that if President Barack Obama were still in office, General Nicholson would have checked with his bosses before calling in what is the country’ most powerful non-nuclear bomb because the Obama White House had made clear to the Pentagon that the president wanted to be consulted in major strike decisions.

“icholson should have been a little more aware that using that weapon for the first time would be a big story,”aid Mr. Scher.

Mr. Trump has made clear that he does not want to be consulted on every strike, and that he wants commanders in the field to have more authority to move swiftly against foes.

The timing of the episodes, at the beginning of the administration, likely played a part, one Obama administration official noted.

“nce the previous administration’ political appointees have departed, the balance of power in the Pentagon always shifts away from the civilians and toward the uniformed officers,”aid Andrew Exum, a former Army Ranger and top Pentagon Middle East policy official.

“hat’ not necessarily dangerous, but until you get the new administration’ team in place, you miss the policy oversight that can sometimes help field commanders —ho are appropriately focused on operations —hink through the political and strategic ramifications of their actions.”

The dropping of the explosive came in the middle of an already fraught time for American security, with a narrative that had begun to take hold of an untethered Pentagon, freed from Obama-era restrictions.

The United States had only days earlier fired dozens of missiles on the airfield in Syria from which President Bashar al-Assad had launched a chemical weapons attack. (Mr. Trump authorized that strike.)

And the country was bracing for a possible showdown with Pyongyang as the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, was expected to launch another missile test amid incorrect talk from Mr. Trump that an American “rmada”as headed toward the Korean Peninsula.

Into that atmosphere, the announcement April 13 that the United States had just dropped the MOAB was itself a dramatic development and was interpreted by many news organizations and national security experts that the Trump administration was sending Mr. Kim, or Syria’ Mr. Assad, a message.

That was not so —n American commander in Afghanistan had simply taken it on his own to use a particularly large bomb on a cave complex in the remote province of Nangarhar.

“ommanders always want more freedom to act within their own judgment,”aid Adm. James A. Winnefeld, a retired vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. “ometimes those same commanders may not sense which of their decisions will bleed over into the strategic level.”

Asked Thursday whether General Nicholson discussed the bombing with him beforehand and had considered the larger strategic message he was sending, Mr. Mattis said that “e take into account the strategic effect of everything we do.”

In Tel Aviv, speaking with reporters who have been traveling with him throughout the Middle East this week, Mr. Mattis said that overall he had been kept informed on the war effort in Afghanistan. But, he added, “ou have to delegate.”

He did not criticize General Nicholson publicly. But one Defense Department official, who was not authorized to speak publicly, said that Mr. Mattis had questioned the purpose of the strike afterward.

In fact, the Pentagon still has not assessed how much damage was done by the bombing, a routine step after major strikes in Syria and Iraq. Afghan officials initially said that they believed only 36 Islamic State fighters were killed, but have since revised that number to just under 100. Afghan forces are still battling Islamic State fighters in the area.

Asked why no damage assessment was done, Mr. Mattis said, “rankly, digging into tunnels to count dead bodies is not a good use of our troops’ime.”

For the wayward Carl Vinson, the confusion began on April 9 when the public affairs office of the Navy’ Third Fleet issued a news release saying that Admiral Harris had ordered the Carl Vinson, a Nimitz-class nuclear-powered carrier, and its strike force —wo destroyers and one cruiser —o leave Singapore and “ail north”o the Western Pacific.

As is customary, the Navy did not say exactly where the carrier force was headed, when it would get there or its precise mission.

Navy officials said the main reason for issuing the release was to alert the families of thousands of sailors that Admiral Harris had also canceled a port call for the ships in Fremantle, Australia, where many relatives were planning to meet their loved ones.

Admiral Harris feared that images of sailors on shore leave would be unseemly at a time when North Korea was firing missiles, Navy officials said.

But the news release omitted any mention of a secretive naval exercise with Australia that Admiral Harris never meant to suggest he was canceling, Navy officials said.

Thus, once the Carl Vinson left Singapore on April 8, it actually sailed south, toward the Indian Ocean, the opposite direction Admiral Harris had said it was going.

At that point, some Pentagon officials said on Thursday, it would have been embarrassing and possibly damaging to American interests to publicly correct the narrative, and send mixed messages to the North Koreans. But some former officials disagreed.

“ords matter, and there will be a cost to U.S. credibility in Asia for this mistake,”aid Brian McKeon, the Pentagon’ top policy official at end of the Obama administration. “iven the stakes, senior officials should have taken greater care to understand the facts, and to correct the record once they learned them.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Eric Schmitt reported from Washington, and Helene Cooper from Tel Aviv. Mark Landler contributed reporting from Washington.

* South Koreans Feel Cheated After U.S. Carrier Miscue

* Aircraft Carrier Wasn’ Sailing to Deter North Korea, as U.S. Suggested

* U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs’n \b ISIS\b0  Caves in Afghanistan

* A Giant U.S. Bomb Carries an Even Bigger Message

The aircraft carrier Carl Vinson in the Sunda Strait last week. | MC2 Sean M. Castellano/US Navy | A combination of still images taken from a video released by the Department of Defense showing the explosion of Massive Ordnance Air Blast, or MOAB, in Afghanistan recently. | U.S. Department of Defense | Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr. at a press conference in Kabul last week. | Hedaytullah Amid/European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170421ed4l000jh



N.Y. / Region
Why Giuliani Held a Secret Meeting with Turkey’ Leader

By BENJAMIN WEISER and PATRICK KINGSLEY 
1,506 words
20 April 2017
14:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In late February, as the United States and the rest of the world were adjusting to President Trump and Turkey was focused on a push by its president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan  , to expand his power  , Mr. Erdogan agreed to an unusual meeting with some American visitors.

The guests included Rudolph W. Giuliani  , a former New York City mayor who had acted as a surrogate for Mr. Trump during his campaign, and another prominent lawyer, Michael B. Mukasey  , who served as attorney general in President George W. Bush’ administration.

The purpose of the   visit by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey   was rather extraordinary: They hoped to reach a diplomatic deal under which Turkey might further aid the United States’nterests in the region. In return, the United States might release the two men’ client, Reza Zarrab,   a Turkish gold trader being held in a Manhattan jail whose case had attracted Mr. Erdogan’ interest.

Mr. Mukasey, in court papers made public on Wednesday, characterized the meeting as part of an effort to seek “ state-to-state resolution of this case,”nd he hinted at some progress, saying, “enior officials in both the U.S. government and the Turkish government remain receptive to pursuing the possibility of an agreement.”

Plea bargaining, even for the best-connected of defendants, is normally conducted by defense lawyers and prosecutors, often in courthouse corridors or drab government offices. But the efforts being made on behalf of Mr. Zarrab show the way that political access and diplomatic overtures can also be employed.

Mr. Zarrab, 33, is a well-known figure in Turkey, where he moved as an infant after being born in Iran (he is a citizen of both countries). He is married to a Turkish pop star and is regarded as a member of Mr. Erdogan’ circle of friends and associates. Photographs show Mr. Erdogan’ wife, Emine, attending at least one charity event alongside Mr. Zarrab and his wife.

Mr. Zarrab had also amassed “ considerable fortune,”ccording to American prosecutors, who say his holdings included ownership in a private airplane and about 20 properties, boats, luxury automobiles and millions of dollars’orth of artwork.

In 2013, Mr. Zarrab was detained by the Turkish authorities in a wide-ranging corruption investigation of businessmen with close ties to Mr. Erdogan, who was then Turkey’ prime minister. But Mr. Zarrab used his influence with the Turkish government to win his release from prison, American prosecutors have said.

They raised the issue of what they called Mr. Zarrab’ “orrupt political connections”ast year when they argued that he not get bail in New York, where he faces charges that include   conspiring to violate the United States sanctions on Iran. He has pleaded not guilty.

Mr. Erdogan, in taking a personal interest in the case, said last year that there were “alicious”ntentions in the prosecution, and he also raised the matter with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr . during talks at the United Nations, according to Turkish news reports.

“e have to seek justice, for he is our citizen,”r. Erdogan said of Mr. Zarrab in September.

The subject of Mr. Zarrab came up again three weeks ago during a visit to Ankara, Turkey, by Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson . During that visit, Turkey’ foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, accused Preet Bharara  , then the United States attorney in Manhattan, whose office first charged Mr. Zarrab, of being a pawn of anti-Turkish forces.

Mr. Bharara, who was fired by President Trump last month, had characterized Mr. Cavusoglu’ remarks as “olitical propaganda.”n Thursday, after The New York Times reported on the strategy by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey to turn the case involving Mr. Zarrab into a matter of international diplomacy, Mr. Bharara said on   reported on the strategy by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey to turn the case involving Mr. Zarrab into a matter of international diplomacy, Mr. Bharara  Twitter  , “ne just hopes that the rule of law, and its independent enforcement, still matters in the United States and at the Department of Justice.”

The efforts on Mr. Zarrab’ behalf come as Mr. Erdogan is even more powerful in Turkey, after a hotly disputed referendum that expanded his authoritarian rule   and drew a congratulatory phone call   from Mr. Trump on Monday.

Mr. Erdogan and Mr. Trump have made overtures   to each other that suggest Turkey and the United States could become closer allies.

The new court filing, by Mr. Zarrab’ lead lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, includes affidavits from Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey that make it clear they hope to get Mr. Erdogan to accept the notion that a diplomatic deal could be of mutual interest to Turkey and the United States. They wrote in the affidavits that a resolution that would be favorable for Mr. Zarrab could be “art of some agreement between the United States and Turkey that will promote the national security interests of the United States.”

Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey said that it was “ardly surprising”hat senior Turkish and United States officials were receptive to a possible deal, considering that none of the transactions in which Mr. Zarrab is accused of participating “nvolved weapons or nuclear technology, or any other contraband,”nd that “urkey is situated in a part of the world strategically critical to the United States.”

Some analysts in Turkey have suggested that if Mr. Zarrab were to be freed or returned to that country, Mr. Erdogan might be more inclined to fall in line with American interests in the Middle East.

Sinan Ulgen, a former Turkish diplomat and the chairman of the Center for Economics and Foreign Policy Studies , a liberal-leaning Turkish think tank, said the strategy implied that “llowing a free pass to Zarrab and company would create good will in Ankara that Washington could use to advance its own regional agenda,”ith clearer support or at least less interference from the Turkish government.

Mr. Erdogan, for example, might be less resistant to American plans to retake Raqqa —he capital of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS —n collaboration with a Syrian Kurdish faction. Turkey regards that faction, known as the P.Y.D., as the Syrian offshoot of a proscribed militant group that operates on Turkish soil.

A swift end to the case against Mr. Zarrab, Mr. Ulgen said, might mean “urkey would be much less resistant to the U.S.’ missions in Syria, and primarily its support to the P.Y.D.”

The United States also needs Turkey to continue to allow anti-ISIS bombing missions to fly out of an air base in the southern part of the country.

Analysts supportive of Mr. Erdogan’ government contend that Mr. Zarrab’ fate is of limited interest to the Turkish state. In the view of these analysts, the charges against him are spurious and were concocted in order to smear the Turkish president.

“his Zarrab issue is not a state issue in Turkey,”aid Hasan Yalcin, strategic research director at Seta  , a government-friendly think tank in Ankara. “t’ not an issue that the Turkish state is focusing on; it’ just speculation that the Turkish state is related to Zarrab.”

State news media in Turkey reported recently that Istanbul’ chief prosecutor had opened an investigation  into Mr. Bharara   and 16 other United States-linked individuals in what Western diplomats regarded as retaliation for the Zarrab case.

The affidavits by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey were filed by Mr. Brafman, the defense lawyer, at the request of the judge, Richard M. Berman of Federal District Court. Judge Berman initially said the affidavits could be filed under seal and ex parte, meaning the government would also not be able to see them. He subsequently directed that they be filed publicly, Mr. Brafman said.

“he affidavits speak for themselves,”e said, declining to comment further.

Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey wrote that both Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Mr. Bharara had been apprised “n general terms”efore the two lawyers’eetings with Mr. Erdogan and other Turkish officials. They said they had also discussed their roles with, and had been briefed by, a State Department representative in Turkey before seeing Mr. Erdogan.

Copies of Mr. Zarrab’ retainer agreements with Mr. Giuliani’ and Mr. Mukasey’ law firms were also filed with the court but were not unsealed.

* Trump Congratulates Erdogan on Turkey Vote Cementing His Rule  

* Erdogan Claims Vast Powers in Turkey After Narrow Victory in Referendum  

* Turk in Iran Sanctions Case Adds Rudy Giuliani to Legal Team  

Rudolph W. Giuliani is part of the legal team representing Reza Zarrab, a Turkish gold trader jailed in Manhattan on charges of conspiring to violate the American sanctions on Iran. | Kevin Hagen for The New York Times | Mr. Zarrab in Istanbul in 2013. | Ozan Kose/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170420ed4k00439



world
Trump Unleashes the Generals. They Don’ Always See the Big Picture.

By ERIC SCHMITT and HELENE COOPER 
1,478 words
20 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —hen Adm. Harry B. Harris Jr., the military’ top commander in the Pacific, ordered the aircraft carrier Carl Vinson “o sail north”rom Singapore this month, he was oblivious to the larger —nd incorrect —mpression that he was rushing a naval strike force to confront an increasingly belligerent North Korea.

Four days later, when Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr. dropped the most powerful conventional weapon in the American arsenal on Islamic State fighters in a tunnel complex in eastern Afghanistan, he not only seized headlines around the world but also unintentionally signaled to dictators in Syria and North Korea that they might be the next target of what the Pentagon called the “other of all bombs.”

Instead of simply achieving tactical objectives, the timing of their actions surprised their bosses at the Pentagon, upset edgy allies and caught the White House flat-footed. Taken together, the episodes illustrate how even the military’ most seasoned four-star field commanders can fail to consider the broader political or strategic ramifications of their operational decisions, and some current and former senior officials suggested that President Trump’ decision to unshackle the military from Obama-era constraints to intensify the fight against terrorists risked even more miscues.

“here are lots of decisions that military commanders make every day on their own without asking, ‘other, may I?’”aid Robert M. Scher, a former senior Pentagon official. “ut they have to realize and take into account that their actions can have strategic impact outside of their areas of responsibility.”

American officials said Thursday that General Nicholson had not requested permission from Mr. Trump, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis or Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, before dropping the giant bomb, a GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast, or MOAB.

And it does not appear the White House was aware of the location of the carrier group when the press secretary, Sean Spicer, or the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, made their public comments about it. White House officials said both men were relying on talking points supplied by the Pentagon.

General Nicholson already had the necessary authority to bomb the tunnel complex and had it during the Obama administration as well, American officials said.

But current and former Defense Department officials said that if President Barack Obama were still in office, General Nicholson would probably have checked with his bosses before calling in the country’ most powerful non-nuclear bomb, because the Obama White House had made clear to the Pentagon that the president wanted to be consulted on major strike decisions.

“icholson should have been a little more aware that using that weapon for the first time would be a big story,”r. Scher said.

Mr. Trump has made clear that he does not want to be consulted on every strike, and that he wants commanders in the field to have more authority to move swiftly against foes.

The timing of the episodes, at the beginning of the Trump administration, most likely played a part, one Obama administration official noted.

“nce the previous administration’ political appointees have departed, the balance of power in the Pentagon always shifts away from the civilians and toward the uniformed officers,”aid Andrew Exum, a former Army Ranger and top Pentagon Middle East policy official.

“hat’ not necessarily dangerous, but until you get the new administration’ team in place, you miss the policy oversight that can sometimes help field commanders —ho are appropriately focused on operations —hink through the political and strategic ramifications of their actions.”

The bomb was dropped at an already fraught time for American security, with a narrative that had begun to take hold of an untethered Pentagon, freed from Obama-era restrictions.

Only days earlier, the United States had fired dozens of missiles at the airfield in Syria from which President Bashar al-Assad had launched a chemical weapons attack. (Mr. Trump authorized that strike.)

And the country was bracing for a possible showdown with Pyongyang as the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, was expected to launch another missile test amid incorrect talk from Mr. Trump that an American “rmada”as headed toward the Korean Peninsula.

In that atmosphere, the announcement on April 13 that the United States had just dropped the MOAB was itself a dramatic development and was interpreted by many news organizations and national security experts as evidence that the Trump administration was sending Mr. Kim, or Mr. Assad, a message.

That was not so —n American commander in Afghanistan had simply taken it upon himself to use a particularly large bomb on a cave complex in the remote province of Nangarhar.

“ommanders always want more freedom to act within their own judgment,”aid Adm. James A. Winnefeld, a retired vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. “ometimes those same commanders may not sense which of their decisions will bleed over into the strategic level.”

Asked Thursday whether General Nicholson had discussed the bombing with him beforehand and considered the larger strategic message he was sending, Mr. Mattis said, “e take into account the strategic effect of everything we do.”

In Tel Aviv, speaking with reporters who have been traveling with him throughout the Middle East this week, Mr. Mattis said that over all, he had been kept informed on the war effort in Afghanistan. But, he added, “ou have to delegate.”

He did not criticize General Nicholson publicly. But one Defense Department official, who was not authorized to speak publicly, said that Mr. Mattis had questioned the purpose of the strike afterward.

In fact, the Pentagon still has not assessed how much damage was done by the bombing, a routine step after major strikes in Syria and Iraq. Afghan officials initially said that they believed only 36 Islamic State fighters had been killed, but they have since revised that number to just under 100. Afghan forces are still battling Islamic State fighters in the area.

Asked why no damage assessment had been done, Mr. Mattis said, “rankly, digging into tunnels to count dead bodies is not a good use of our troops’ime.”

For the wayward Carl Vinson, the confusion began on April 9 when the public affairs office of the Navy’ Third Fleet issued a news release saying that Admiral Harris had ordered the Carl Vinson, a Nimitz-class nuclear-powered carrier, and its strike force —wo destroyers and one cruiser —o leave Singapore and “ail north”o the Western Pacific.

As is customary, the Navy did not say exactly where the carrier force was headed, when it would get there or its precise mission.

Navy officials said the main reason for issuing the release was to alert the families of thousands of sailors that Admiral Harris had also canceled a port call for the ships in Fremantle, Australia, where many relatives were planning to meet their loved ones.

Admiral Harris feared that images of sailors on shore leave would be unseemly at a time when North Korea was firing missiles, Navy officials said.

But the news release omitted any mention of a secretive naval exercise with Australia that Admiral Harris never meant to suggest he was canceling, Navy officials said.

Thus, once the Carl Vinson left Singapore on April 8, it actually sailed south, toward the Indian Ocean, the opposite direction Admiral Harris had said it was going.

At that point, some Pentagon officials said on Thursday, it would have been embarrassing and possibly damaging to American interests to publicly correct the narrative and send mixed messages to the North Koreans. But some former officials disagreed.

“ords matter, and there will be a cost to U.S. credibility in Asia for this mistake,”aid Brian McKeon, the Pentagon’ top policy official at the end of the Obama administration. “iven the stakes, senior officials should have taken greater care to understand the facts, and to correct the record once they learned them.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Eric Schmitt @EricSchmittNYT and Helene Cooper @helenecooper on Twitter.Eric Schmitt reported from Washington, and Helene Cooper from Tel Aviv. Mark Landler contributed reporting from Washington.

PHOTO: The aircraft carrier Carl Vinson in the Sunda Strait last week. An order to “ail north”ave the false impression that the ship was en route to confront North Korea. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MC2 SEAN M. CASTELLANO/ U.S. NAVY)

* South Koreans Feel Cheated After U.S. Carrier Miscue

* Aircraft Carrier Wasn’ Sailing to Deter North Korea, as U.S. Suggested

* U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs’n \b ISIS\b0  Caves in Afghanistan

* A Giant U.S. Bomb Carries an Even Bigger Message

Document INHT000020170421ed4k0000f



Books; Book Review
Paperback Row

By JOUMANA KHATIB 
453 words
20 April 2017
21:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Six new paperbacks to check out this week.

 A RAGE FOR ORDER: THE MIDDLE EAST IN TURMOIL, FROM TAHRIR SQUARE TO \b ISIS\b0  , by Robert F. Worth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $15.) A masterly account of the 2011 Arab Spring uprisings, and the region’ decline into violence and anarchy, by a former New York Times foreign correspondent. Our reviewer, Kenneth M. Pollack, called the book “ marvel of storytelling, with the chapters conjuring a poignancy fitting for the subject.”

THE MIRROR THIEF, by Martin Seay. (Melville House, $17.99.) Linked narratives brimming with delightful, esoteric detail unfold in three Venices: 16th-century Italy; 1950s Venice Beach, Calif.; and the Venetian casino in Las Vegas in 2003. A card counter, the man hired to track him down and an oblique book of poems weave through a series of schemes in this novel, with a structure that recalls David Mitchell’ “loud Atlas.”

 FREE SPEECH: TEN PRINCIPLES FOR A CONNECTED WORLD , by Timothy Garton Ash. (Yale University, $22.) Protected speech is under siege on a wide front and is caught up in a number of modern controversies, from the role of government surveillance to the criminalization of hate speech and the prosecution of whistle-blowers. Garton Ash examines 10 such cases, framed with his call for “ore free speech but also better speech.”

THE NEST, by Cynthia D’prix Sweeney. (Ecco/HarperCollins, $16.99.) A $2 million trust fund is set aside for the Plumb siblings, who are each counting on their share to rescue them from financial straits. But months before they are set to receive the money, Leo, the eldest, squanders a majority of the sum after a car accident; the ensuing family drama of “irst-world problems proves to be an enjoyable comedy of manners as Sweeney artfully skewers family dynamics,”ur reviewer, Patricia Park, wrote.

LAROSE, by Louise Erdrich. (Harper Perennial, $15.99.) While hunting buck, Landreaux does the worst thing imaginable: He accidentally kills his best friend’ child. As penance, he offers his own son, LaRose, to the grieving parents, setting in motion a powerful story of ancestry, justice and forgiveness.

JOE GOULD’ TEETH, by Jill Lepore. (Vintage, $16.) Gould — New York eccentric friendly with many of the early 20th century’ best-known artists —ecided to record everything anyone said to him, aiming to “iden the sphere of history as Walt Whitman did that of poetry.”he project, known as “he Oral History of Our Time,”cquired a near-mythic status —nd then some wondered if it ever existed at all. Lepore, a New Yorker staff writer and Harvard historian, sets out to discover the manuscript’ fate.

Document NYTFEED020170420ed4k0076e



EDITORIAL
Editorial Desk; SECTA
Mr. Trump Plays by His Own Rules

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
769 words
19 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
24
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Anyone who has been paying the slightest attention knows by now that this president and this White House intend to play by their own set of rules -- rules that in some cases come close to breaking the law and, at the very least, defy traditions of conduct and transparency Americans have come to expect from their public servants. We know that Donald Trump has refused, unlike other presidents, to release his tax returns; that his trust agreement allows him undisclosed access to profits from his businesses; and even that he clings to a profitable lease on a hotel only a stone's throw from the White House when divesting himself of that lease is not only the obvious but the right thing to do.

But just when you think you've seen enough there's more. On Friday, the administration announced it would no longer release White House visitors' logs that have been available for years. (It cynically said posting these records would cost taxpayers $70,000 by 2020. Compare that with the multimillion-dollar tab estimated for every weekend trip Mr. Trump takes to Mar-a-Lago.) Meanwhile, news trickled out that on the very day that two of Ivanka Trump 's and Jared Kushner 's children were serenading the Chinese president, Xi Jinping , at Mar-a-Lago, the People's Republic of China approved new trademarks allowing Ivanka to peddle jewelry, bags and spa services to a nation of 1.4 billion where she is a role model for aspirational oligarchs.

In the great scheme of things, neither the visitor blackout nor Ms. Trump's commercial coup seems a big deal. Yet both symbolize larger problems. One is an almost total absence of openness in an administration that is already teeming with real and potential conflicts and that has decided it can grant secret waivers to ethics requirements. The other is a culture of self-enrichment and self-dealing in which corporate C.E.O.s, lobbyists and foreign officials seeking the first family's favor hold parties at Mar-a-Lago and at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, a couple of blocks from the White House. On Tuesday, Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, a government watchdog group, expanded a lawsuit charging that the hotel violates the Constitution's emoluments clause, which prohibits the president from taking payments from foreign nations.

One has to ask when this seamless meshing of statesmanship and merchandising will stop, if ever. Mr. Trump struggled for years to close deals across the Middle East; now that he's president, doors are opening. His family is seeking or holds trademarks in Egypt, Israel, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates, where the president's sons just opened a golf course in Dubai, and in Jordan, whose King Abdullah II just visited the White House to discuss joint efforts against ISIS.

But Americans who expect that their government will stop this grotesque flouting of rules and traditional norms have been deeply disappointed. The Office of Government Ethics received 39,105 public queries and complaints about Trump administration ethics over the past six months, compared with 733 during the same period eight years earlier at the start of the Obama administration. But the office has no investigative or subpoena power: Its authority rests on the willingness of a president to take transparency in public service seriously, which this president does not.

That leaves Jason Chaffetz, the Utah Republican who is chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee, which has the legal authority and the resources to investigate and hold the administration to account. Anyone familiar with Mr. Chaffetz's record of partisan, ineffectual witch-hunting won't be surprised to learn that he's done nothing.

Mr. Shaub and his team have been working nights and weekends trying to rein in what they can of the Trump entourage's abuses, combing through the financial disclosures of administration appointees and ringing alarm bells. They've had a few successes: So far the Senate has refused to confirm nominees whose financial disclosures don't earn approval from the ethics office, which has unearthed potential conflicts and led several nominees to shed assets that pose problems. But that's hardly a match for an administration filled with people who seem determined to wring every last dollar and ounce of trust from the American people.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY JENNIFER HEUER) 

Document NYTF000020170419ed4j0006e



Editorial
Opinion
Mr. Trump Plays by His Own Rules (or No Rules)

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
813 words
19 April 2017
03:09
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

Anyone who has been paying the slightest attention knows by now that this president and this White House intend to play by their own set of rules —ules that in some cases come close to breaking the law and, at the very least, defy traditions of conduct and transparency Americans have come to expect from their public servants. We know that Donald Trump has refused, unlike other presidents, to release his tax returns; that his trust agreement allows him undisclosed access to profits from his businesses; and even that he clings to a profitable lease on a hotel only a stone’ throw from the White House when divesting himself of that lease is not only the obvious but the right thing to do.

But just when you think you’e seen enough there’ more. On Friday, the administration announced  it would no longer release White House visitors’ogs that have been available for years. (It cynically said posting these records would cost taxpayers $70,000 by 2020. Compare that with the multimillion-dollar tab estimated for every weekend trip Mr. Trump takes to Mar-a-Lago.) Meanwhile, news trickled out that on the very day that two of Ivanka Trump ’ and Jared Kushner ’ children were serenading the Chinese president, Xi Jinping , at Mar-a-Lago, the People’ Republic of China approved new trademarks allowing Ivanka to peddle jewelry, bags and spa services to a nation of 1.4 billion where she is  a role model for aspirational oligarchs.

In the great scheme of things, neither the visitor blackout nor Ms. Trump’ commercial coup seems a big deal. Yet both symbolize larger problems. One is an almost total absence of openness in an administration that is already teeming with real and potential conflicts and that has decided it can grant secret waivers to ethics requirements. The other is a culture of self-enrichment and self-dealing in which corporate C.E.O.s, lobbyists and foreign officials seeking the first family’ favor hold parties at Mar-a-Lago and at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, a couple of blocks from the White House. On Tuesday, Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, a government watchdog group, expanded a lawsuit charging that the hotel violates the Constitution’ emoluments clause, which prohibits the president from taking payments from foreign nations.

One has to ask when this seamless meshing of statesmanship and merchandising will stop, if ever. Mr. Trump struggled for years to close deals across the Middle East; now that he’ president, doors are opening. His family is seeking or holds trademarks in Egypt, Israel, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates, where the president’ sons just opened  a golf course in Dubai, and in Jordan, whose King Abdullah II just visited the White House to discuss joint efforts against ISIS.

But Americans who expect that their government will stop this grotesque flouting of rules and traditional norms have been deeply disappointed. The Office of Government Ethicsreceived  39,105 public queries and complaints about Trump administration ethics over the past six months, compared with 733 during the same period eight years earlier at the start of the Obama administration. But the office has no investigative or subpoena power: Its authority rests on the willingness of a president to take transparency in public service seriously, which this president does not.

That leaves Jason Chaffetz, the Utah Republican who is chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee, which has the legal authority and the resources to investigate and hold the administration to account. Anyone familiar with Mr. Chaffetz’ record of partisan, ineffectual witch-hunting won’ be surprised to learn that he’ done nothing.

Walter Shaub Jr., chief of the ethics office, and his team have been working nights and weekends trying to rein in what they can of the Trump entourage’ abuses, combing through the financial disclosures of administration appointees and ringing alarm bells. They’e had a few successes: So far the Senate has refused to confirm nominees whose financial disclosures don’ earn approval from the ethics office, which has unearthed potential conflicts and led several nominees to shed assets that pose problems. But that’ hardly a match for an administration filled with people who seem determined to wring every last dollar and ounce of trust from the American people.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook  and Twitter , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter .

Correction: April 19, 2017, Wednesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: The reference to Walter Shaub Jr. was incomplete because of an editing error. He is the director of the Office of Government Ethics.

Jennifer Heuer 

Document NYTFEED020170419ed4j00105



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Gunmen Kill Police Officer Near a Monastery in Egypt

By DECLAN WALSH; Asmaa Al Zohairy contributed reporting. 
578 words
19 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
12
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDCAIRO -- Gunmen attacked a checkpoint near the iconic St. Catherine's Monastery in Sinai, one of the oldest Christian monasteries in the world, killing one police officer and wounding four others on Tuesday evening, Egypt's Interior Ministry said.

The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the shooting through its Amaq news agency, according to the SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors jihadist communications.

Although comparatively small by the standards of the Sinai insurgency, the assault was a relatively rare instance of violence in the southern part of the province, and it came just nine days after Islamic State suicide bombers killed 45 people in attacks on two churches -- in Alexandria and Tanta -- on Palm Sunday.

In a statement on its Facebook page, Egypt's Interior Ministry said that gunmen opened fire on the checkpoint with small arms, then fled after coming under fire from Egyptian security forces.

The four wounded police officers were taken to a hospital in the nearby Red Sea resort of Sharm el Sheikh. There was no word of any militant casualties.

The attack came at a sensitive time in Egypt, just over a week before a planned visit to Cairo by Pope Francis that the Vatican has billed as an opportunity to strengthen ties between Muslim and Christian leaders.

St. Catherine's Monastery, which was built in the sixth century and sits at the foot of Mount Sinai, is popular with tourists visiting the nearby Red Sea resorts. The monastery is Greek Orthodox, and is not directly connected to the Egyptian Orthodox church, the denomination that has borne the brunt of a surge in Islamic State attacks targeting Christians since December.

It was not immediately clear whether the attack on St. Catherine's was part of the Islamic State's broader campaign of sectarian bloodshed, or of the more localized guerrilla warfare led by the Islamic State's affiliate in North Sinai.

The last major attack in southern Sinai occurred in 2014, when a suicide bomber hit a bus in Taba, on the border with Israel, killing three South Korean tourists and the Egyptian bus driver. But the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, also claimed to have brought down a Russian passenger jet that crashed into the Sinai Desert shortly after takeoff from Sharm el Sheikh in October 2015, killing all 224 people on board.

The attack on St. Catherine's, a Unesco World Heritage site, will be seen as an ominous sign for efforts to revive the area's floundering tourist industry. Over the past year, Egyptian officials have tried to persuade Russia and Britain to resume flights to Sharm el Sheikh, which stopped in 2015.

Zack Gold, a Sinai expert at the Atlantic Council in Washington, said the attack showed that the Islamic State had penetrated deeper into southern Sinai than previously thought possible. ''This helps Islamic State in its economic warfare against the state,'' he said.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Correction: April 21, 2017, Friday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Wednesday about an attack on a police checkpoint near St. Catherine's Monastery in the Sinai Peninsula of Egypt misstated the monastery's denomination. It is Greek Orthodox, not Egyptian Orthodox.

Follow Declan Walsh on Twitter @declanwalsh .

Document NYTF000020170421ed4j0000z



Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Won't Disclose Damage Done by Giant Bomb on  ISIS ' Afghan Caves

By MUJIB MASHAL and FAHIM ABED 
923 words
19 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan -- Since the United States dropped the ''mother of all bombs'' on an Islamic State cave complex in eastern Afghanistan on Thursday, American military officials have been circumspect about the bomb's damage, but one voice has been filling the information vacuum in the region: Islamic State radio.

The reluctance of the United States to discuss casualties and other damage from the 22,000-pound bomb concerns local officials in Nangarhar Province who supported the massive bomb after military officials said ground operations had failed to penetrate the Islamic State stronghold in the mountains of the Achin district.

''I and other people have this concern -- that why American forces are not letting anyone visit the scene of the bombing?'' said Zabihullah Zmarai, a member of the council in Nangarhar Province who held a post-bombing news conference to announce his support. ''The U.S. authorities should provide an answer to this question.''

Afghan security officials say that clearance operations are taking place around the site, and that Islamic State fighters are engaging Afghan and American forces, who are calling in more airstrikes to target the militants' positions. There are also reports that the American military has kept even Afghan forces from the bombing site.

One senior Afghan security official in Kabul said on Tuesday that Thursday's bombing killed 96 Islamic State militants, 13 of them major commanders. The official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to talk to the news media, provided the names and basic information about the commanders, most of whom were from the tribal areas across the border in Pakistan, but who also included some Indian citizens and Central Asians. However, the official provided no proof of the deaths or information on how officials reached the number of 96.

The United States military, despite repeated attempts, did not provide comment.

The Islamic State's local radio outlet, which was unaffected by the bombing, continues to broadcast into Jalalabad, the urban center in the east. It broadcasts half-hour programs during the day and an evening program that often lasts more than an hour.

As early as the day after the bombing, it broadcast a call-in program in which voices of men who claimed to be fighters in the area who were not affected by the powerful bomb could be heard between rhyming Islamic chants.

''The media was expecting that this bomb would have killed all the Islamic State fighters or forced them to flee, but that is not the case,'' the program's anchor said. ''After the big bomb, our warrior, brave youth became a shield in front of them.''

Islamic State radio, known as Voice of the Caliphate, has been reconstituted after it was destroyed last year by a targeted American drone attack. Afghan officials said that the earlier operation was run by five militants from the back of a small truck that switched locations often to avoid being targeted.

Islamic State affiliates in Afghanistan expanded rapidly in 2015, before repeated Afghan military operations and American airstrikes brought them to a halt. Islamic State fighters are now estimated at about 700, down from 2,000 to 3,000, and their activities are reduced to mainly three districts in Nangarhar.

The tunnel complex in the Tangi Assadkhel area of Achin prevented military operations from eliminating the group entirely, American military officials have said in justifying the first use of the bomb, the GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast.

Naser Kamawal, another Nangarhar provincial council member, said the bomb did not seem to have succeeded in its mission. Afghan forces had not advanced past the areas they had cleared repeatedly long before the bombing.

''Why the bomb with such a big destruction had such few casualties?'' Mr. Kamawal said. ''If there was some 90 Islamic State militants, then why were our own Afghan forces not able to eliminate them in a military operation -- what was the need for using such a big bomb?''

It was unclear whether any Afghan or coalition forces have made it to the bombing site five days after the attack. The senior Afghan security official said the day after the bombing that Afghan commandos had done so and, after clearing the site, had handed it over to American military forensic teams.

Mr. Zmarai, the provincial council member, said local officials in Achin told him that neither Afghan nor American forces had arrived at the site.

A spokesman for the Afghan commandos, Jawid Salim, agreed. ''It is not true that the members of U.S. forensic are at the scene of bombing -- no one is there,'' he said. ''We are in the area and we see everything.''

Afghan commando forces advancing the day after the bombing overcame resistance about a mile from the site but continued with operations in other parts of Achin instead of going to the scene, he said, adding that American airstrikes were helping them during follow-up operations.

Mr. Salim expressed satisfaction that the bomb hit what he called an important target, and he seemed satisfied by the security official's report that more than 90 fighters were killed.

''They say it destroys everything within two miles, but that could be in plain land -- in mountainous areas, the bomb may not have such big destruction,'' Mr. Salim said, speculating, like so many other officials, in the absence of any concrete information.

Document NYTF000020170419ed4j0003a



CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
YouTube's Shifting Rules Are Hurting Small Players

By AMANDA HESS 
1,374 words
18 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

At the age of 21, David Pakman started a little Massachusetts community radio talk program. While the young broadcaster got his show syndicated on a few public radio stations, it was a YouTube channel he began in 2009, ''The David Pakman Show,'' that opened up his progressive political commentary to a whole new digital audience. The show has since amassed 353,000 subscribers, and roughly half of its revenue now comes from the ads that play before his videos. He earns enough to produce the show full time and pay a lean staff.

Or, at least, he used to. Last month YouTube announced abrupt, vague changes to its automated processes for placing ads across the platform. Ads on Mr. Pakman's YouTube channel evaporated, dropping to as little as 6 cents a day, and forcing him to set up a crowdfunding page to help cover $20,000 a month in operating costs.

''This is an existential threat to the show,'' Mr. Pakman said. ''We need that money.''

Since its 2005 debut with the slogan ''Broadcast Yourself,'' YouTube has positioned itself as a place where any people with camera phones can make a career of their creativity and thrive free of the grip of corporate media gatekeepers. But in order to share in the advertising wealth a user base of more than a billion can provide, independent producers like Mr. Pakman must satisfy the demands of YouTube's unfeeling, opaque and shifting algorithms.

The architecture of the internet has tremendous influence over what is made, and what is seen; algorithms influence what content spreads further on Facebook and turns up on top of Google searches. YouTube's process for mechanically pulling ads from videos is particularly concerning, because it takes aim at whole topics of conversation that could be perceived as potentially offensive to advertisers, and because it so often misfires. It risks suppressing political commentary and jokes. It puts the wild, independent internet in danger of becoming more boring than TV.

[Video: David Pakman Show In Danger as Independent Media More Important Than Ever Watch on YouTube.]

YouTube's most serious ad change yet came in the wake of reports from The Times of London and The Wall Street Journal that ads were appearing on YouTube videos that espoused extremism and hate speech. When major advertisers like AT&T and Johnson & Johnson withdrew their spots, YouTube announced that it would try to make the site more palatable to advertisers by ''taking a tougher stance on hateful, offensive and derogatory content.''

But according to YouTube creators, that shift has also punished video makers who bear no resemblance to terrorist sympathizers and racists. YouTube's comedians, political commentators and experts on subjects from military arms to video games have reported being squeezed by the ad shake-up -- often in videos they've posted to YouTube. On the site, it's known as ''the adpocalypse.''

The topics of Mr. Pakman's videos are no more controversial than the programming typically found on CNN or the local news. In fact, because his show is also broadcast over the radio, it adheres strictly to FCC content rules. But the show takes pride in its independence from corporate ownership. ''I have no boss above me,'' Mr. Pakman said, and because of YouTube's automated ad systems, ''I've never had any contact with advertisers, so it's impossible for me to 'sell out' to satisfy them.''

Instead, he's subject to the whims of the algorithm. To rein in its sprawling video empire -- 400 hours of video are uploaded to the platform every minute -- YouTube uses machine learning systems that can't always discern context, or distinguish commentary or humor from hate speech. That limitation means that YouTube routinely pulls ads from content deemed ''not advertiser-friendly.'' That includes depictions of violence or drug use, ''sexual humor'' and ''controversial or sensitive subjects,'' including war and natural disasters. YouTube has previously blocked ads on Mr. Pakman's news videos referring to ISIS church bombings and the assassination of a Russian diplomat. YouTube creators can appeal the decision to a human who will watch the video, but the recent changes have upended the usual processes, often leaving creators without an official channel for appeal.

Recent ad changes have hit some of YouTube's most popular channels: The comedy channel h3h3Productions has seen YouTube's system grow stricter in recent weeks, while the Military Arms Channel, which tests and reviews firearms, has registered a complete drop in ad revenue before rebounding to 25 percent of its usual income. Felix Kjellberg, a wildly successful comedy and video game vlogger known as PewDiePie, lost development deals with YouTube and the Disney-owned Maker Studios after The Wall Street Journal reported on a proliferation of Hitler references in his videos. (Mr. Kjellberg apologized for what he called jokes that went too far.) But he's also seen programmatic ads yanked from a portion of his videos, and he's become a symbol for the resistance to the ''adpocalypse.'' He's taken to churning out satirical videos presenting himself as the brand-safe character ''Family-Friendly Felix.''

[Video: YOUTUBEISOVERPARTY (deleted version) Watch on YouTube.]

Last month's changes signaled that YouTube's ad rules had become even stricter and less clear. YouTube announced that it was leading advertisers toward ''content that meets a higher level of brand safety.'' YouTube gave creators no further hints on what that means, just issuing a blanket message telling them they may experience ''fluctuations'' in revenue as the new systems are ''fine-tuned.''

''It's getting so bad that you can't even speak your mind or be honest without fear of losing money and being not 'brand-friendly,''' said Ethan Klein, the creator of h3h3. ''YouTube is on the fast track to becoming Disney vloggers: beautiful young people that wouldn't say anything controversial and are always happy.''

This is not all the algorithm's fault. People create these systems, and they are sensitive to bad press and skittish advertisers. The YouTube ad crisis -- and the company's response -- also speaks to a persistent public misunderstanding of the worth of digital creators. The mainstream media barely engages with YouTube videos as an artistic product in the way it does traditional television and film. Coverage is focused on how much money YouTube stars make, how improbably famous they are among teenagers and, now, on the small number of racist and extremist videos that have slipped through the cracks of the ad system.

Jamie Byrne, director of creators and enterprise at YouTube, said that concerned companies had requested tougher controls to keep their ad dollars flowing. ''For creators to flourish on our platform, we need an incredibly strong advertising community engaged on YouTube as well,'' he said. He hopes that as the ad systems learn to decipher context, and advertisers relax, creators will see greater returns.

Media power has consolidated in the past several decades, with a smaller crew of billionaires controlling journalism and entertainment. The internet was supposed to offer an opportunity for a diverse group of upstarts to challenge the corporate structure. But the same consolidation of power has happened online. Independent blogs have been shut down or snapped up by bigger companies. YouTube has long been owned by Google, which has gobbled up a greater share of online ad revenue in recent years. Google and Facebook are now so dominant that they form a practical duopoly over digital advertising. Meanwhile, YouTube is making a run at Netflix with its original-content subscription service, YouTube Red, and going after television with YouTube TV, which allows subscribers to stream TV channels online for $35 a month.

All of that means that new media creators hoping to make a living online need to play by YouTube's rules, and steer clear of anything ''potentially objectionable'' -- not to real people, who might actually be offended, but to robots. If YouTube wants to fulfill its promise of an online environment where independent creators can make interesting work, it will find a way to scrub ads from truly vile content without penalizing the merely controversial.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY BRANDON BLOMMAERT) (C6) 

Document NYTF000020170418ed4i0006b



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Trump Congratulates Erdogan on Vote Cementing His Rule

By MARK LANDLER 
463 words
18 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Trump called President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey on Monday to congratulate him on winning a much-disputed referendum that will cement his autocratic rule over the country and, in the view of many experts, erode Turkey's democratic institutions.

Those concerns were not mentioned in a brief readout of the phone call that the White House released Monday night. After noting Mr. Trump's congratulations, the one-paragraph statement pivoted to a recent American missile strike on a Syrian airfield, which it said he and Mr. Erdogan had also discussed.

The statement did not say whether Mr. Trump had raised independent reports of voting irregularities during the Turkish referendum or the government's heavy-handed tactics in the weeks leading up to it, when the country was under a state of emergency. The State Department noted both issues in a more cautious, less laudatory statement issued a few hours earlier.

The White House was also silent about the long-term implications of the referendum, which some experts have likened to a deathblow to democracy in Turkey. Mr. Erdogan's narrow victory, in effect, ratifies his authoritarian rule. The change to Turkey's Constitution will allow the winner of the 2019 presidential election to assume full control of the government, ending the current parliamentary political system.

In its statement, the State Department said, ''We look to the government of Turkey to protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of all its citizens -- regardless of their vote on April 16 -- as guaranteed by the Turkish Constitution and in accordance with Turkey's international commitments, such as under the Helsinki Charter.'' That document compels its signatory nations, including Turkey, to uphold human rights.

Mr. Trump and Mr. Erdogan are viewed as ideological bedfellows: They are populist leaders with little patience for the courts or other checks on their power. But Mr. Erdogan has taken his authoritarian bent to an extreme, imposing the state of emergency and purging the opposition, academia and the army after a failed coup last year.

The White House emphasized that the two leaders were united in their determination to punish Syria's president, Bashar al-Assad, for using chemical weapons against his own people. ''President Trump thanked President Erdogan for supporting this action by the United States,'' the statement said, referring to the April 6 missile attack in Syria.

It also stressed that the two men stand together in battling the Islamic State, or ISIS: ''President Trump and President Erdogan also discussed the counter-ISIS campaign and the need to cooperate against all groups that use terrorism to achieve their ends.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Document NYTF000020170418ed4i0005c



Foreign Desk; SECT
Celebrating Easter in an Iraqi Town That Has Lost Its Christians

Photographs and Text by RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
718 words
18 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

QARAQOSH, Iraq -- Islamic State militants overran the Christian town of Qaraqosh nearly three years ago, smashing every crucifix they found and using the walls of churches for target practice. Residents fled by the thousands, and the few who stayed were forced to spit on images of the Virgin Mary.

This weekend, my colleagues and I attended Easter service in Qaraqosh, which has long been a center of Christian life in Iraq, hoping to find signs of rebirth. Instead, we drove through what looked like a ghost town.

I have been traveling to Iraq frequently over the past few months, and when I visit Muslim districts in areas of eastern Mosul that were recently liberated from the Islamic State, I mostly feel hopeful for the future of the region. Life is returning.

By comparison, Christian districts like Hamdaniya, Karamless and Qaraqosh, which were liberated around five months ago, remain largely empty. Shops in Hamdaniya still bear graffiti left by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, which occupied the area for nearly two and a half years.

The graffiti on one building read: ''The Islamic State will remain.''

When I ask Iraqi Christians why they haven't returned to the town, I get conflicting answers. Some say they feel unsafe and don't trust the government to protect them. They point to the lack of electricity and running water. Others say they are awaiting compensation from the government for their destroyed homes. Still others say they won't go back until there is a political agreement that gives Christian areas a semiautonomous status.

On Sunday, I visited one of the oldest and largest churches in northern Iraq, the sanctuary of St. George in Qaraqosh. Inside the grounds, security officials checked bags, and soldiers with automatic weapons stood sentry on the church's roof.

We were told to come early because of the significance of this Easter, the first to be celebrated in Qaraqosh since the Islamic State was flushed out of the town. But when the service started, the majority of the pews were empty.

During the service, I felt the lingering presence of the Islamic State.

A pillar on the way to the altar included the phrase Ø§Ù„Ù„Ù‡Ø£ÙƒØ¨Ø± or ''God is great,'' scrawled on its surface in black paint.

On a part of the church's nave, the militants left the phrase Ø§Ù„Ù…Ù„ØªÙ‚Ù‰Ø§Ù„Ø¬Ù†Ø©Ø§Ù†Ø´Ø§Ø¡Ø§Ù„Ù„Ù‡ which means, ''We meet in heaven, God willing.''

On another marble pillar, there were markings of what looked like a car, numbers and positions, scrawled in childlike strokes, as if the militants had simply wanted to deface the surface.

Twenty minutes into the service, only seven pews had worshipers, in a church that had standing-room-only crowds on major holy days before the arrival of the militants.

Iraq's Christian community has been shrinking rapidly since the American invasion in 2003. There were about 1.5 million Christians living in the country that year, yet by the time the Islamic State swept across northern Iraq in 2014, only about 400,000 remained.

The church in Qaraqosh bore the scars not just of occupation, but also of fighting. As we entered its grand entryway, we ducked under damaged panels that dangled from the ceiling.

Names of Islamic State fighters, probably those who had been stationed in the church, were written on a marble wall next to one of the church's gorgeous friezes.

In the many buildings I have visited that were once occupied by the Islamic State, this has seemed to be a habit of the militants: Scribbling their noms de guerre on the walls in marker, ink or spray paint, like teenagers in a bathroom stall.

Signs of the occupation could also be felt in the church's courtyard, where one of the walls looked as if it had been used for target practice. We found the dummies the militants had been aiming at lying on their sides.

We left the Easter service an hour after it began. Our parting view spoke to the desolation.

Document NYTF000020170418ed4i0004u



U.S.; Politics
Trump Congratulates Erdogan on Vote Amplifying His Power

By MARK LANDLER 
512 words
18 April 2017
05:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —resident Trump called President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey on Monday to congratulate him on winning a much-disputed referendum that will cement his autocratic rule over the country and, in the view of many experts, erode Turkey’ democratic institutions.

Those concerns were not mentioned in a brief readout of the phone call that the White House released Monday night. After noting Mr. Trump’ congratulations, the one-paragraph statement pivoted to a recent American missile strike on a Syrian airfield, which it said he and Mr. Erdogan had also discussed.

The statement did not say whether Mr. Trump had raised independent reports of voting irregularities during the Turkish referendum or the government’ heavy-handed tactics in the weeks leading up to it, when the country was under a state of emergency. The State Department noted both issues in a more cautious, less laudatory statement issued a few hours earlier.

The White House was also silent about the long-term implications of the referendum, which some experts have likened to a deathblow to democracy in Turkey. Mr. Erdogan’ narrow victory, in effect, ratifies his authoritarian rule. The change to Turkey’ Constitution will allow the winner of the 2019 presidential election to assume full control of the government, ending the current parliamentary political system.

In its statement, the State Department said, “e look to the government of Turkey to protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of all its citizens —egardless of their vote on April 16 —s guaranteed by the Turkish Constitution and in accordance with Turkey’ international commitments, such as under the Helsinki Charter.”hat document compels its signatory nations, including Turkey, to uphold human rights.

Mr. Trump and Mr. Erdogan are viewed as ideological bedfellows: They are populist leaders with little patience for the courts or other checks on their power. But Mr. Erdogan has taken his authoritarian bent to an extreme, imposing the state of emergency and purging the opposition, academia and the army after a failed coup last year.

The White House emphasized that the two leaders were united in their determination to punish Syria’ president, Bashar al-Assad, for using chemical weapons against his own people. “resident Trump thanked President Erdogan for supporting this action by the United States,”he statement said, referring to the April 6 missile attack in Syria.

It also stressed that the two men stand together in battling the Islamic State, or ISIS: “resident Trump and President Erdogan also discussed the counter-ISIS campaign and the need to cooperate against all groups that use terrorism to achieve their ends.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* In Supporting Erdogan, Turks Cite Economic and Religious Gains

* Turkey Vote Could Mean the End of a Courtship to Join the E.U.

* Erdogan Claims Vast Powers in Turkey After Narrow Victory in Referendum

President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey on Monday in Ankara. | Tumay Berkin/European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170418ed4i0018h



books
Bush Nostalgia Is Overrated, but His Book of Paintings Is Not; Nonfiction

By JONATHAN ALTER 
1,534 words
17 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

PORTRAITS OF COURAGEA Commander in Chief’ Tribute to America’ WarriorsBy George W. BushIllustrated. 191 pp. Crown Publishers. $35.

As a cub reporter in 1967, Richard Cohen (now a political columnist for The Washington Post) covered an exhibition of Dwight D. Eisenhower’ paintings and asked the former president about their symbolism.

“et’ get something straight here, Cohen,”ke snapped. “hey would have burned this [expletive] a long time ago if I weren’ the president of the United States.”

The same might have been said of former President George W. Bush’ paintings of his pets —nd his embarrassing if psychologically compelling self-portraits in the bathroom —hat were hacked in 2013 from family emails by “uccifer,” Romanian hacker. This was a first. Who leaks paintings?

Their value lay only in their presidential provenance. In the Amazon TV series “lpha House”disclosure: I was a producer), Garry Trudeau makes sport of a fictional Republican senator carefully hanging his treasured bathtub-feet “ush”s if it were a masterpiece. This while former President Jimmy Carter was selling one of his paintings at a Carter Center charity auction for $750,000.

In the introduction to his new coffee-table book of oil paintings, Bush readily —erhaps pre-emptively —dmits that he’ a “ovice.”hree years after leaving the White House, he set out to adopt the pastime of Winston Churchill, who painted to relieve the “lack Dog”f depression. But age 66 is awfully late to achieve proficiency, especially for a man with a famously short attention span. Bush recalls playfully informing his first art instructor, Gail Norfleet, of his objectives. “ail, there’ a Rembrandt trapped in this body,”e told her. “our job is to liberate him.”

Norfleet and Bush’ other talented tutors fell short of that ideal, but they did liberate an inner Bush we —nd maybe he —ever knew existed: An evocative and surprisingly adept artist who has dramatically improved his technique while also doing penance for one of the greatest disasters in American history.

After staring at the haunting close-up portraits of wounded warriors and reading the searing accounts of their suffering, I’ beginning to understand why this beautifully published book went to No. 1 on The Times’ nonfiction best-seller list. It’ not that people are suddenly nostalgic for Bush; historians consistently rank him near the bottom in their lists of American presidents and —espite lasting achievements on treating AIDS globally and a prescription drug benefit for Medicare —e will very likely remain there, even if he rises past President Trump some day. (Trump hasn’ gotten us into a $1 trillion war or presided over an economic meltdown —o far.) And it’ not just that Trump has set the bar of character and decency so low that Bush barely needs to lift his cowboy boot to step over it. His charming family, warm relationship with the Obamas, and welcome defense of the press and other threatened democratic institutions aren’ sufficient explanations, either.

A better answer might lie in the words of Marine Corps Sgt. Andy Hatcher, who enlisted a month before 9/11 and was ambushed on Thanksgiving Day 2004 in the Second Battle of Falluja. Hatcher lost his right foot and most of the hearing in his right ear. He also suffered traumatic brain injury, though a less severe form of that signature wound of the Iraq War than afflicted other veterans. “y father is a Vietnam vet,”atcher said. “e was treated incredibly differently than I was.”

The success of “ortraits of Courage”with the proceeds to help vets) is something more than just another “hank you for your service.”t testifies to our genuine, bipartisan determination to do it better this time —o support healing in all of its forms, even from the president who most made that healing necessary. It reflects our fascination with how leaders process pain and regret. And whether or not we backed Bush’ 2003 invasion of Iraq (as I wrongly did), commemorating the more than 40,000 brave Americans who left a piece of themselves behind in Iraq and Afghanistan seems a fitting if tiny step toward bridging the civilian-military divide. Bush writes of the veterans he met that “ooking them in the eye and saluting them as their commander in chief”as the greatest honor of his presidency and that he will continue to actively honor them for the rest of his life. This was not something that Presidents Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon did much of with Vietnam veterans after leaving office.

Presidents who send soldiers into battle cannot easily confess that it was in vain. In his memoir “ecision Points,”ush concedes that American forces were withdrawn too quickly but not that responding to 9/11 by attacking a dictator who had nothing to do with it was a colossal error. He can’ admit that he has little to show for his dream of democratizing the Middle East, beyond continuing chaos.

And yet, bearing unflinching witness to the horrific consequences of historic folly should always be welcome. Atonement is not accountability, much less redemption, but it’ a start. Bush mostly avoids Veterans Day-style platitudes and sugarcoats nothing, not even stories about a veteran who wounded a fellow soldier with friendly fire and one shot by an Afghan security guard who was supposed to be an ally.

The former president met the 96 men and two women he painted in military hospitals and at the Warrior 100K mountain bike rides and Warrior Open golf outings sponsored by the Bush Institute. Their inspiring stories of recovery —ost would not have survived in earlier wars —annot soften the horrors they endured. Bush’ colorful brush strokes (he painted from photographs) capture the faces of soldiers like Army Capt. Jae Barclay, who underwent 30 surgeries after his vehicle struck an I.E.D. in Afghanistan; Lt. Col. Kent Solheim, whose right leg was amputated amid 34 surgeries, after which he returned for two more deployments; and Master Sgt. Israel del Toro Jr., “T,”hom Bush first met when he was in a medically induced coma after his Humvee was hit by a bomb that severed his fingers and nose and severely burned 80 percent of his body. He was given little chance of survival, and when he beat those odds, doctors told him he would never walk or breathe on his own. After more than 100 surgeries, DT represented the United States in cycling and powerlifting at the 2016 Invictus Games and won the gold medal in the shot put.

The wounded warriors who don’ like Bush and haven’ recovered well were unlikely to have become friendly enough with him to have their portraits painted. But most of his subjects suffered nightmares, depression and “TS.”He leaves “isorder”ff the end of post-traumatic stress, presumably because the clinical distinction between PTS and PTSD can be fuzzy.) The stories are gruesome but also occasionally amusing. Lt. Col. Ken Dwyer told Bush and the golf legend Lee Trevino how he took his prosthetic eye out of its socket and presented it to an umpire at his son’ baseball game with the comment: “ere, you seem to need this a lot more than I do.”

The only weak part of this book is the ingratiating foreword by Gen. Peter Pace, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. “resident Bush asked tough questions —nd continued to ask them until he had all the information he needed,”ace writes. This is precisely what Bush did not do —n incomplete plans for the postwar occupation, insufficient American troop levels, the disbanding of the Iraqi Army (one of the factors that led to ISIS) and many other matters. “nce he made a decision, he would resource it properly,”ace claims. Tell that to the men who were killed or wounded because of unconscionable delays in obtaining proper body armor. Pace is right about one thing: The book is a “essage of love”rom a former president to the troops.

In 2003, I argued that Iraq was the right war with the wrong commander in chief. I had it nearly backward. It was the wrong war —or which history will forever blame Bush —ut with the right commander in chief, at least for the noble if narrow purpose of creatively honoring veterans through art. Contra Ike, these portraits —n unexpected asterisk to the Bush legacy —ould not have been burned, even if the artist had never been president.

Jonathan Alter, a former columnist for Newsweek who has written books on Franklin D. Roosevelt and Barack Obama, is working on a biography of Jimmy Carter.

Lt. Col. Kent Graham Solheim, U.S. Army. PAINTINGS BY PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH. FROM TOP: LT. COL. KENT GRAHAM SOLHEIM, U.S. ARMY; SGT. FIRST CLASS MICHAEL R. RODRIGUEZ, U.S. ARMY; SGT. LESLIE ZIMMERMAN, U.S. ARMY. Sgt. First Class Michael R. Rodriguez, U.S. Army. PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH Sgt. Leslie Zimmerman, U.S. Army.

Document INHT000020170418ed4h0000a



World; Asia Pacific
After U.S. Talks With Afghanistan, Hints at a Harder Line on Pakistan

By MUJIB MASHAL 
727 words
17 April 2017
03:17
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan —alks between the United States and Afghanistan wrapped up here on Sunday, as the Trump administration reviews its options in the 15-year American presence in Afghanistan in the face of a resurgent Taliban and renewed concerns about Pakistan’ role in supporting them.

Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, President Trump’ national security adviser, met with Afghan leaders, including President Ashraf Ghani, in talks that came days after the United States dropped a huge bomb on a honeycomb of Islamic State caves in eastern Afghanistan.

But the greater problem in Afghanistan is the strengthening of the Taliban. In an interview with the Afghan television channel ToloNews, General McMaster said, “hat is necessary at this point is to consolidate gains and to deal with what is a big security problem now.”e did not comment on whether the United States would add more troops, saying it was for “resident Trump to decide, really, what is the best course of action to begin to accelerate progress in the war.”

Afghan forces have struggled against a resurgent Taliban in the past couple of years, losing territory and suffering record casualties, while American strategy on the conflict is largely considered stagnant here. The insurgent group controls large parts of the countryside and threatens several cities. In a sign of the American military’ concern, the commander of American and NATO forces in Afghanistan has asked for thousands of more troops to be deployed in the country to advise and assist Afghan forces.

In the ToloNews interview, General McMaster said that Taliban fighters who refused the Afghan government’ call for peace “ill have to be defeated on battlefields,”nd that the United States was “ommitted to give the Afghan state, the Afghan security forces, the strength they need.”

He also appeared to take a tougher line on Pakistan, which has been accused of using the Taliban as a proxy force and giving its leaders sanctuary. Many analysts, as well as some coalition partners, have been critical of the United States’phill struggle to persuade Pakistan to crack down on the Afghan Taliban leadership, which has used Pakistan as a base for its battles in Afghanistan.

“s all of us have hoped for many, many years —e have hoped that Pakistani leaders will understand that it is in their interest to go after these groups less selectively than they have in the past,”eneral McMaster, who is heading next to Pakistan, said in the ToloNews interview. “he best way to pursue their interests in Afghanistan and elsewhere is through the use of diplomacy, and not through the use of proxies that engage in violence.”

Analysts have long questioned the American consideration of Pakistan as an ally, as the country’ military is accused of aiding Taliban’ efforts to derail American objectives.

“any people in Afghanistan are wondering about the nature of relations between the United States and Pakistan, particularly the fact that everyone recognizes the principal role of Pakistan in supporting Taliban and other terrorist groups,”aid Davood Moradian, the director of the Afghan Institute for Strategic Studies.

Mr. Moradian said the new administration realized that the prior “ppeasement policy”ith Pakistan had not worked and needed to be reconsidered.

Afghan officials aware of the discussions with General McMaster said there was a common understanding of the threat of terrorist groups emerging from Pakistan. And there are other indications that the United States may be weighing a tougher stance on Pakistan, among them General McMaster’ reported pick of a point person on the country who has strongly advocated that the United States stop treating Pakistan as an ally and condition any future military aid on fighting terrorist groups.

The agenda of the two-day talks also included American troop levels, the developing of Afghan air capabilities and peace talks with the Taliban, Afghan officials said.

* Calling Successor a ‘raitor’ Afghan Ex-Leader Denounces U.S. Bombing

* U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs’n \b ISIS\b0  Caves in Afghanistan

* Afghan Security Reforms Falter, With Tough Fighting Ahead

Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, the national security adviser, left, met on Sunday with Afghan leaders, including the government’ chief executive, Abdullah Abdullah. | Afghanistan Chief Executive Office, via European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170417ed4h000jh



MODERN LOVE
Style Desk; SECTST
A Dose of Empathy From My Syrian Doctor

By RANDI DAVENPORT 
1,591 words
16 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

He lifted his glasses and let them rest on his forehead before taking hold of my right leg. ''Pull me closer,'' he said.

I pulled.

''Push me away.''

I pushed.

I thought: This is the game lovers play. Pull me closer, push me away, each action holding the promise of a specific outcome: If I push you away, you will come after me. If I pull you closer, you will let me. But he wasn't my lover. He was my doctor.

And then I felt my leg give way, a sensation of water running downhill. I came back to myself. To the blue-white light of the exam room. The crinkly sound of the paper on the table. The feeling of his hand on my skin as again he told me to pull him closer. To push him away. The sensation of weakness once more, this time in my left leg.

He made no comment, but I saw the studied flatness of his expression. I looked down at the shrunken muscles in my feet, at my paralyzed toes. And then I looked up at him. He reached into his lab coat, pulled out his reflex hammer and took aim at my knee. My leg jumped, the spasm of a too-brisk response.

''You are fine,'' he said, his words inflected by the Syrian accent that gave me so much comfort. ''Trust me.''

I tried to trust him, but I wasn't fine and we both knew it. My motor neurons were failing. They had been failing for two decades, slowly, in a sleepy subterranean wave.

I knew I was lucky. Motor neuron disease is incurable and most people who have it die within a year or two, maybe five. But I was still alive. Soldiering on.

So when my doctor said I was fine, he meant he had discovered nothing new and alarming during this exam. I was holding steady. I wasn't fine but I wasn't dying, either.

We met every three months. The regularity of these appointments, and the close monitoring that the schedule suggested, should have terrified me. Instead, it made me feel safe. As time passed, I realized it wasn't just the monitoring that brought me comfort but the doctor himself.

I liked the way he wore his hair cut short, so I could see the contours of his skull. I liked the shape of his hands and the patient way he answered my questions. And if I hesitated, not wanting to talk about embarrassing symptoms, he would soften his voice and give me a mild look. ''Tell me,'' he'd say, and I'd tell him.

One night I dreamed of him standing in the middle of a wasteland, a world exploded by war, his sleeve pushed back so I could see the watch on his wrist. The dial read 10 minutes to 8. In the dream I thought, ''Oh, thank God. I still have time.'' But when I woke up, I felt only terror. ''Time's running out,'' I thought.

I sent my doctor an email and he responded right away. ''Do not worry,'' he wrote. ''You are fine.'' I felt the force of his words, the shelter of his certainty.

It's axiomatic to say that patients with serious illnesses fall in love with their doctors, seeing them as points of light in an otherwise dismal sky. But I knew this wasn't love. It was desperation, a finger-hold on a cliff before the fall.

I wasn't in love with him, but I had come to depend on him. I was accustomed to taking care of myself and I had let him take care of me. I let him see that I was scared. And when I let him see my fear, I had to see it, too. My own fragility. The stuff I couldn't just power through.

Despite this, he gave me hope. This was the ammunition that fueled my fight.

''Pull me closer,'' he said each time we met. ''Push me away.''

I asked about his family in Syria.

''You don't want to hear this,'' he said, as formal and as courteous as ever. But eventually he told me about his reckless nephews. His brother-in-law with cancer. His mother and sisters who remained there, watching daily for things that could fall from the sky: bombs, pieces of aircraft, the flotsam of war.

Inadvertently, I winced and turned away. When I looked at him once more, he was watching me recoil from things unknown.

''You are fine,'' he said, and smiled.

Not long after, three Muslim students were shot in our town, killed when they answered a knock at their apartment door. In San Bernardino, Calif., a newly married couple, their toddler at her grandmother's house, opened fire in a room full of county office workers. And all the news was about shooters from ISIS, Muslims and the threat they posed to the American way of life.

At my next appointment, I could tell my doctor was preoccupied.

''What's wrong?'' I asked softly.

''It is nothing,'' he said. He wouldn't look at me.

I thought about the way he had come to America and chosen to work at a big state teaching hospital so he could help poor people. How he had come here to be safe and to offer safety. I had never seen him look as defeated as he did now.

''Tell me,'' I said.

He hesitated and then said he was afraid for his wife and children. He would be fine, but he worried about them. ''People are crazy,'' he said. And then he began to talk about leaving America, maybe moving to Dubai.

''You will break my heart,'' I said. I thought I was joking, but a minute later I was weeping.

I understood why he wanted to leave. But I also knew that if I was still alive, it was because of him. His bravery mattered when mine faltered. His mantra: ''You are fine. You are fine,'' cut through my doubt when it seemed there was no light.

How many effects of warfare are invisible, revealed only in human trembling, that shivering language of fear? The twitching, failing muscle. The bullet in the air. Each equivalent to the other, it turns out, when the coming damage is unknown, but certain.

I wanted him to be safe. The same thing he wanted for me. And I knew I was helpless to procure that safety for him, because some people are, indeed, crazy. And he was just as helpless when it came to halting the march of my illness.

I said his name and he turned to face me.

''I am with you,'' he said, as if I had asked him for something, his voice fierce again. His face filled with resolve. ''I am not going anywhere.''

''You're O.K., too,'' I replied, wiping my eyes, knowing my words were futile but needing to say something anyway. ''Nothing's going to happen,'' I said, even though I could not possibly know if he would be all right. Even so, I barreled on. ''Your family will be all right. You'll be all right.''

He smiled gently and shook his head. And then I realized something: He had never once tried to reassure me about the future in that way, with false hope. He had only ever spoken about the present, telling me what he knew to be true. I was still fine. I was not yet headed for a quick death. And that was what had given me comfort.

''You are fine,'' I offered softly, thinking that, for at least this moment, he was. But as soon as I said this, he flicked his glance away and did not reply.

I did not blame him for ducking the conversation the way you would dodge a downpour of rain. We could hear nothing of war in that cool place, where the only sounds came from the elevators rising and falling. There were no bullets flying. No audible dying off of this neuron or the next. These things are silent until they are upon us, and by then it is too late.

So we sat without speaking, together in the dark night of that bright room. But if he had taught me anything, it was that comfort resides in the rituals of care, the steady application of optimism, the shivering light of faith in the fact that I was still okay.

And so I thought: What can I offer when the only thing I have is hope? And then: You can be his patient. You can let him take care of you.

Almost as soon as I thought this, he reached into his lab coat for his hammer. ''Go like this,'' he said, cupping his fingers so that one hand hooked into the other. When I did, he told me to pull. Then he hit my knee with the hammer and resumed his exam.

To hear Modern Love: The Podcast, subscribe on iTunes or Google Play Music. To read past Modern Love columns, click here. Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook (Styles and Modern Love), Twitter (Styles, Fashion and Weddings) and Instagram.

To contact Modern Love, email modernlove@nytimes.com .

Randi Davenport lives in Chapel Hill, N.C. Her latest novel is ''The End of Always.''

DRAWING (DRAWING BY BRIAN REA) 

Document NYTF000020170416ed4g0008r



world
After Church Bombings, Egyptian Christians Are Resigned but Resolute

By DECLAN WALSH 
1,612 words
15 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ALEXANDRIA, Egypt —hen the bomb went off at St. Mark’ Cathedral one week ago, William Frances had one thought: “h, my God, it’ happening again.”

Six years earlier, Mr. Frances lost his mother, his sister and a cousin in a bombing at another Alexandria church that left him devastated. Now he prayed he hadn’ lost anyone else.

“ had enough,”e recalled. “ said: ‘lease, God, no more. Please.’”

The coordinated suicide attacks  on St. Mark’, Egypt ’ historic seat of Christianity, and at another church, in the city of Tanta, took 45 lives and dealt a heavy blow to the country’ embattled Coptic Orthodox minority. The Islamic State group claimed responsibility for both attacks.

The bombing in Alexandria, a bustling seaport of crumbling elegance, also dredged up painful memories of 2011 church attack  that, despite years of investigation, remains unsolved. The trail is stone cold: Not only have the Egyptian police failed to arrest those responsible for the bloodshed, they can’ even say which group carried it out.

Ineptitude? Indifference? As Christians in Alexandria mourned the latest victims, some wondered if this time it would end differently. Not Mr. Frances.

“othing has changed,”r. Frances, a 29-year-old computer technician, said in a cafe on the city’ sweeping seafront boulevard. “t happened six years ago, it happened this week, and it will happen again. I don’ feel safe in this country.”

His hard-bitten skepticism mirrors that of many Egyptian Christians, who say they have lost faith in a system that swings between an apathetic shrug and outright discrimination.

Egypt’ strongman leader, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, styles himself as a staunch defender of Copts, who account for one-tenth of the country’ 92 million people, and who openly rejoiced when he came to power in 2013.

Yet Copts have had little to celebrate under Mr. Sisi, and find themselves still   vulnerable to prejudice, violence and the vagaries of a system in which impunity is rife.

Joseph Malak, a lawyer representing families of the 2011 victims, said a court order he won in October required the Interior Ministry to provide an update on the investigation. He has received nothing.

To people like Mr. Frances, the latest attack was a reminder of how little has changed. “nother president, another regime —t’ all the same,”e said.

Now the Islamic State hopes to bomb its way into the equation. Since a suicide bombing at a Cairo church in December, the Islamic State has trumpeted its intention to seek a foothold in Egypt by slaughtering vulnerable Christians. Its choice of Alexandria, an ancient center of Christendom, for the latest escalation was a marker of its ambitions.

St. Mark arrived here in A.D. 64, according to church teaching, befriending a shoemaker who became his first bishop. Together they established their first church on a site that is now home to a grand cathedral, with giant chandeliers, walls lined with icons and St. Mark’ head preserved in its vaults.

Last weekend, as the Coptic patriarch, Pope Tawadros II, offered Palm Sunday Mass, a suicide bomber roamed nearby streets looking for a way inside. It was not easy: Egyptian security officials guarded the main approach streets.

But once the Mass ended and the pope had retired to his chambers, the security cordon relaxed. Amgad Bakheet, a rickshaw driver, saw a man walk up to the church gates with his jacket zipped high and one hand hidden.

As the man passed through a security gate with a metal detector, Mr. Bakheet said, he heard beeping. The man stepped back. Mr. Bakheet was flung to the ground, his body peppered with shrapnel.

“ called out to St. George,”e said at his hospital bed Wednesday, wincing from pain, as a friend showed a photo of the metal that medics had pulled from his flesh.

Four police officers, seven Christians and six Muslim passers-by perished in the attack. Hours later, Mr. Sisi declared a state of emergency that gave him sweeping powers to try terrorism suspects in emergency courts. In a show of force, soldiers fanned out across the country to guard churches, while armored vehicles took up positions in the streets.

The Interior Ministry identified the Alexandria bomber as Mahmoud Hassan Mubarak Abdallah, a petroleum worker who had returned to his home in Suez from Kuwait last year.

In a television interview, Mr. Abdallah’ wife said she had last seen her husband when he told her that he was leaving for Nigeria in December. It was unclear if he had gone.

Yet even as Mr. Sisi, in a visit with Pope Tawadros in Cairo on Thursday, vowed to track down those behind the bombings, a crowd set fire to three Christian homes in Minya, 125 miles south of the capital, in a dispute over church-building. It was a stark reminder of the sectarian wellspring the Islamic State hopes to exploit.

A church-building law, passed last year, discriminates against Christians. Mob attacks stoked by rabble-rousers and Islamist ideologues, like the one in Minya, are rarely prosecuted. Few Christians serve in the top ranks of the military, security services and academia.

“he highest people can never be Christian,”aid Michael Wahid Hanna, an Egypt expert at the Century Foundation in New York. “hey never are. It’ systemic.”

Ibrahim Khalaf Fahmy, a resident of the Minya village where clashes erupted on Thursday, described a situation of boiling frustrations.

“he Muslims insult us and spit in our faces, even before the police,”r. Fahmy said by telephone. Mr. Sisi’ state of emergency had been imposed “ot to protect the Copts,”e said, “ut to prevent a revolt of the Copts.”

Violence against Christians is rare in Alexandria, a city with a rich literary and intellectual tradition. Even so, many complain of less visible forms of discrimination that sting nonetheless.

Dawd Suleiman, who lost his wife and a daughter in the 2011 attack, stepped out of evening prayers recently for an interview at one of the many cafes lining Alexandria’ seafront.

Mr. Suleiman, a retired mechanic, recounted how the previous blast had ruined his life. His daughter Marina, who narrowly survived, suffered continuing psychological trauma, he said.

Mr. Suleiman’ one hope was to get a job for his son, Kyrillos, in the state-run petroleum company where he had worked for 37 years. (Such unofficial sinecures are considered a virtual right in many state companies.) But the job, which he said management had promised, was blocked by a single bigoted supervisor, he said.

Kyrillos left Egypt for Germany, where he works for a railway company. “t’ the small things that hurt,”r. Suleiman said.

Suffering and martyrdom occupy a central place in Coptic tradition. Persecution by Roman emperors or Islamic invaders is recounted during religious services. The church calendar begins in 284, the start of the reign of the Roman emperor Diocletian, who terrorized Christians.

The veneration of Christian martyrs is felt most keenly at the monastery of St. Mina, an hour’ drive from Alexandria. There, barren desert has been transformed into a lush compound of gardens and monastic cells around a soaring cathedral. The seven Christians killed in last Sunday’ bombing were taken there for entombment in a martyr’ church under construction for the 2011 bombing’ 23 victims.

“he new martyrs will be buried beside the old ones,”ishop Kyrillos Ava Mina, leader of the monastery, said as he walked around the site, weaving through a maze of wooden beams. “t is a gift for them to be buried here.”

Coptic clerics will welcome Pope Francis when he visits Egypt on April 28. On Friday, Pope Tawadros canceled most Easter Sunday festivities, limiting them to a simple Mass.

Many Coptic clerics are careful of engaging in public debate. Asked what was driving the Islamic State attacks, the monastery’ spokesman, Father Elijah Ava Mina, chuckled dryly. “ don’ know,”e said. “sk them.”

Yet talk of Copts being forced to leave Egypt en masse,  as some have suggested , seems overblown.

Attendance at Holy Week services at St. Mark’ Cathedral in Alexandria soared after the bombing, clerics said, as worshipers defied their fears and crowded into a church whose pillars and altars were shrouded in black cloth.

On Friday, George Naseem Fahim stood guard at the church gates. His father, Naseem Fahim, was killed in the blast Sunday, he said, after he directed the suicide bomber away from the main gate and into the metal detector.

Now his son took his place.

“’ continuing what he started,”r. Fahim said. “hy worry or be afraid? He has gone to heaven, and I am ready to join him if necessary.”

Magdy Samaan contributed reporting.

PHOTOS: The funeral for those killed in the Palm Sunday suicide bombing at St. Mark’ Cathedral in Alexandria, Egypt. Attacks on Coptic Christian churches in two cities that day killed 45 people.; Mourners at the funeral in Alexandria. Seven victims were entombed at a monastery in St. Mina in a martyr’ church for the 23 victims of a 2011 church bombing. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SAMER ABDALLAH/ASSOCIATED PRESS); Investigators at St. Mark’ after the attack. The Islamic State took responsibility for the bombing. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) MAP

* Attacks Show \b ISIS\b0 ’ew Plan: Divide Egypt by Killing Christians 

* Egypt Declares State of Emergency, as Attacks Undercut Promise of Security 

* Targeted by \b ISIS\b0 , Egyptian Christians Flee Violence 

* Attack on Coptic Cathedral in Cairo Kills Dozens 

Document INHT000020170416ed4f00001



World; Middle East
After Church Bombings, Egyptian Christians Are Resigned but Resolute

By DECLAN WALSH 
1,592 words
15 April 2017
18:16
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

ALEXANDRIA, Egypt —hen the bomb went off at St. Mark’ Cathedral one week ago, William Frances had one thought: “h, my God, it’ happening again.”

Six years earlier, Mr. Frances lost his mother, his sister and a cousin in a bombing at another Alexandria church that left him devastated. Now he prayed he hadn’ lost anyone else.

“ had enough,”e recalled. “ said: ‘lease, God, no more. Please.’”

The coordinated suicide attacks  on St. Mark’, Egypt’ historic seat of Christianity, and at another church, in the city of Tanta, took 45 lives and dealt a heavy blow to the country’ embattled Coptic Orthodox minority. The Islamic State group claimed responsibility for both attacks.

The bombing in Alexandria, a bustling seaport of crumbling elegance, also dredged up painful memories of 2011 church attack  that, despite years of investigation, remains unsolved. The trail is stone cold: Not only have the Egyptian police failed to arrest those responsible for the bloodshed, they can’ even say which group carried it out.

Ineptitude? Indifference? As Christians in Alexandria mourned the latest victims, some wondered if this time it would end differently. Not Mr. Frances.

“othing has changed,”r. Frances, a 29-year-old computer technician, said in a cafe on the city’ sweeping seafront boulevard. “t happened six years ago, it happened this week, and it will happen again. I don’ feel safe in this country.”

His hard-bitten skepticism mirrors that of many Egyptian Christians, who say they have lost faith in a system that swings between an apathetic shrug and outright discrimination.

Egypt’ strongman leader, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, styles himself as a staunch defender of Copts, who account for one-tenth of the country’ 92 million people, and who openly rejoiced when he came to power in 2013.

Yet Copts have had little to celebrate under Mr. Sisi, and find themselves still   vulnerable to prejudice, violence and the vagaries of a system in which impunity is rife.

Joseph Malak, a lawyer representing families of the 2011 victims, said a court order he won in October required the Interior Ministry to provide an update on the investigation. He has received nothing.

To people like Mr. Frances, the latest attack was a reminder of how little has changed. “nother president, another regime —t’ all the same,”e said.

Now the Islamic State hopes to bomb its way into the equation. Since a suicide bombing at a Cairo church in December, the Islamic State has trumpeted its intention to seek a foothold in Egypt by slaughtering vulnerable Christians. Its choice of Alexandria, an ancient center of Christendom, for the latest escalation was a marker of its ambitions.

St. Mark arrived here in A.D. 64, according to church teaching, befriending a shoemaker who became his first bishop. Together they established their first church on a site that is now home to a grand cathedral, with giant chandeliers, walls lined with icons and St. Mark’ head preserved in its vaults.

Last weekend, as the Coptic patriarch, Pope Tawadros II, offered Palm Sunday Mass, a suicide bomber roamed nearby streets looking for a way inside. It was not easy: Egyptian security officials guarded the main approach streets.

But once the Mass ended and the pope had retired to his chambers, the security cordon relaxed. Amgad Bakheet, a rickshaw driver, saw a man walk up to the church gates with his jacket zipped high and one hand hidden.

As the man passed through a security gate with a metal detector, Mr. Bakheet said, he heard beeping. The man stepped back. Mr. Bakheet was flung to the ground, his body peppered with shrapnel.

“ called out to St. George,”e said at his hospital bed Wednesday, wincing from pain, as a friend showed a photo of the metal that medics had pulled from his flesh.

Four police officers, seven Christians and six Muslim passers-by perished in the attack. Hours later, Mr. Sisi declared a state of emergency that gave him sweeping powers to try terrorism suspects in emergency courts. In a show of force, soldiers fanned out across the country to guard churches, while armored vehicles took up positions in the streets.

The Interior Ministry identified the Alexandria bomber as Mahmoud Hassan Mubarak Abdallah, a petroleum worker who had returned to his home in Suez from Kuwait last year.

In a television interview, Mr. Abdallah’ wife said she had last seen her husband when he told her that he was leaving for Nigeria in December. It was unclear if he had gone.

Yet even as Mr. Sisi, in a visit with Pope Tawadros in Cairo on Thursday, vowed to track down those behind the bombings, a crowd set fire to three Christian homes in Minya, 125 miles south of the capital, in a dispute over church-building. It was a stark reminder of the sectarian wellspring the Islamic State hopes to exploit.

A church-building law, passed last year, discriminates against Christians. Mob attacks stoked by rabble-rousers and Islamist ideologues, like the one in Minya, are rarely prosecuted. Few Christians serve in the top ranks of the military, security services and academia.

“he highest people can never be Christian,”aid Michael Wahid Hanna, an Egypt expert at the Century Foundation in New York. “hey never are. It’ systemic.”

Ibrahim Khalaf Fahmy, a resident of the Minya village where clashes erupted on Thursday, described a situation of boiling frustrations.

“he Muslims insult us and spit in our faces, even before the police,”r. Fahmy said by telephone. Mr. Sisi’ state of emergency had been imposed “ot to protect the Copts,”e said, “ut to prevent a revolt of the Copts.”

Violence against Christians is rare in Alexandria, a city with a rich literary and intellectual tradition. Even so, many complain of less visible forms of discrimination that sting nonetheless.

Dawd Suleiman, who lost his wife and a daughter in the 2011 attack, stepped out of evening prayers recently for an interview at one of the many cafes lining Alexandria’ seafront.

Mr. Suleiman, a retired mechanic, recounted how the previous blast had ruined his life. His daughter Marina, who narrowly survived, suffered continuing psychological trauma, he said.

Mr. Suleiman’ one hope was to get a job for his son, Kyrillos, in the state-run petroleum company where he had worked for 37 years. (Such unofficial sinecures are considered a virtual right in many state companies.) But the job, which he said management had promised, was blocked by a single bigoted supervisor, he said.

Kyrillos left Egypt for Germany, where he works for a railway company. “t’ the small things that hurt,”r. Suleiman said.

Suffering and martyrdom occupy a central place in Coptic tradition. Persecution by Roman emperors or Islamic invaders is recounted during religious services. The church calendar begins in 284, the start of the reign of the Roman emperor Diocletian, who terrorized Christians.

The veneration of Christian martyrs is felt most keenly at the monastery of St. Mina, an hour’ drive from Alexandria. There, barren desert has been transformed into a lush compound of gardens and monastic cells around a soaring cathedral. The seven Christians killed in last Sunday’ bombing were taken there for entombment in a martyr’ church under construction for the 2011 bombing’ 23 victims.

“he new martyrs will be buried beside the old ones,”ishop Kyrillos Ava Mina, leader of the monastery, said as he walked around the site, weaving through a maze of wooden beams. “t is a gift for them to be buried here.”

Coptic clerics will welcome Pope Francis when he visits Egypt on April 28. On Friday, Pope Tawadros canceled most Easter Sunday festivities, limiting them to a simple Mass.

Many Coptic clerics are careful of engaging in public debate. Asked what was driving the Islamic State attacks, the monastery’ spokesman, Father Elijah Ava Mina, chuckled dryly. “ don’ know,”e said. “sk them.”

Yet talk of Copts being forced to leave Egypt en masse,  as some have suggested , seems overblown.

Attendance at Holy Week services at St. Mark’ Cathedral in Alexandria soared after the bombing, clerics said, as worshipers defied their fears and crowded into a church whose pillars and altars were shrouded in black cloth.

On Friday, George Naseem Fahim stood guard at the church gates. His father, Naseem Fahim, was killed in the blast Sunday, he said, after he directed the suicide bomber away from the main gate and into the metal detector.

Now his son took his place.

“’ continuing what he started,”r. Fahim said. “hy worry or be afraid? He has gone to heaven, and I am ready to join him if necessary.”

Magdy Samaan contributed reporting.

* Attacks Show \b ISIS\b0 ’ew Plan: Divide Egypt by Killing Christians 

* Egypt Declares State of Emergency, as Attacks Undercut Promise of Security 

* Targeted by \b ISIS\b0 , Egyptian Christians Flee Violence 

* Attack on Coptic Cathedral in Cairo Kills Dozens 

The funeral for those killed in the Palm Sunday suicide bombing at St. Mark’ Cathedral in Alexandria, Egypt. | Samer Abdallah/Associated Press | Mourners at the funeral for victims of the suicide bombing at a Coptic Christian church in Alexandria, Egypt. | Samer Abdallah/Associated Press | Investigators at St. Mark’ Cathedral in Alexandria, Egypt, after the suicide attack. The Islamic State took responsibility for the bombing. | European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170415ed4f0040h



World; Asia Pacific
Calling Successor a ‘raitor’ Afghan Ex-Leader Denounces U.S. Bombing

By MUJIB MASHAL 
969 words
15 April 2017
13:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan —he American military’ use of the most powerful conventional bomb in its arsenal on an Islamic State cave complex in Afghanistan has stirred up political trouble for the Afghan government, as former President Hamid Karzai on Saturday called his successor “ traitor”nd declared that he wanted the Americans gone from the country.

In an interview with The New York Times, hours after he said he intended to work toward “usting the U.S.,” fuming Mr. Karzai said there was no justification for the United States to drop the powerful bomb in Afghanistan. The weapon, the GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast, is referred to as the “other of all bombs.”

He accused the American military of using the presence of Islamic State militants to turn his country into a laboratory for testing its weapons.

Mr. Karzai called President Ashraf Ghani’ government an “ccomplice”hat allowed and welcomed the use of the bomb. Mr. Ghani’ government had said the attack, which was said to have killed dozens of militants and destroyed three large caves in Nangarhar Province, was coordinated with the United States.

“hame on him for saying that, shame, shame,”r. Karzai said. “o Afghan with self-respect would do that.”e added, “e is a traitor, a traitor.”

A spokesman for Mr. Ghani would not address Mr. Karzai’ harsh words directly. But Mr. Ghani’ office put out a brief post on Twitter, clearly aimed at Mr. Karzai: “very Afghan has the right to speak their mind. This is a country of free speech.”

The uproar over the bombing and its meanings comes as H. R. McMaster, President Trump’ national security adviser, arrived in Kabul on Saturday for consultations with Afghan leaders as the new administration reviews its Afghanistan policy.

Afghan and American military officials described the bomb’ use as a battlefield necessity for the destruction of the Islamic State cave complex and the success of military operations. Four ground operations in the area, supported by regular, smaller airstrikes, had proven futile, they say. There have been no signs yet that the bombing caused any civilian casualties.

Other Afghan politicians have been more restrained about their views of the American bombing, with some opposed to it and others saying they supported it.

Amin Karim, the spokesman for the main faction of the Hezb-e-Islami, a conservative Islamist party with links to the insurgency, said members of his party disagreed with the strike because they believed it was carried out for American domestic political reasons and as a way to send a message to other countries at odds with the United States, rather than strictly to fight terrorism in Afghanistan.

“he goal of this attack was for beyond Afghanistan —t was for showing American power to North Korea, Syria and some other countries; it was for scaring these countries,”r. Amin said.

At a news conference organized by the Nangarhar governor’ office on Friday, a group of elders from the Achin district, where the bomb was dropped, expressed support for the use of such overwhelming force to eliminate the Islamic State fighters.

Atta Muhammed Noor, the powerful governor of the northern Balkh Province and a leader of the Jamiat-e-Islami, one of the largest Islamist parties, said he supported the use of the bomb as well as any “rackdown on insurgents and fundamentalists.”

Mr. Karzai said the people of eastern Afghanistan had expressed concern about Islamic State fighters crossing the border with Pakistan when the threat emerged more than two years ago, but little action was taken then. “hey allowed Daesh to come and come, and empty villages of their residents and entrench themselves,”e said, using the Arabic acronym for the Islamic State. “hy did they wait for two years? Why didn’ they stop them then? All the entry points were known.”

He added: “he conclusion is that Daesh was a U.S. contractor, like DynCorp, like other U.S. companies, that they used to empty an area of its population and create a cause, create an environment, a psychological environment in which the U.S. can then test its weapon.”

Mr. Karzai, who has grown more anti-American in recent years despite having come to power with the help of the United States military, had been seen as a quiet opposition figure, albeit one intent on derailing Mr. Ghani’ government.

Even when he was in power, he was against the United States’se of air power on Afghan villages, but analysts say they believe the latest American bombing has given him another political pretext to mobilize against the government.

Mr. Karzai said he would mobilize opposition against the American presence in his country, “rom agitation, to protest, to going to the Afghan people.”ut it remains unclear how much influence he now has. The current Afghan authorities forcefully blame him for the corrupt institutions they inherited and are trying to peel away the layers of patronage that once made him a powerful player.

While Mr. Ghani’ coalition government has failed to make progress in many areas and has struggled to contain the Taliban as they have seized new territory, it has been able to withstand political pressure by opponents like Mr. Karzai. It remains to be seen how much trouble he can cause.

Jawad Sukhanyar and Fahim Abed contributed reporting.

* U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs’n \b ISIS\b0  Caves in Afghanistan

* A Giant U.S. Bomb Carries an Even Bigger Message

* Afghanistan Is in Chaos. Is That What Hamid Karzai Wants?

Former President Hamid Karzai, right, in his office in Kabul, Afghanistan, in 2016. | Sergey Ponomarev for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170415ed4f002xl



National Desk; SECTA
Trump's Policy Reversals, in His Own Words

By AUDREY CARLSEN and JUGAL K. PATEL 
585 words
15 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
10
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

President Trump has changed his stance on several longstanding positions over the past week.

NATO

Mr. Trump has criticized NATO

for not focusing on terrorism.

Though little has changed

about NATO since he became

president, he has changed his

perspective about the alliance.

MARCH 23, 2016

'I think NATO may be obsolete.'

Interview with Bloomberg Politics

APRIL 4, 2016

'He asked me about NATO. I said it's

obsolete.'

Campaign rally in Milwaukee, Wis., describing an interview

with Wolf Blitzer

JULY 31, 2016

'I said NATO is obsolete, because it's

not taking care of terror.'

Interview with ABC's ''This Week''

JAN. 16, 2017

'I said a long time ago that NATO

had problems. Number one, it was

obsolete, because it was designed

many, many years ago.'

Joint interview with the Times of London and the German

newspaper Bild

APRIL 12, 2017

'I said it was obsolete. It's no longer

obsolete.'

News conference at the White House

China and currency manipulation

Throughout the presidential

campaign, Mr. Trump condemned

China for manipulating its

currency to gain an edge in trade.

JUNE 16, 2015

'They're devaluing their currency to

a level that you wouldn't believe. It

makes it impossible for our companies

to compete, impossible.'

Speech announcing his presidential bid

JULY 21, 2016

'They are the greatest currency

manipulators ever.'

Speech at the Republican National Convention

AUG. 24, 2016

'I am going to instruct my Treasury

secretary to label China a currency

manipulator, the greatest in the world.'

Campaign speech

FEB. 23, 2017

'I think they're grand champions at

manipulation of currency.'

Interview with Reuters

APRIL 2, 2017

'When you talk about currency manipulation,

when you talk about devaluations,

they are world champions.'

Interview with The Financial Times

APRIL 12, 2017

'They're not currency manipulators.'

Interview with The Wall Street Journal

On the Export-Import Bank

During his campaign, Mr. Trump

denounced the Export-Import

Bank, a taxpayer-funded agency

that gives loans to American

exporters.

AUG. 26, 2015

'I don't like it. I think it's a lot of excess

baggage. I think it's unnecessary.'

Interview with Bloomberg Politics

APRIL 12, 2017

'Actually, it's a very good thing. And it

actually makes money; it could make a

lot of money.'

Interview with The Wall Street Journal

Syria

Mr. Trump urged the Obama

administration to stay out of the

Syrian civil war, and during his

campaign he emphasized taking

on the Islamic State instead of

the Syrian government.

MAY 29, 2013

'Syria is NOT our problem.'

Twitter post

SEPT. 5, 2013

'Do NOT attack Syria, fix U.S.A.'

Twitter post

OCT. 9, 2016

'I don't like Assad at all, but Assad is

killing ISIS, Russia is killing ISIS and

Iran is killing ISIS.'

Presidential debate

OCT. 26, 2016

'What we should do is focus on ISIS.

We should not be focusing on Syria.'

Initerview with Reuters

APRIL. 6, 2017

'Tonight I ordered a targeted military

strike on the airfield in Syria from where

the chemical attack was launched. ...

I call on all civilized nations to join us

in seeking to end the slaughter and

bloodshed in Syria.'

Televised remarks

Jesse Guss working with a knitting machine in 2015 at Sage Automotive Interiors in Marietta, S.C., one of many smaller businesses that benefits from the Export-Import Bank. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MEGAN GIELOW FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) GRAPHICS 

Document NYTF000020170415ed4f0005p



Foreign Desk; SECTA
Stockholm Suspect Was  ISIS  Recruit, Uzbek Official Says

By SEWELL CHAN; Oleg Matsnev contributed reporting from Moscow. 
501 words
15 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON -- The Uzbek man who is suspected of steering a hijacked beer truck into a crowd of shoppers in central Stockholm last week had been recruited by the Islamic State, and had encouraged other Uzbeks to travel to Syria to fight for the militant group, Uzbekistan's foreign minister said on Friday.

The suspect, Rakhmat Akilov, 39, was arrested a few hours after the April 7 attack that left four people dead and 15 others wounded. It was Sweden's worst terrorist assault in decades. At a court hearing on Tuesday, Mr. Akilov's court-appointed lawyer said that his client planned to plead guilty.

The Islamic State, also known as ISIS, has not claimed responsibility for the attack. Experts note, however, that the militant group tends to do so when its loyalists are killed, and not when they are taken into custody, as was the case in Stockholm.

The statement by the Uzbek foreign minister, Abdulaziz Kamilov, was the first public indication that Mr. Akilov might have been doing the bidding of the Islamic State. Many Swedes have been asking how Mr. Akilov, who last year was denied asylum and was ordered to leave the country, managed to elude the authorities' grasp.

Mr. Kamilov said that Mr. Akilov was born in 1978 in Samarkand, in central Uzbekistan. He traveled to Stockholm in 2014 to work on construction sites.

''During the time he spent abroad, he was recruited by emissaries of international terror organization Islamic State,'' Mr. Kamilov said of Mr. Akilov. ''According to the information available, he actively encouraged his fellow nationals to travel to Syria and to fight alongside Islamic State.

''He repeatedly sent propagandist videos with terror content to his relatives and other contacts in Uzbekistan,'' Mr. Kamilov added, ''trying to induce them to commit acts of violence against representatives of public authority, leadership and law enforcement of Uzbekistan.''

Mr. Kamilov, speaking to reporters in his country's capital, Tashkent, said that ''information on unlawful acts by Rakhmat Akilov was earlier relayed through intelligence agencies to one of our Western partners for further sharing with the Swedish side.'' But he did not offer details or indicate whether the information had been given to Sweden.

Swedish officials did not appear familiar with Mr. Kamilov's assertions. ''The Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Sweden has not received any such information,'' the ministry's press office said in a statement.

Mr. Kamilov also said that Uzbekistan had opened an investigation and had charged Mr. Akilov with involving minors in antisocial behavior; manufacturing and distribution of materials posing a threat to public security; and participation in extremist, separatist and fundamentalist organizations, among other prohibited groups.

Follow Sewell Chan on Twitter @sewellchan.

Flowers left near the Ahlens department store in Stockholm on Wednesday. Four people were killed last week in the area. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FREDRIK SANDBERG/TT NEWS AGENCY, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170415ed4f0005j



BITS
Business/Financial Desk; SECT
Tech Roundup: New Zealand Looks Globally to Build Up Its Technology Industry

By PUI-WING TAM 
376 words
15 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

With so much turmoil happening around the world, at least one country appears to be building up its technology ambitions by capitalizing on those concerns.

New Zealand has been running a municipal program to draw in developers globally, including from the United States. And it has been overwhelmed by the number of responses, the New York Times reporters Jacqueline Williams and David Streitfeld write. New Zealand is suddenly attractive to many because of its remote location -- far from American politics, ISIS and ''Brexit'' -- and lower costs, among other factors.

It helps that New Zealand has already landed one big tech name. This year, Peter Thiel, the billionaire Silicon Valley investor who has been advising President Trump, was revealed to have obtained New Zealand citizenship. As part of his application, Mr. Thiel said he would help elevate the country's tech industry.

Mr. Thiel did set up a fund that made some investments in New Zealand-based tech companies, but that activity has largely diminished since.

Now, officials in New Zealand are again trying to build up its tech industry, aided by international events.

''It's boom time for the next 10 years,'' Rod Drury, the chief executive of the online accounting software firm Xero, which is based in New Zealand, said of trying to lure more coders and engineers to the country. ''We'll take a lot. We'll take hundreds.''

More tech news:

New tools are needed to track technology's impact on jobs, a panel of economists and computer scientists has concluded. The panel's recommendations include the development of an A.I. index to track the pace and spread of artificial intelligence technology. That technical assessment, they said, could then be combined with data on skills and tasks involved in various occupations to guide education and job-training programs.

G.M. is expanding it's self-driving car operations in Silicon Valley. As the race to develop the new generation of vehicles heats up, the automaker plans to hire 1,100 people and invest $14 million at a new development center in San Francisco that would spearhead its work on self-driving cars.

Document NYTF000020170415ed4f0003f



World; Asia Pacific
A Giant U.S. Bomb Carries an Even Bigger Message

By ERIC SCHMITT, HELENE COOPER and C. J. CHIVERS 
1,276 words
15 April 2017
03:13
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The bomb that the United States dropped on an Islamic State cave complex in Afghanistan on Thursday was big —t 22,000 pounds, the most powerful conventional weapon in the American arsenal. Arguably, even bigger were the messages it sent, whether by design or not.

To potential adversaries like Syria and North Korea, the bombing could signal deterrence. For the American public, it underscored the Pentagon’ more aggressive stance under President Trump than under his predecessor, whose administration never even debated using the weapon.

Dozens of militants were killed, Afghan officials said. American commanders said that the bomb was chosen because it fit the target, a series of tunnels with dug-in positions nearby used by militants in a remote part of eastern Afghanistan, and that it posed little or no risk to civilians. The bombing spared troops from fierce fighting in caves.

It also illustrated how Mr. Trump is releasing commanders from Obama-era restrictions on the use of force and how the top United States commander in Afghanistan, Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., was seeking to showcase Afghanistan’ myriad threats. General Nicholson, who has requested reinforcements to the 8,500 American troops stationed there, drew his bosses’ttention by dropping what the Pentagon has nicknamed the “other of all bombs.”

“Another promise kept,”onald J. Trump Jr., the president’ son, said on Twitter, noting his father’ campaign promise to vigorously strike the Islamic State and using an emoji of a bomb with a lit fuse.

Using the weapon, called the GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast, or MOAB, presents special challenges. It can obliterate everything within a 1,000-yard radius. The ordnance contains almost 19,000 pounds of Composition H6, an explosive compound that is roughly one-third stronger than an equivalent weight of TNT.

In Afghanistan, with its rural and agrarian economy, civilians who are engaged in food-gathering, wood-cutting, farming or tending herds are often near or beside concentrations of militants. The blast radius of an explosion of this size could pose risks to people far from the center of the target.

For that reason, President Barack Obama’ administration did not consider using the bomb, American officials said. Early in the Iraq war in April 2003, during the administration of President George W. Bush, American commanders weighed using the weapon to try to kill President Saddam Hussein, who was on the run from United States troops who had toppled his government.

But commanders discarded the option when analysts estimated that the bomb’ blast would also kill thousands of civilians. “he collateral damage would have been massive,”aid Marc Garlasco, who led a team in the military’ Joint Staff that was seeking to target Mr. Hussein.

The Afghan government said Friday that 36 militants were killed in Thursday’ blast. That number has not been independently verified, and official Afghan government casualties estimates have been unreliable in the past. Another official put the number of dead militants at more than 80.

Early reports from the area near the blast did not suggest that any civilians had been killed and said that most civilians had left the target area in recent weeks because of continuing fighting between the militants and Afghan forces and American troops.

The attack seemed to have a limited purpose and its significance seemed to be less than what was implied by news coverage that focused principally on the unusually large size of the bomb.

By comparison, under Mr. Obama, the Air Force killed more than 100 Qaeda militants in Syria in the waning hours of his presidency by dropping bombs with no memorable name from B-52 planes.

General Nicholson said Thursday’ attack was tactically necessary to defeat obstacles, hidden bombs and the dug-in positions used by the militants. “herefore, this was the appropriate weapon to use at this time,”e said.

But the Islamic State’ regional affiliate in Afghanistan, largely made up of former members of the Pakistani Taliban, numbers only some 700 fighters, compared with a peak of 2,000 to 3,000 in the spring of 2016.

The Trump administration has not publicly articulated a thorough long-term plan or endgame for the Afghan war and faces harsh circumstances in a conflict beset by starts and stops, troop commitments and withdrawals, and a series of disappointments and failures over more than a decade and a half of varied missions, priorities and even doctrines.

Many of the areas where American troops and their allies have fought hard and died in large numbers have fallen or reverted to militant control in recent years. The Afghan security forces, created with American training, money and weapons, have not lived up to the Pentagon’ promises.

The pace of airstrikes has increased, and Thursday’ bombing served as an example of a new weapon being applied to the war. But past airstrikes, while they have killed an uncountable quantity of militants, have not prevented their organizations from regrouping and refilling their ranks. And in this case, the use of the powerful bomb —hether it was seen internationally as a signal of a renewed American intention of using force —ould also be read as an option that commanders viewed as necessary because they have limited resources on the ground.

While some analysts said the bombing sent a stern symbolic message to Syria and North Korea, it has little real utility against those countries, or Iran or Russia, because it is pushed out of a lumbering cargo plane that can operate safely only over nations that have no effective air defenses or air forces.

Some critics said the bombing could send an unintended message to North Korea that may unnecessarily rattle nerves in Pyongyang at a time of high tension for no clear strategic reason, while failing to advance a long-term strategy in Afghanistan.

“et’ not confuse this tactic for a strategy,”aid Representative Seth Moulton, a Massachusetts Democrat and former Marine Corps captain who served four tours in Iraq.

At the Pentagon, military officials said that they did not need to request authorization for the strike from Mr. Trump, although three officials also acknowledged that if Mr. Obama had still been in charge, the Defense Department would probably have sent the proposal to the White House before proceeding.

But instead of the deliberative processes in place during the Obama administration that made for lengthy National Security Council staff meetings, Mr. Trump has approved allowing his commanders more authority, giving the Pentagon a rare freedom to assert its control over national security policy from a commander in chief who eschews quibbling over the details.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Mujib Mashal and Fahim Abed contributed reporting from Kabul, Afghanistan, and Michael R. Gordon from Baghdad.

* ‘other of All Bombs’illed Dozens of Militants, Afghan Officials Say

* U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs’n \b ISIS\b0  Caves in Afghanistan

The top United States commander in Afghanistan, Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., said attack with the powerful bomb was necessary to defeat obstacles, hidden bombs and the dug-in positions used by the militants. | Aref Karimi/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | The United States dropped the most powerful conventional bomb in the American arsenal on an Islamic State cave complex in Afghanistan on Thursday, the Pentagon said. Footage released by U.S. Central Command shows the moment the bomb was dropped in Achin District. | By U.S. CENTRAL COMMAND 

Document NYTFEED020170415ed4f000ul



Europe Edition
Briefing
Afghanistan, Marine Le Pen, Vin Diesel: Your Friday Briefing

By PATRICK BOEHLER 
1,278 words
14 April 2017
06:04
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•n Afghanistan, the U.S. military used its most powerful nonnuclear bomb for the first time, dropping it on an Islamic State tunnel complex.

In Syria, an airstrike by the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State killed 18 Syrian fighters allied with the United States.

_____

•he past restraint of American air power has helped Syria’ leader, Bashar al-Assad, cling to power.

But the U.S. approach has changed since the chemical weapons attack on civilians last week, and Mr. Assad has begun a counterpropaganda campaign, asserting that videos of victims, including dead and convulsing children, had been faked.

Our analyst looks at the forces prompting Mr. Assad to use chemical weapons.

_____

•n Turkey, some opinion polls this week show a slim majority of voters favor expanding President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’ powers in Sunday’ referendum. To Mr. Erdogan, the answer to all the country’ economic, military and political challenges appears to be an expansion of his mandate.

We asked Turkish overseas voters how they felt about the proposed changes. Their responses varied, but tying them together was a deep sense of concern about the country’ future.

Meanwhile, life in the fragile democracy is becoming stranger, as a purge of people suspected of supporting a coup has turned Orwellian.

_____

•nited Nations experts demanded that the Russian region of Chechnya halt the abduction and killing of gay and bisexual men, after reports about violent repression there.

Above, a demonstration outside the Russian Embassy in London.

Separately, the European Court of Human Rightsfaulted Russia for its handling of the 2004 school siege in the North Caucasus town of Beslan, which resulted in the deaths of more than 330 hostages.

_____

•ith France’ presidential election little more than a week away, Facebook said it shut down 30,000 accounts to rein in the spread of misinformation on the social media platform. Polls predict a tight race.

Marine Le Pen of the National Front remains a front-runner, in part thanks to her efforts to distance her far-right party from its anti-Semitic past. But associates and court documents raise fresh doubts about the sincerity of her efforts.

_____

•ood news, far away: Scientists say they may have found the conditions for life in the icy moons of the outer solar system.

Data collected by NASA’ Cassini spacecraft suggests that moons like Saturn’ Enceladus may allow hydrothermal chemical reactions that can give rise to microbial life.

_____

Business

•Silvio Berlusconi, the former Italian prime minister, sold A.C. Milan, a seven-time European soccer champion, to a Chinese businessman for 740 million euros. The team is set to take on Inter Milan, the city’ other Chinese-owned team, tomorrow.

•n Wall Street, it’ “harging Bull”ersus “earless Girl.” The Italian-born sculptor who made the bull nearly 30 years ago says the statue of the defiant girl is an insult to his work. Supporters of the defiant girl are, well, standing firm.

•amage control: Bill O’eilly left Fox News for vacation while Rupert Murdoch and his sons deal with the fallout from sexual harassment accusations against their star.

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•erman prosecutors said they had insufficient evidence to link an Iraqi man they had arrested to the explosions in Dortmund on Tuesday but sought to keep holding him on suspicion of ties to the Islamic State. [The New York Times]

•t least 97 African migrants were believed to have drowned after their Europe-bound boat sank in the Mediterranean Sea, the Libyan Coast Guard said. [Associated Press]

•ussia said it would not participate in the Eurovision Song Contest in Ukraine in May after Kiev barred the Russian contestant from entering the country. [The Guardian]

•wo lost front teeth and a broken nose: Those were among the injuries to the passenger who was dragged off a United Airlines plane last weekend, his lawyer said. [The New York Times]

•ike Pompeo, the C.I.A. director who once applauded disclosures by WikiLeaks, called the group a “ostile intelligence service.”The New York Times]

•Canada’ government introduced a bill, which is expected to pass, that would make it the second country to completely legalize marijuana. [The New York Times]

•ess than a year after one of the strongest El Niñs on record, forecasters see an increasing possibility that another may begin later this year. [The New York Times]

Smarter Living

•ow the grain in your cereal is processed makes a big difference in your body’ performance throughout the day.

•ave time at the gym by learning all about really, really short workouts.

•ecipe of the day: Roast a whole head of cauliflower and serve it with a rich romesco sauce.

Noteworthy

•hat’ it like to be a female fan of horror? “ believe it was a man’ world one time in horror,”said one horror convention attendee. “ do not believe that anymore.”

•ere’ our review of the latest installment of “he Fast and the Furious,”which opened in cinemas across Europe this week. And we sat down with Vin Diesel, the former bouncer who became the franchise’ improbable hero.

•ow dare you! Our article exploring London’ future after “rexit”generated a spirited trans-Atlantic discussion.

•nd the revival of Beaujolais might be one of the most inspiring wine stories of the last decade.

Back Story

Over a dinner of crayfish in Stockholm in 1924, two men decided that Sweden needed its own car manufacturer, one that made vehicles suitable for the harsh local climate and whose guiding principle was safety.

From their idea came Volvo — Latin translation of “ roll”—hich rolled its first car off the assembly line 90 years ago today. The car, an Ö 4, was affectionately called “akob.”

The Swedes were hardly the first to produce automobiles; people like Karl Benz and Henry Ford had already been at it for decades.

In 1999, Ford Motor bought Volvo, which was later sold in 2010 to Geely, a Chinese automaker, for $1.3 billion.

For the new owner, buying Volvo was momentous: “e are like a poor farm boy pursuing a famous movie star,”Li Shufu, Geely’ chairman, said.

By the end of next year, the company, which is still based in Sweden and owned by a Chinese conglomerate, says it will be producing up to 100,000 cars a year in South Carolina.

It’ a head-spinning tale of globalization that started over a humble meal almost a century ago.

_____

This briefing was prepared for the European morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.

Agence France-Presse —etty Images | VII for The New York Times | Thomas Hornall/Press Association, via Associated Press | Gabriel Bouys/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | NASA/JPL-Caltech/Space Science Institute | Livio Anticoli/ANSA, via Associated Press | Martin Meissner/Associated Press | David Duprey/Associated Press | Maddie McGarvey for The New York Times | Stan Wayman/LIFE Picture Collection, via Getty Images | The United States dropped the most powerful nonnuclear bomb in its arsenal on what it said was an ISIS cave complex in remote Afghanistan. The bomb —alled the GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast —an obliterate everything within a 1,000-yard radius. | By THE NEW YORK TIMES 

Document NYTFEED020170414ed4e001jl



Foreign Desk; SECTA
A Giant U.S. Bomb Strikes  ISIS  Caves in Afghanistan

By HELENE COOPER and MUJIB MASHAL; Helene Cooper reported from Washington, and Mujib Mashal from Kabul, Afghanistan. Zahra Nader and Fahim Abid contributed reporting from Kabul. 
1,462 words
14 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

CORRECTION APPENDEDWASHINGTON -- The United States dropped the ''mother of all bombs'' -- the most powerful conventional bomb in the American arsenal -- on an Islamic State cave complex in Afghanistan on Thursday, the Pentagon said, unleashing a weapon so massive that it had to be dropped from the rear of a cargo plane.

The strike was the first combat use of what is formally named the GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast. President Trump has bestowed additional authority on the Pentagon in his first months in office, which the military has argued will help it defeat the Islamic State more speedily. Mr. Trump did not say whether he had personally approved Thursday's mission.

''What I do is I authorize my military,'' Mr. Trump said after a meeting with emergency workers at the White House. He called the bombing ''another very, very successful mission.''

The Pentagon gave no casualty totals for the bombing, part of an intense air campaign against the militant group in Afghanistan. But in a separate announcement, the Pentagon said that an airstrike in Syria by the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State there had killed 18 Syrian fighters allied with the United States, raising concerns about whether the White House is applying any rigor to the process of approving airstrikes in hot spots from Afghanistan to Syria.

The Syria strike -- on Tuesday near the town of Tabqah, which Syrian fighters and American advisers are trying to capture -- was the third American-led airstrike in a month that may have killed civilians or allies. Earlier bombing runs killed or wounded scores of civilians in a mosque complex in Syria and in a building in the west of Mosul, Iraq.

''We have the greatest military in the world,'' Mr. Trump said. ''We have given them total authorization, and that's what they're doing, and frankly, that's why they've been so successful lately.''

American commanders in Iraq and Syria have been given more authority to call in strikes, a loosening of the reins that began in the last month of the Obama administration. But some national security experts said that Mr. Trump and the Pentagon risked inflaming anti-American sentiment in the Muslim world with their approach to fighting the Islamic State.

The number of civilian casualties reported in American-led strikes in Iraq and Syria has increased since Mr. Trump took office, and March was the deadliest month for civilians ever recorded by Airwars, a group that tracks bombings. Reports of civilian casualties in Iraq and Syria jumped to 3,471 from 1,782 the month before, the group said.

American officials have attributed the rising number of strikes and the increased danger to civilians to the fact that the fight is moving to the densely populated urban battlefields of Mosul and Raqqa, the Islamic State's self-proclaimed capital in Syria. They say they try to avoid civilian casualties, while the militants deliberately kill anyone who stands in their way.

In addition to the greater leeway granted to commanders in Iraq and Syria, Mr. Trump has relaxed some of the rules for preventing civilian casualties when the military carries out counterterrorism strikes in Somalia and Yemen.

''Trump has ceded responsibilities to his military commanders, and it appears he's paying little attention to operational details,'' said Derek Chollet, who was the assistant secretary of defense for international affairs in the Obama administration.

''Here's the question,'' Mr. Chollet added. ''Trump takes great pride in his authorizing the military when things go well, but one wonders if he'll have the same sense of shared accountability when things go wrong, as they inevitably do.''

Thursday's strike in Afghanistan -- using a 20,000-pound weapon that costs an estimated $170,000 per bomb, according to the Air Force -- hit a tunnel complex in the Achin district of Nangarhar Province, according to a statement from the United States military in Afghanistan. The statement did not say how many militants were killed, or whether the bombing caused any civilian casualties.

The weapon is so big that, while the cargo plane is in the air, the bomb rolls out of the rear on a pallet, pulled by a drogue parachute. It is designed to destroy tunnels and other underground facilities, and its blast radius is estimated to stretch a mile in every direction.

The strike against tunnels and caves reflects the ever-changing nature of the war in Afghanistan, now in its 15th year.

During the years of intense fighting in Afghanistan, the United States dropped a handful of similar bombs to destroy caves believed to be used by the Taliban and Al Qaeda, as well as to frighten troops dug into trenches who were not immediately killed. The military offered a similar rationale on Thursday for using the bomb -- a successor to the ''daisy cutter,'' a heavy bomb designed for the instant clearing of large sections of jungle in Vietnam.

Islamic State fighters in Afghanistan ''are using I.E.D.s, bunkers and tunnels to thicken their defense,'' said Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., the United States commander there, referring to improvised explosive devices. ''This is the right munition to reduce these obstacles and maintain the momentum of our offensive.''

Afghan security officials said their ground forces had advanced on the Tangi Asadkhel area of Achin but met firm resistance from Islamic State militants who were launching attacks from six mountainside tunnels. The Afghan forces retreated and asked for airstrikes.

''The ground forces could not do it, so the Americans bombed the area,'' said Gen. Dawlat Waziri, a spokesman for the Afghan Ministry of Defense.

The Afghan government was kept ''in the loop'' about the bombing, said Shahhussain Murtazawi, a spokesman for the president.

While the damage from the bombing, which occurred at night in a remote area, was unclear, the strike quickly brought backlash. Hamid Karzai, Afghanistan's former president, was among those who condemned it.

''This is not the war on terror but the inhuman and most brutal misuse of our country as testing ground for new and dangerous weapons,'' Mr. Karzai wrote on Twitter. ''It is upon us, Afghans, to stop the USA.''

Jon B. Alterman, director of the Middle East Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said the Pentagon was being given leeway to carry out strategy without being told what, exactly, the overarching strategy is. ''What they haven't been given is a lot of strategic guidance to work with,'' he said. ''They can affect things, but without a guiding strategy, it's hard to be sure you're having the desired effect.''

Tuesday's strike in Syria was requested by coalition allies on the ground near Tabqah, according to the United States Central Command, which oversees combat operations in the Middle East. The fighters had ''identified the target location as an ISIS fighting position,'' it said in a statement, using another name for the Islamic State.

The military said the target location turned out to be a ''fighting position'' for the Syrian Democratic Forces, who have been fighting the Islamic State alongside the United States.

''The coalition's deepest condolences go out to the members of the S.D.F. and their families,'' Central Command said in the statement, calling the episode ''tragic.'' Military officials said the cause was being investigated.

But the increased casualties in Syria ''cannot be explained away simply by the increased tempo of the war,'' said Chris Woods, director of Airwars.

He noted that the number of airstrikes and targets hit actually fell slightly in March, but said his group's research indicated that civilian deaths had risen sixfold in Syria, with more than 350 killed last month alone.

''This indicates to us a possible loosening of U.S. battlefield rules,'' he said, ''which is placing civilians at greater risk of harm.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Correction: April 19, 2017, Wednesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Friday about a massive bomb dropped on an Islamic State cave complex in Afghanistan misstated the cost of the weapon used in the attack. The bomb costs an estimated $170,000 per weapon, according to the Air Force, not $16 million.

Follow Helene Cooper @helenecooper and Mujib Mashal @MujMash on Twitter.

The GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast is the most powerful conventional bomb in the American arsenal. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE, VIA EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) MAPS (A6) 

Document NYTF000020170419ed4e0000n



world
A Giant U.S. Bomb Carries an Even Bigger Message

By ERIC SCHMITT, HELENE COOPER and C. J. CHIVERS 
1,207 words
14 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —he bomb that the United States dropped on an Islamic State cave complex in Afghanistan on Thursday was big —t 22,000 pounds, the most powerful conventional weapon in the American arsenal. Arguably, even bigger were the messages it sent, whether by design or not.

To potential adversaries like Syria and North Korea, the bombing could signal deterrence. For the American public, it underscored the Pentagon’ more aggressive stance under President Trump than under his predecessor, whose administration never even debated using the weapon.

Dozens of militants were killed, Afghan officials said. American commanders said that the bomb was chosen because it fit the target, a series of tunnels with dug-in positions nearby used by militants in a remote part of eastern Afghanistan, and that it posed little or no risk to civilians. The bombing spared troops from fierce fighting in caves.

It also illustrated how Mr. Trump is releasing commanders from Obama-era restrictions on the use of force and how the top United States commander in Afghanistan, Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., was seeking to showcase Afghanistan’ myriad threats. General Nicholson, who has requested reinforcements to the 8,500 American troops stationed there, drew his bosses’ttention by dropping what the Pentagon has nicknamed the “other of all bombs.”

“Another promise kept,”Donald J. Trump Jr., the president’ son, said on Twitter, noting his father’ campaign promise to vigorously strike the Islamic State and using an emoji of a bomb with a lit fuse.

Using the weapon, called the GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast, or MOAB, presents special challenges. It can obliterate everything within a 1,000-yard radius. The ordnance contains almost 19,000 pounds of Composition H6, an explosive compound that is roughly one-third stronger than an equivalent weight of TNT.

In Afghanistan, with its rural and agrarian economy, civilians who are engaged in food-gathering, woodcutting, farming or tending herds are often near or beside concentrations of militants. The blast radius of an explosion of this size could pose risks to people far from the center of the target.

For that reason, President Barack Obama’ administration did not consider using the bomb, American officials said. Early in the Iraq war in April 2003, during the administration of President George W. Bush, American commanders weighed using the weapon to try to kill President Saddam Hussein, who was on the run from United States troops who had toppled his government.

But commanders discarded the option when analysts estimated that the bomb’ blast would also kill thousands of civilians. “he collateral damage would have been massive,”aid Marc Garlasco, who led a team in the military’ Joint Staff that was seeking to target Mr. Hussein.

The Afghan government said Friday that 36 militants were killed in Thursday’ blast. That number has not been independently verified, and official Afghan government casualties estimates have been unreliable in the past. Another official put the number of dead militants at more than 80.

Early reports from the area near the blast did not suggest that any civilians had been killed and said that most civilians had left the target area in recent weeks because of continuing fighting between the militants and Afghan forces and American troops.

The attack seemed to have a limited purpose and to be less significant than implied by the news coverage that focused principally on the unusually large size of the bomb.

By comparison, under Mr. Obama, the Air Force killed more than 100 Qaeda militants in Syria in the waning hours of his presidency by dropping bombs with no memorable name from B-52 planes.

General Nicholson said Thursday’ attack was tactically necessary to defeat obstacles, hidden bombs and the dug-in positions used by the militants. “herefore, this was the appropriate weapon to use at this time,”e said.

But the Islamic State’ regional affiliate in Afghanistan, largely made up of former members of the Pakistani Taliban, numbers only some 700 fighters, compared with a peak of 2,000 to 3,000 in the spring of 2016.

The Trump administration has not publicly articulated a thorough long-term plan or endgame for the Afghan war and faces harsh circumstances in a conflict beset by starts and stops, troop commitments and withdrawals, and a series of disappointments and failures over more than a decade and a half of varied missions, priorities and even doctrines.

Many of the areas where American troops and their allies have fought hard and died in large numbers have fallen or reverted to militant control in recent years. The Afghan security forces, created with American training, money and weapons, have not lived up to the Pentagon’ promises.

The pace of airstrikes has increased, and Thursday’ bombing served as an example of a new weapon being applied to the war. But past airstrikes, while they have killed an uncountable quantity of militants, have not prevented their organizations from regrouping and refilling their ranks. And in this case, the use of the powerful bomb —hether it was seen internationally as a signal of a renewed American intention of using force —ould also be read as an option that commanders viewed as necessary because they have limited resources on the ground.

While some analysts said the bombing sent a stern symbolic message to Syria and North Korea, it has little real utility against those countries, or Iran or Russia, because it is pushed out of a lumbering cargo plane that can operate safely only over nations that have no effective air defenses or air forces.

Some critics said the bombing could send an unintended message to North Korea that may unnecessarily rattle nerves in Pyongyang at a time of high tension for no clear strategic reason, while failing to advance a long-term strategy in Afghanistan.

“et’ not confuse this tactic for a strategy,”aid Representative Seth Moulton, a Massachusetts Democrat and former Marine Corps captain who served four tours in Iraq.

At the Pentagon, military officials said that they did not need to request authorization for the strike from Mr. Trump, although three officials also acknowledged that if Mr. Obama had still been in charge, the Defense Department would probably have sent the proposal to the White House before proceeding.

But instead of the deliberative processes in place during the Obama administration that made for lengthy National Security Council staff meetings, Mr. Trump has approved allowing his commanders more authority, giving the Pentagon a rare freedom to assert its control over national security policy from a commander in chief who eschews quibbling over the details.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Eric Schmitt and Helene Cooper reported from Washington. Mujib Mashal and Fahim Abed contributed reporting from Kabul, Afghanistan, and Michael R. Gordon from Baghdad.

PHOTO: Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr. said the attack was necessary. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MASSOUD HOSSAINI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

* ‘other of All Bombs’illed Dozens of Militants, Afghan Officials Say

* U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs’n \b ISIS\b0  Caves in Afghanistan

Document INHT000020170416ed4e00005



Op-Ed Contributor
Opinion
Sound and Fury

By MAX BOOT 
1,006 words
14 April 2017
22:02
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

When I read of the United States forces’ropping of the second-largest non-nuclear explosive in their arsenal —he 21,000-pound GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast (MOAB) —n eastern Afghanistan, I am reminded of what John Paul Vann, the legendary Army officer and civilian adviser during the Vietnam War, said about the right way to fight guerrillas: “his is a political war, and it calls for discrimination in killing. The best weapon for killing would be a knife, but I’ afraid we can’ do it that way. The worst is an airplane. The next worse is artillery. Barring a knife, the best is a rifle —ou know who you’e killing.”n Israeli general made a similar point to me after the defeat of the second intifada, saying, “etter to fight terror with an M-16 rather than an F-16.”

What they were saying, these veteran counterguerrilla fighters, is that war requires careful calibration in the application of violence, lest excessive firepower kill lots of innocents and drive more recruits into the enemy’ camp. That is precisely the problem that United States forces (and before them, the French) encountered in Vietnam and the Russians encountered in Afghanistan.

There is, to be sure, no evidence of any collateral damage from the use of the “other of all bombs”n Afghanistan. Preliminary reporting indicates that the bomb may have killed 36 Islamic State militants and collapsed some tunnel networks. These are results to be cheered. And if North Korea or Iran is intimidated by this staggering display of firepower, so much the better.

But while it makes sense to loosen the overly restrictive rules of engagement imposed by the Obama administration, doing so carries risks. A reminder of that came in Syria, where a recent United States airstrike mistakenly killed 18 friendly Syrian fighters. This is not an anomaly; as my Council on Foreign Relations colleague, Micah Zenko, notes, both American airstrikes and civilian casualties have increased since the Trump administration took office.

President Trump, who campaigned on a promise to “bomb the shit”ut of the Islamic State militants, will not be concerned about this; indeed, he said that the use of the MOAB was a “ery, very successful mission,”nd he is probably right, in the narrow tactical sense. But for the bigger strategic picture he would be well-advised to read the 2006 United States Army-Marine Corps Counterinsurgency Field Manual, co-authored by his own secretary of defense, which states: “n operation that kills five insurgents is counterproductive if collateral damage leads to the recruitment of 50 more insurgents.”

Beyond the possibility of collateral damage, there is a larger reason the use of the MOAB in Afghanistan should not be a cause for high-fives and unseemly celebration: It is a sign that the war in Afghanistan is not going well. The kind of war that Vann envisioned —mploying small arms —s only possible if the threat is below a certain threshold. When the enemy becomes too powerful, as it did in Vietnam, then it becomes necessary to call in air and artillery strikes. That was not a sign of progress; it was a sign, in fact, that the security situation was spiraling out of control.

The situation in Afghanistan is, needless to say, not nearly as bad as it was in Vietnam during the 1960s. The Taliban are no Vietcong, and they are not supported by regular army units like the People’ Army of Vietnam. But nevertheless the trajectory in Afghanistan has been headed in the wrong direction since President Obama prematurely ended his surge and withdrew most American troops by 2016.

Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., commander of the international military force in Afghanistan, noted in early February that the government is in control of only about two-thirds of the population. As the terrorism analyst Peter Bergenpoints out, this means that the Taliban either “ontrol or contest”“ total of around 10 million people, which is more than the population that ISIS controlled in Syria and Iraq at the height of its power during the summer of 2014.”

The Taliban are bad enough. Just as worrisome is that the Islamic State is also making inroads in eastern Afghanistan. Indeed, the Islamic State is by now so well-established that the Afghan Army was unable to advance into its stronghold in the Achin district of Nangarhar Province. Hence the decision to drop the MOAB. But, as Mr. Bergen says, in 2001 the United States dropped 15,000-pound “aisy Cutter”ombs on the nearby Tora Bora complex and still failed to kill Osama bin Laden and other senior leaders of Al Qaeda. Such enormous munitions may make a big blast, but they are not guaranteed to wipe out enemy fighters burrowing deep underground. And even if they kill insurgents, they will not kill the insurgency.

Victory in any counterinsurgency requires improving the effectiveness of the government and bringing 24/7 security to the countryside. In the case of Afghanistan, it is simply not possible to achieve those objectives with only 8,500 United States troops assisting the embattled Afghan security forces, which are suffering heavy casualties and losing ground. General Nicholson asked for a “ew thousand”ore advisers, and if the Trump administration wants to maintain even the existing, tenuous level of security, it will have to, at a minimum, meet his request. Bombs alone, no matter how big, won’ get the job done.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Max Boot (@MaxBoot) is a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations and author of the forthcoming “he Road Not Taken: Edward Lansdale and the American Tragedy in Vietnam.”

Afghan security forces in the Achin district on Friday, a day after the United States dropped a Massive Ordnance Air Blast in the area. | Rahmat Gul/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170414ed4e006va



World; Asia Pacific
‘other of All Bombs’illed Dozens of Militants, Afghan Officials Say

By MUJIB MASHAL and FAHIM ABED 
1,385 words
14 April 2017
11:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan — day after the United States military dropped its most powerful conventional bomb on caves used by Islamic State affiliates in eastern Afghanistan, officials said on Friday that dozens of militants had been killed, but that they were still trying to assess the full extent of the damage. Residents said the blast had been felt tens of miles away.

The strike on Thursday targeted a set of mountain tunnels in the Achin district, a stronghold of the Islamic State’ regional affiliate, and it was the first use in combat of the GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast, referred to as the “other of all bombs.”he bombing was part of an intense air campaign against the Islamic State, with American airstrikes in Afghanistan averaging as many as 10 a day in the first two weeks of April.

Gen. Dawlat Waziri, a spokesman for the Afghan Defense Ministry, said initial information indicated that 36 militants had been killed and three large caves destroyed in the bombing in Nangarhar Province. However, Attaullah Khogyani, a spokesman for the provincial governor’ office, said 82 militants had been killed.

Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., the commander of American and NATO forces in Afghanistan, said on Friday at a news conference in Kabul, the capital, that the Islamic State was using caves, tunnels and “n extensive belt of improvised explosive devices,”r roadside bombs, to resist Afghan and coalition operations.

The general said that he had been in constant touch with his chain of command, but that the decision to deploy such force was shaped by the battlefield realities and not by outside political factors. President Trump has given additional authority to military commanders since taking office, but he has not said whether he personally approved Thursday’ bombing mission.

“his is the first time we have encountered an extensive obstacle to our progress that was constituted by I.E.D.s, the presence of tunnels and caves, and therefore this was the appropriate weapon to use at this time,”eneral Nicholson said. “t was the right time to use it tactically against the right target on the battlefield, and it has enabled us to resume our offensive operations.”

Local officials in Achin said that Afghan commandos were advancing on the area and that smaller airstrikes had continued Friday morning.

“.S. forces are providing air support and also support on the ground —here are some U.S. advisers with Afghan forces,”aid Ismail Shinwari, the district governor of Achin.

Ahmad Jawid Salim, a spokesman for the Afghan Army commandos, said that the operation in Achin had been underway for 45 days but that progress had stalled in the Tangi Assadkhel area of the district, where the bomb was dropped. On Sunday, an American special forces soldier, Staff Sgt. Mark R. De Alencar, 37, was killed near there.

“ur foreign counterparts used all available weapons”o destroy the Islamic State havens in Tangi Assadkhel, Mr. Salim said. “ut because the posts and havens of I.S. were very strong, it was decided to use this big bomb.”

Mr. Salim said that the Afghan commandos were given notice that the bomb would be used and that they pulled back about two miles before it was dropped. “e were getting reports minute by minute, and we were aware that the bomb would drop in 30 and then 20 seconds,”e said.

There were no initial reports of civilian casualties from the explosion, and Afghan and American military officials said that precautions had been taken to avoid harming noncombatants. Most civilians in Achin have been displaced since 2015, when the Islamic State turned the district into a stronghold.

Mr. Salim said that there had been only one civilian family in Tangi Assadkhel, and that it had been evacuated before the strike.

But Malik Kamin, a tribal elder from the nearby area of Shadal Bazaar, said some civilians had been in Tangi Assadkhel when the bomb fell. He said commandos who went in after the bomb was dropped had found two disabled women and an elderly man there and brought them to Shadal Bazaar.

General Nicholson said there were no indications that civilians had been wounded or killed. There was “urveillance over the area before, during and after the operation, and now we have Afghan and U.S. forces on the site and see no evidence of civilian casualties,”e said at the news conference.

The bomb, which was dropped from a cargo plane, weighed about 10 tons, and its force was felt across Achin and even in neighboring districts.

One tribal elder who lives less than two miles from Tangi Assadkhel said the blast was so strong that residents of his village thought that it had been the target. Shrapnel and rocks as heavy as five pounds fell on his house, he said. A resident of the nearby Pekhe area said four houses there, about three miles from the blast site, had been destroyed.

Both residents spoke on the condition of anonymity, fearing retaliation if the Islamic State found its way back to their area.

Haji Ghalib, governor of Bati Kot, a district about 20 miles from Achin, said he had felt the blast there. “eople in other districts also felt it,”e said. “rom check posts in Achin some guys called me, and they were asking, ‘hat was that?’t was very big —or a moment, big flames were rising from the mountain, the whole area was bright.”

The Islamic State’ regional affiliate in Afghanistan, largely made of former members of the Pakistani Taliban, was rapidly expanding in eastern Afghanistan during much of 2015 and 2016. In March 2016, American military officials estimated that the group had 2,000 to 3,000 fighters across 11 districts.

After multiple operations and extensive airstrikes, that number has been reduced to about 700 fighters across three districts, officials say. The efforts involved several ground operations by Afghan soldiers and commandos advised by American military special forces. But they were also accompanied by an intense air campaign that included B-52 bombers last year, staples of the early part of the war that had not been used for many years.

The Islamic State has claimed responsibility for several suicide bombings in urban centers, most recently at the gates of the presidential palace in Kabul on Wednesday, an attack that killed at least five people.

In the past, urban attacks were often the work of the Haqqani network, a brutal arm of the Taliban. In a sign of the complexity of the war, Afghan and American officials have expressed concern that there might be an overlap in the enabling networks used by the Haqqani group and the Islamic State for bombings in cities.

“ne of the things we are concerned about, and the reason we think the entire world needs to be focused on Afghanistan, is the potential for convergence among the various terrorist groups in this area,”eneral Nicholson said.

Some of the tunnels and caves in the complex bombed on Thursday dated from the fight against the British Empire, said Mr. Ghalib, the Bati Kot district governor, who was Achin’ governor for years. More tunnels were added during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, and still more by the Islamic State.

Zahra Nader contributed reporting from Kabul, and Helene Cooper from Washington.

* American Soldier Is Killed in Afghanistan

Afghan special forces in the Achin district of eastern Afghanistan on Friday, a day after the United States dropped the most powerful conventional bomb in its arsenal on an Islamic State cave complex. | Parwiz/Reuters | The United States dropped the most powerful conventional bomb in the American arsenal on an Islamic State cave complex in Afghanistan on Thursday, the Pentagon said. Footage released by U.S. Central Command shows the moment the bomb was dropped in Achin District. | By U.S. CENTRAL COMMAND | The United States dropped the most powerful nonnuclear bomb in its arsenal on what it said was an ISIS cave complex in remote Afghanistan. The bomb —alled the GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast —an obliterate everything within a 1,000-yard radius. | By THE NEW YORK TIMES 

Document NYTFEED020170414ed4e002jp



World; Europe
Suspect in Stockholm Attack Was an  ISIS  Recruit, Uzbek Official Says

By SEWELL CHAN 
582 words
14 April 2017
13:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON —he Uzbek man who is suspected of steering a hijacked beer truck into a crowd of shoppers in central Stockholm last week had been recruited by the Islamic State, and had encouraged other Uzbeks to travel to Syria to fight for the militant group, Uzbekistan’ foreign minister said on Friday.

The suspect, Rakhmat Akilov, 39, was arrested a few hours after the April 7 attack that left four people dead and 15 others wounded. It was Sweden’ worst terrorist assault in decades. At a court hearing on Tuesday, Mr. Akilov’ court-appointed lawyer said that his client planned to plead guilty.

The Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0 , has not claimed responsibility for the attack. Experts note, however, that the militant group tends to do so when its loyalists are killed, and not when they are taken into custody, as was the case in Stockholm.

The statement by the Uzbek foreign minister, Abdulaziz Kamilov, was the first public indication that Mr. Akilov might have been doing the bidding of the Islamic State. Many Swedes have been asking how Mr. Akilov, who last year was denied asylum and was ordered to leave the country, managed to elude the authorities’rasp.

Mr. Kamilov said that Mr. Akilov was born in 1978 in Samarkand, in central Uzbekistan. He traveled to Stockholm in 2014 to work on construction sites.

“uring the time he spent abroad, he was recruited by emissaries of international terror organization Islamic State,”r. Kamilov said of Mr. Akilov. “ccording to the information available, he actively encouraged his fellow nationals to travel to Syria and to fight alongside Islamic State.

“e repeatedly sent propagandist videos with terror content to his relatives and other contacts in Uzbekistan,”r. Kamilov added, “rying to induce them to commit acts of violence against representatives of public authority, leadership and law enforcement of Uzbekistan.”

Mr. Kamilov, speaking to reporters in his country’ capital, Tashkent, said that “nformation on unlawful acts by Rakhmat Akilov was earlier relayed through intelligence agencies to one of our Western partners for further sharing with the Swedish side.”ut he did not offer details or indicate whether the information had been given to Sweden.

Swedish officials did not appear familiar with Mr. Kamilov’ assertions. “he Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Sweden has not received any such information,”he ministry’ press office said in a statement.

Mr. Kamilov also said that Uzbekistan had opened an investigation and had charged Mr. Akilov with involving minors in antisocial behavior; manufacturing and distribution of materials posing a threat to public security; and participation in extremist, separatist and fundamentalist organizations, among other prohibited groups.

Follow Sewell Chan on Twitter @sewellchan.Oleg Matsnev contributed reporting from Moscow.

* Stockholm Attack Suspect Will Plead Guilty, His Lawyer Says

* Sweden Mourns Stockholm Attack Victims; Suspect Is Formally Identified

* Stockholm Suspect Was Denied Asylum and Told to Leave in ’6

* Arrest in Stockholm Truck Attack: ‘e Think He Is the Driver’

* Stockholm Truck Attack Kills 4; Terrorism Is Suspected

Flowers left near the Ahlens department store in central Stockholm on Wednesday. | Fredrik Sandberg/TT News Agency, via Associated Press | Rakhmat Akilov | Swedish Police, via TT News Agency | In response to the terrorist attack in central Sweden last week, thousands came out on Sunday to honor the victims with a message for peace. | By MARTIN EDSTRÖ, VEDA SHASTRI and TIM CHAFFEE 

Document NYTFEED020170414ed4e0030f



Foreign Desk; SECT
18 Syrian Fighters Allied With U.S. Are Killed in Coalition Airstrike

By HELENE COOPER 
433 words
14 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- An airstrike by the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State killed 18 Syrian fighters allied with the United States, the military said on Thursday.

The strike, on Tuesday in Tabqah, Syria, was the third time in a month that American-led airstrikes may have killed civilians or allies, and it comes even as the Pentagon is investigating two previous airstrikes that killed or wounded scores of civilians in a mosque complex in Syria and in a building in the west of Mosul, Iraq.

Tuesday's strike was requested by coalition allies who were on the ground near Tabqah, the United States Central Command, which oversees combat operations in the Middle East, said in a statement. The fighters had called in the airstrikes and ''identified the target location as an ISIS fighting position,'' it said, using another name for the Islamic State.

The Central Command statement said that the target location turned out to be a ''fighting position'' for the Syrian Democratic Forces, who have been fighting the Islamic State alongside the United States.

It was unclear whether the strike came from an American warplane or one from the other coalition partners.

''The coalition's deepest condolences go out to the members of the S.D.F. and their families,'' Central Command said in the statement, calling the episode ''tragic.'' Military officials said the cause is being investigated.

As the American-led military campaigns against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria have intensified in recent months, so, too, have reports of civilian casualties and, now, friendly fire.

Military officials say that is to be expected as Iraqi forces try to retake Mosul in what is seen as the last big urban hurdle to defeating the extremist Sunni militant group in Iraq, and while forces allied with the United States are moving in on the group's de facto capital of Raqqa, in Syria.

President Trump has indicated that unlike President Barack Obama, who had his White House scrutinize many military operations, he will leave more operational decision-making to the Pentagon and to American commanders in the field.

That move has been welcomed by many in the military, who often expressed frustration at what they saw as a cumbersome decision-making process in Mr. Obama's White House. But it has raised questions about whether Mr. Trump is exercising sufficient oversight.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Helene Cooper on Twitter @helenecooper .

Document NYTF000020170414ed4e0005i



World; Asia Pacific
U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs’n  ISIS  Caves in Afghanistan

By HELENE COOPER and MUJIB MASHAL 
1,591 words
13 April 2017
20:32
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

WASHINGTON —he United States dropped the “other of all bombs”—he most powerful conventional bomb in the American arsenal —n an Islamic State cave complex in Afghanistan on Thursday, the Pentagon said, unleashing a weapon so massive that it had to be dropped from the rear of a cargo plane.

The strike was the first combat use of what is formally named the GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast. President Trump has bestowed additional authority on the Pentagon in his first months in office, which the military has argued will help it defeat the Islamic State more speedily. Mr. Trump did not say whether he had personally approved Thursday’ mission.

“hat I do is I authorize my military,”r. Trump said after a meeting with emergency workers at the White House. He called the bombing “nother very, very successful mission.”

The Pentagon gave no casualty totals for the bombing, part of an intense air campaign against the militant group in Afghanistan. But in a separate announcement, the Pentagon said that an airstrike in Syria by the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State there had killed 18 Syrian fighters allied with the United States, raising concerns about whether the White House is applying any rigor to the process of approving airstrikes in hot spots from Afghanistan to Syria.

The Syria strike —n Tuesday near the town of Tabqah, which Syrian fighters and American advisers are trying to capture —as the third American-led airstrike in a month that may have killed civilians or allies. Earlier bombing runs killed or wounded scores of civilians in a mosque complex in Syria and in a building in the west of Mosul, Iraq.

“e have the greatest military in the world,”r. Trump said. “e have given them total authorization, and that’ what they’e doing, and frankly, that’ why they’e been so successful lately.”

American commanders in Iraq and Syria have been given more authority to call in strikes, a loosening of the reins that began in the last month of the Obama administration. But some national security experts said that Mr. Trump and the Pentagon risked inflaming anti-American sentiment in the Muslim world with their approach to fighting the Islamic State.

The number of civilian casualties reported in American-led strikes in Iraq and Syria has increased since Mr. Trump took office, and March was the deadliest month for civilians ever recorded by Airwars, a group that tracks bombings. Reports of civilian casualties in Iraq and Syria jumped to 3,471 from 1,782 the month before, the group said.

American officials have attributed the rising number of strikes and the increased danger to civilians to the fact that the fight is moving to the densely populated urban battlefields of Mosul and Raqqa, the Islamic State’ self-proclaimed capital in Syria. They say they try to avoid civilian casualties, while the militants deliberately kill anyone who stands in their way.

In addition to the greater leeway granted to commanders in Iraq and Syria, Mr. Trump has relaxed some of the rules for preventing civilian casualties when the military carries out counterterrorism strikes in Somalia and Yemen.

“rump has ceded responsibilities to his military commanders, and it appears he’ paying little attention to operational details,”aid Derek Chollet, who was the assistant secretary of defense for international affairs in the Obama administration.

“ere’ the question,”r. Chollet added. “rump takes great pride in his authorizing the military when things go well, but one wonders if he’l have the same sense of shared accountability when things go wrong, as they inevitably do.”

Thursday’ strike in Afghanistan —sing a 20,000-pound weapon that costs an estimated $170,000 per bomb, according to the Air Force —it a tunnel complex in the Achin district of Nangarhar Province, according to a statement from the United States military in Afghanistan. The statement did not say how many militants were killed, or whether the bombing caused any civilian casualties.

The weapon is so big that, while the cargo plane is in the air, the bomb rolls out of the rear on a pallet, pulled by a drogue parachute. It is designed to destroy tunnels and other underground facilities, and its blast radius is estimated to stretch a mile in every direction.

The strike against tunnels and caves reflects the ever-changing nature of the war in Afghanistan, now in its 15th year.

During the years of intense fighting in Afghanistan, the United States dropped a handful of similar bombs to destroy caves believed to be used by the Taliban and Al Qaeda, as well as to frighten troops dug into trenches who were not immediately killed. The military offered a similar rationale on Thursday for using the bomb — successor to the “aisy cutter,” heavy bomb designed for the instant clearing of large sections of jungle in Vietnam.

Islamic State fighters in Afghanistan “re using I.E.D.s, bunkers and tunnels to thicken their defense,”aid Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., the United States commander there, referring to improvised explosive devices. “his is the right munition to reduce these obstacles and maintain the momentum of our offensive.”

Afghan security officials said their ground forces had advanced on the Tangi Asadkhel area of Achin but met firm resistance from Islamic State militants who were launching attacks from six mountainside tunnels. The Afghan forces retreated and asked for airstrikes.

“he ground forces could not do it, so the Americans bombed the area,”aid Gen. Dawlat Waziri, a spokesman for the Afghan Ministry of Defense.

The Afghan government was kept “n the loop”bout the bombing, said Shahhussain Murtazawi, a spokesman for the president.

While the damage from the bombing, which occurred at night in a remote area, was unclear, the strike quickly brought backlash. Hamid Karzai, Afghanistan’ former president, was among those who condemned it.

“his is not the war on terror but the inhuman and most brutal misuse of our country as testing ground for new and dangerous weapons,”r. Karzai wrote on Twitter. “t is upon us, Afghans, to stop the USA.”

Jon B. Alterman, director of the Middle East Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said the Pentagon was being given leeway to carry out strategy without being told what, exactly, the overarching strategy is. “hat they haven’ been given is a lot of strategic guidance to work with,”e said. “hey can affect things, but without a guiding strategy, it’ hard to be sure you’e having the desired effect.”

Tuesday’ strike in Syria was requested by coalition allies on the ground near Tabqah, according to the United States Central Command, which oversees combat operations in the Middle East. The fighters had “dentified the target location as an \b ISIS\b0  fighting position,”t said in a statement, using another name for the Islamic State.

The military said the target location turned out to be a “ighting position”or the Syrian Democratic Forces, who have been fighting the Islamic State alongside the United States.

“he coalition’ deepest condolences go out to the members of the S.D.F. and their families,”entral Command said in the statement, calling the episode “ragic.”ilitary officials said the cause was being investigated.

But the increased casualties in Syria “annot be explained away simply by the increased tempo of the war,”aid Chris Woods, director of Airwars.

He noted that the number of airstrikes and targets hit actually fell slightly in March, but said his group’ research indicated that civilian deaths had risen sixfold in Syria, with more than 350 killed last month alone.

“his indicates to us a possible loosening of U.S. battlefield rules,”e said, “hich is placing civilians at greater risk of harm.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Helene Cooper @helenecooper and Mujib Mashal @MujMash on Twitter.Helene Cooper reported from Washington, and Mujib Mashal from Kabul, Afghanistan. Zahra Nader and Fahim Abid contributed reporting from Kabul.

Correction: April 19, 2017, Wednesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Friday about a massive bomb dropped on an Islamic State cave complex in Afghanistan misstated the cost of the weapon used in the attack. The bomb costs an estimated $170,000 per weapon, according to the Air Force, not $16 million.

* Afghan Security Reforms Falter, With Tough Fighting Ahead

* At Least 9 Civilians Killed as Coalition Strikes Taliban Arsenal, Officials Say

The GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb is the largest conventional bomb in the American arsenal. A Thursday strike in Afghanistan was the first combat use of the bomb. | Eglin Air Force Base, via Associated Press | The United States dropped the most powerful nonnuclear bomb in its arsenal on what it said was an ISIS cave complex in remote Afghanistan. The bomb —alled the GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast —an obliterate everything within a 1,000-yard radius. | By THE NEW YORK TIMES | The United States dropped the most powerful conventional bomb in the American arsenal on an Islamic State cave complex in Afghanistan on Thursday, the Pentagon said. Footage released by U.S. Central Command shows the moment the bomb was dropped in Achin District. | By U.S. CENTRAL COMMAND 

Document NYTFEED020170413ed4d005v5



World; Middle East
18 Syrian Fighters Allied With U.S. Are Killed in Coalition Airstrike

By HELENE COOPER 
461 words
13 April 2017
16:32
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —n airstrike by the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State killed 18 Syrian fighters allied with the United States, the military said on Thursday.

The strike, on Tuesday in Tabqah, Syria, was the third time in a month that American-led airstrikes may have killed civilians or allies, and comes even as the Pentagon is investigating two previous airstrikes that killed or wounded scores of civilians in a mosque complex in Syria and in a building in west Mosul, Iraq.

Tuesday’ strike was requested by coalition allies who were on the ground near Tabqah, the United States Central Command, which oversees combat operations in the Middle East, said in a statement. The fighters had called in the airstrikes and “dentified the target location as an ISIS fighting position,”sing another name for the Islamic State.

The Central Command statement said that the target location turned out to be a “ighting position”or the Syrian Democratic Forces, who have been fighting the Islamic State alongside the United States.

It was unclear whether the strike came from an American warplane or one from the other coalition partners.

“he coalition’ deepest condolences go out to members of the SDF and their families,”entral Command said in the statement, calling the episode “ragic.”ilitary officials said the cause is being investigated.

As the American-led military campaigns against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria have intensified in recent months, so too have reports of civilian casualties and now, friendly fire.

Military officials say that is to be expected as Iraqi forces try to retake Mosul in what is seen as the last big urban hurdle to defeating the extremist Sunni militant group in Iraq, and while forces allied with the United States are moving in on the group’ de-facto capital of Raqqa, in Syria.

President Trump has indicated that unlike President Barack Obama, who had his White House scrutinize many military operations, he will leave more operational decision-making to the Pentagon and to American commanders in the field.

That move has been welcomed by many in the military, who often expressed frustration at what they saw as a cumbersome decision-making process in Mr. Obama’ White House. But it has raised questions about whether Mr. Trump is exercising sufficient oversight.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* Syria’ ‘onundrum’ Limited Strikes Risk Entrenching Assad’ Strategy

* On Trump’ Syria Strategy, One Voice Is Missing: Trump’

* Russia Suspends Cooperation With U.S. in Syria After Missile Strikes

* Why the Syrian Chemical Weapons Problem Is So Hard to Solve

Document NYTFEED020170413ed4d003pd



world
Lula and Simba, Last Surviving Animals at Mosul Zoo, Have Been Rescued

By RANA F. SWEIS 
548 words
12 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

AMMAN, Jordan —he last surviving animals in the Montazah Al-Morour Zoo in the war-ravaged Iraqi city of Mosul —ula, a bear, and Simba, a lion —eached safety at a wildlife shelter in Amman, the Jordanian capital, on Monday night.

Their home at the zoo was severely damaged as battles for control of the city, Iraq’ second largest, have raged for months between Iraqi forces and Islamic State militants.

A half-million people are thought to be unable to escape the city. The Islamic State has used civilians as human shields, and American airstrikes, supporting Iraqi counterterrorism forces, have leveled parts of Mosul. A strike in one neighborhood last month was thought to have killed as many as 200 civilians.

About 40 animals had died at the zoo in recent months. Some starved and some were killed by bombs, according to Four Paws International, an animal welfare organization based in Vienna that carried out the rescue. Workers said that the animals’ages were filthy and that Simba and Lula urgently needed veterinary care.

Amir Khalil, a veterinarian with Four Paws who led the rescue mission, called it an “uthentic odyssey.”he animals, he said, will now have proper food and medical care, “ithout living in constant danger of a nearby war zone and noise of bomb blasts in the background.”

Mr. Khalil visited the Mosul zoo in February to check on the animals and organize regular feedings for them.

His group’ previous attempt to rescue the two animals failed when workers carrying them were stopped at a checkpoint. The aid workers were asked to leave Mosul. Lula and Simba were sent back to the zoo. “e never got to know the exact details why we were not allowed to pass, but, of course, transporting large wild animals in an area with such a complex political situation is not easy,”r. Khalil said Wednesday in a telephone interview.

Mr. Khalil said Islamic State militants had been at the zoo and had painted over a sign with the animals’aces. He said he had heard criticism about his attention to the animals at a time when so many people were suffering. “ like this kind of criticism,”e said, “ecause in my opinion humanity cannot be divided.”

He said Simba and Lula were a symbol of that humanity. “ar rages on but all those fighting cannot ignore animals, put them in a cage, starve them to death, deprive them of water,”e said.

Simba and Lula’ new home will be the New Hope Center, the biggest wildlife shelter in the Middle East.

Follow Rana F. Sweis on Twitter @ranasweis.

PHOTOS: Lula after arriving this week at a shelter in Amman. Previous efforts to rescue the bear from war-torn Mosul had failed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MUHAMMAD HAMED/REUTERS); Simba, the lone surviving lion in Mosul’ zoo, being treated two weeks ago before being evacuated this week from Iraq. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AHMAD GHARABLI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE —GETTY IMAGES)

* Engulfed in Battle, Mosul Civilians Run for Their Lives

* Stuck Without Water in Mosul, Neighbors Find a Way

* A Times Photographer’ Inside Look at the War on \b ISIS\b0  in Mosul

Document INHT000020170413ed4c0000n



opinion
Why Is Trump Fighting  ISIS  in Syria?; Op-Ed Columnist

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
975 words
12 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The Trump foreign policy team has been all over the map on what to do next in Syria —opple the regime, intensify aid to rebels, respond to any new attacks on innocent civilians. But when pressed, there is one idea everyone on the team seems to agree on: “he defeat of \b ISIS\b0 ,”s Secretary of State Rex Tillerson put it.

Well, let me add to their confusion by asking just one question: Why?

Why should our goal right now be to defeat the Islamic State in Syria? Of course, ISIS is detestable and needs to be eradicated. But is it really in our interest to be focusing solely on defeating ISIS in Syria right now?

Let’ go through the logic: There are actually two ISIS manifestations.

One is “irtual ISIS.”t is satanic, cruel and amorphous; it disseminates its ideology through the internet. It has adherents across Europe and the Muslim world. In my opinion, that ISIS is the primary threat to us, because it has found ways to deftly pump out Sunni jihadist ideology that inspires and gives permission to those Muslims on the fringes of society who feel humiliated —rom London to Paris to Cairo —o recover their dignity via headline-grabbing murders of innocents.

The other incarnation is “erritorial ISIS.”t still controls pockets in western Iraq and larger sectors of Syria. Its goal is to defeat Bashar al-Assad’ regime in Syria —lus its Russian, Iranian and Hezbollah allies —nd to defeat the pro-Iranian Shiite regime in Iraq, replacing both with a caliphate.

Challenge No. 1: Not only will virtual ISIS, which has nodes all over the world, not go away even if territorial ISIS is defeated, I believe virtual ISIS will become yet more virulent to disguise the fact that it has lost the territorial caliphate to its archenemies: Shiite Iran, Hezbollah, pro-Shiite militias in Iraq, the pro-Shiite Assad regime in Damascus and Russia, not to mention America.

Challenge No. 2: America’ goal in Syria is to create enough pressure on Assad, Russia, Iran and Hezbollah so they will negotiate a power-sharing accord with moderate Sunni Muslims that would also ease Assad out of power. One way to do that would be for NATO to create a no-fly safe zone around Idlib Province, where many of the anti-Assad rebels have gathered and where Assad recently dropped his poison gas on civilians. But Congress and the U.S. public are clearly wary of that.

So what else could we do? We could dramatically increase our military aid to anti-Assad rebels, giving them sufficient anti-tank and antiaircraft missiles to threaten Russian, Iranian, Hezbollah and Syrian helicopters and fighter jets and make them bleed, maybe enough to want to open negotiations. Fine with me.

What else? We could simply back off fighting territorial ISIS in Syria and make it entirely a problem for Iran, Russia, Hezbollah and Assad. After all, they’e the ones overextended in Syria, not us. Make them fight a two-front war —he moderate rebels on one side and ISIS on the other. If we defeat territorial ISIS in Syria now, we will only reduce the pressure on Assad, Iran, Russia and Hezbollah and enable them to devote all their resources to crushing the last moderate rebels in Idlib, not sharing power with them.

I don’ get it. President Trump is offering to defeat ISIS in Syriafor free —nd then pivot to strengthening the moderate anti-Assad rebels. Why? When was the last time Trump did anything for free? When was the last real estate deal Trump did where he volunteered to clean up a toxic waste dump —or free —efore he negotiated with the owner on the price of the golf course next door?

This is a time for Trump to be Trump —tterly cynical and unpredictable. ISIS right now is the biggest threat to Iran, Hezbollah, Russia and pro-Shiite Iranian militias —ecause ISIS is a Sunni terrorist group that plays as dirty as Iran and Russia.

Trump should want to defeat ISIS in Iraq. But in Syria? Not for free, not now. In Syria, Trump should let ISIS be Assad’, Iran’, Hezbollah’ and Russia’ headache —he same way we encouraged the mujahedeen fighters to bleed Russia in Afghanistan.

Yes, in the long run we want to crush ISIS everywhere, but the only way to crush ISIS and keep it crushed on the ground is if we have moderate Sunnis in Syria and Iraq able and willing to replace it. And those will only emerge if there are real power-sharing deals in Syria and Iraq —nd that will only happen if Assad, Russia, Iran and Hezbollah feel pressured to share power.

And while I am at it, where is Trump’ Twitter feed when we need it? He should be tweeting every day this message: “ussia, Iran and Hezbollah have become the protectors of a Syrian regime that uses poison gas on babies! Babies! Russia, Iran, Hezbollah, Assad —oison gas enablers. Sad.”

Do not let them off the hook! We need to make them own what they’e become —nablers of a Syria that uses poison gas on children. Believe it or not, they won’ like being labeled that way. Trump needs to use his global Twitter feed strategically. Barack Obama never played this card. Trump needs to slam it down every day. It creates leverage.

Syria is not a knitting circle. Everyone there plays dirty, deviously and without mercy. Where’ that Trump when we need him?

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Frank Bruni is off today.

Document INHT000020170412ed4c00012



National Desk; SECTA
A Florida Sheriff Catches Attention, and Some Heat, With an Anti-Heroin Video

By JACEY FORTIN 
1,165 words
12 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
15
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Maybe it was the ski masks that did it.

Or it could have been the steely look in the eyes of Lake County, Fla., Sheriff Peyton Grinnell as he deadpanned: ''We are coming for you. Run.''

Perhaps it was the muted background music: an eerie melody that wouldn't have been out of place in a Batman movie.

In the end, what could have been an unremarkable public service announcement about opioid abuse in Lake County spread widely on the internet, garnering about a million views on the Facebook page of the sheriff's office, where it was first posted Friday. It sparked concerns about police militarization and drew more than a few comparisons to Islamic State recruitment videos.

But many residents of Lake County seemed to respond positively, thanking the sheriff for drawing attention to a deadly scourge that has altered communities beyond recognition.

In the 95-second clip, Sheriff Grinnell, who was elected in November, stood at a podium flanked by four deputies wearing black face coverings. The sheriff addressed his Lake County constituents, saying he was aware of the ''serious issue'' of heroin abuse in the area. He encouraged people to call the office with tips.

He added: ''To the dealers that are pushing this poison, I have a message for you.'' And the camera began to zoom in.

The sheriff warned drug dealers that the police were waiting for some arrest warrants to be finalized.

''Enjoy trying to sleep tonight, wondering if tonight's the night our SWAT team blows your front door off the hinges,'' he said. ''We are coming for you. If our agents can show the nexus between you, the pusher of poison, and the person that overdoses and dies, we will charge you with murder. We are coming for you. Run.''

At the end of the video, Sheriff Grinnell and the four others walked offscreen in a silent, single file.

[Video: Sheriff Peyton Grinnell Issues Warning to Lake County Drug Dealers Watch on YouTube.]

''It makes the Lake County Sheriff's Department look like they're about to go to battle in Falluja,'' said Ezekiel Edwards, director of the American Civil Liberties Union's Criminal Law Reform Project.

SWAT teams, he added, should be used only when there is an imminent threat to human life. ''That video suggested that they are using SWAT inappropriately, and in a way that is going to escalate violence and danger to all involved.''

But Lt. John Herrell, a spokesman for the sheriff's office, said responses from residents had been positive.

''I would say that the critics are off the mark and have missed the whole point of the message,'' he said. ''The sheriff wanted to let the community know that he's aware of this problem.''

Lt. Herrell added that the video's tough tone was aimed at dealers, not addicts. And as for the men in black masks, he explained: ''They are undercover deputies, and state statutes require that their identities be protected.''

Kim Mousette, 52, said it was time for the police to take a tougher approach to heroin abuse in the county. She said her neighborhood in Pine Lakes, once a quiet refuge, had lately become a haven for drug users where people no longer felt safe leaving their doors unlocked.

''We were in one of the most pristine, protected areas of Florida, and now this is going on,'' she said in a phone interview. ''You could be walking along and have a syringe go through your foot.''

Ms. Mousette, who said the police had largely been unresponsive to complaints, voted for Sheriff Grinnell last year. Now, she feels she made the right choice. ''I was very happy to see that video,'' she said.

Thank you Sheriff Peyton Grinnell! VIDEO: Lake County sheriff, masked deputies have stern warning for heroin dealers https://t.co/0xrauuXfII -- ellen snelling (@LNseven5) April 10, 2017

Heroin abuse surged in Lake County after Florida's state legislature cracked down on loosely regulated pain clinics -- known as ''pill mills'' -- in 2011, said Lt. Herrell. As a result, people lost easy access to prescription drugs like OxyContin and turned to heroin.

The opioid scourge is national in scope; the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that nearly 13,000 people died of heroin overdoses across the country in 2015, up 20.6 percent from 2014.

Audrianna Nicole Boone, 27, watched family members suffer from addiction in her hometown, Lady Lake. She moved to North Carolina in 2012, and has long felt that the Lake County police never did enough to fight opioid abuse.

''When I see this video, it's kind of like the sheriff's office declaring war on the drug addiction and the criminals,'' she said. ''I love it, and I hope it continues to go viral.''

Still, she added, the video was only a starting point. ''Instead of arresting these people for the drug use, how about enacting some type of system that helps these people get clean and reintroduces these people to society?'' she said.

As the clip began to find audiences across the country, it encountered sharper criticism. Some compared it to Islamic State recruitment videos, which often feature militants wearing black ski masks. Others poked fun at the melodramatic production. Still others said it was a clear case of an over-militarization of police forces across the United States.

Mr. Edwards of the A.C.L.U. acknowledged that opioid addiction was a serious issue in need of redress -- but not like this.

''Even though it's just one local video, it does, in a very short amount of time, encapsulate much of what is wrong with policing today: militarization, using force inappropriately, and continuing to fight a drug war that has proved to be a failure,'' he said.

Looking very Isis. Maybe behead a suspect or two? #ourdrugwar Lake County sheriff taunts heroin dealers on Facebook. https://t.co/OvCO3r0jWS -- David Simon (@AoDespair) April 10, 2017

our plan is simple. kill the batman. pic.twitter.com/dazg03bCZu -- Jamelle Bouie (@jbouie) April 10, 2017

Some in Lake County agreed.

''It's a good example of how overly militarized police in the U.S. are,'' said Robert Vibert, 35, who lives in the town of Tavares, where the county sheriff's office is.

He said he found the video overly dramatic, as if Sheriff Grinnell were trying to make a name for himself. ''I'm sure he means well, but his approach is lackluster and a waste if he doesn't tackle the totality of the problem,'' Mr. Vibert said. ''Without attacking supply lines, and helping addicts and users get clean, it won't ever really solve the problem.''

Flanked by masked deputies, Sheriff Peyton Grinnell had a stern warning for drug dealers: ''We are coming for you. Run.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY LAKE COUNTY SHERIFF'S OFFICE) 

Document NYTF000020170412ed4c0006g



OP-ED COLUMNIST
Editorial Desk; SECTA
Why Is Trump Fighting  ISIS  in Syria?

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
975 words
12 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
23
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The Trump foreign policy team has been all over the map on what to do next in Syria -- topple the regime, intensify aid to rebels, respond to any new attacks on innocent civilians. But when pressed, there is one idea everyone on the team seems to agree on: ''The defeat of ISIS,'' as Secretary of State Rex Tillerson put it.

Well, let me add to their confusion by asking just one question: Why?

Why should our goal right now be to defeat the Islamic State in Syria? Of course, ISIS is detestable and needs to be eradicated. But is it really in our interest to be focusing solely on defeating ISIS in Syria right now?

Let's go through the logic: There are actually two ISIS manifestations.

One is ''virtual ISIS.'' It is satanic, cruel and amorphous; it disseminates its ideology through the internet. It has adherents across Europe and the Muslim world. In my opinion, that ISIS is the primary threat to us, because it has found ways to deftly pump out Sunni jihadist ideology that inspires and gives permission to those Muslims on the fringes of society who feel humiliated -- from London to Paris to Cairo -- to recover their dignity via headline-grabbing murders of innocents.

The other incarnation is ''territorial ISIS.'' It still controls pockets in western Iraq and larger sectors of Syria. Its goal is to defeat Bashar al-Assad's regime in Syria -- plus its Russian, Iranian and Hezbollah allies -- and to defeat the pro-Iranian Shiite regime in Iraq, replacing both with a caliphate.

Challenge No. 1: Not only will virtual ISIS, which has nodes all over the world, not go away even if territorial ISIS is defeated, I believe virtual ISIS will become yet more virulent to disguise the fact that it has lost the territorial caliphate to its archenemies: Shiite Iran, Hezbollah, pro-Shiite militias in Iraq, the pro-Shiite Assad regime in Damascus and Russia, not to mention America.

Challenge No. 2: America's goal in Syria is to create enough pressure on Assad, Russia, Iran and Hezbollah so they will negotiate a power-sharing accord with moderate Sunni Muslims that would also ease Assad out of power. One way to do that would be for NATO to create a no-fly safe zone around Idlib Province, where many of the anti-Assad rebels have gathered and where Assad recently dropped his poison gas on civilians. But Congress and the U.S. public are clearly wary of that.

So what else could we do? We could dramatically increase our military aid to anti-Assad rebels, giving them sufficient anti-tank and antiaircraft missiles to threaten Russian, Iranian, Hezbollah and Syrian helicopters and fighter jets and make them bleed, maybe enough to want to open negotiations. Fine with me.

What else? We could simply back off fighting territorial ISIS in Syria and make it entirely a problem for Iran, Russia, Hezbollah and Assad. After all, they're the ones overextended in Syria, not us. Make them fight a two-front war -- the moderate rebels on one side and ISIS on the other. If we defeat territorial ISIS in Syria now, we will only reduce the pressure on Assad, Iran, Russia and Hezbollah and enable them to devote all their resources to crushing the last moderate rebels in Idlib, not sharing power with them.

I don't get it. President Trump is offering to defeat ISIS in Syria for free -- and then pivot to strengthening the moderate anti-Assad rebels. Why? When was the last time Trump did anything for free? When was the last real estate deal Trump did where he volunteered to clean up a toxic waste dump -- for free -- before he negotiated with the owner on the price of the golf course next door?

This is a time for Trump to be Trump -- utterly cynical and unpredictable. ISIS right now is the biggest threat to Iran, Hezbollah, Russia and pro-Shiite Iranian militias -- because ISIS is a Sunni terrorist group that plays as dirty as Iran and Russia.

Trump should want to defeat ISIS in Iraq. But in Syria? Not for free, not now. In Syria, Trump should let ISIS be Assad's, Iran's, Hezbollah's and Russia's headache -- the same way we encouraged the mujahedeen fighters to bleed Russia in Afghanistan.

Yes, in the long run we want to crush ISIS everywhere, but the only way to crush ISIS and keep it crushed on the ground is if we have moderate Sunnis in Syria and Iraq able and willing to replace it. And those will only emerge if there are real power-sharing deals in Syria and Iraq -- and that will only happen if Assad, Russia, Iran and Hezbollah feel pressured to share power.

And while I am at it, where is Trump's Twitter feed when we need it? He should be tweeting every day this message: ''Russia, Iran and Hezbollah have become the protectors of a Syrian regime that uses poison gas on babies! Babies! Russia, Iran, Hezbollah, Assad -- poison gas enablers. Sad.''

Do not let them off the hook! We need to make them own what they've become -- enablers of a Syria that uses poison gas on children. Believe it or not, they won't like being labeled that way. Trump needs to use his global Twitter feed strategically. Barack Obama never played this card. Trump needs to slam it down every day. It creates leverage.

Syria is not a knitting circle. Everyone there plays dirty, deviously and without mercy. Where's that Trump when we need him?

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Frank Bruni is off today.

Document NYTF000020170412ed4c0004d

