 


World News:  ISIS -Linked Filipino Killed

By Jake Maxwell Watts 
438 words
17 October 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA -- One of the U.S.'s most-wanted terrorists was among the last remaining leaders killed after Philippine forces pressed forward with their offensive to retake the southern city of Marawi from Islamic State-linked militants, authorities said.

The bodies of Isnilon Hapilon -- who was on the U.S. Department of Justice list of most-wanted terrorists world-wide, with a reward of as much as $5 million for his capture -- and Omar Maute were recovered on Monday after the two leaders were killed as they moved between concrete structures and mosques in the city's old central business district with a few dozen other fighters and hostages, government spokesman Ernesto Abella said.

The two were leading a last stand against government troops in Marawi, officials said.

Hapilon was involved in several kidnappings, including the 2001 abduction from an island resort of 20 people, U.S. authorities say.

The deaths of Hapilon and Maute are a long-awaited victory for the government forces, who, inexperienced in urban combat, have struggled to clear the city since it was occupied in the name of Islamic State by hundreds of heavily armed fighters in May.

The armed forces said their offensive had boxed the remaining militant-controlled area to just a few acres even before the two leaders were killed.

The remaining combatants "were seen scampering in disarray," the armed forces said. "It will be a matter of days before it can finally be declared that Marawi has been liberated from the clutches of terrorists."

The two leaders had been a target for the military since the reported death last month of Maute's brother, Abdullah -- though no body was found to confirm his demise. The brothers were local to the province and rallied a coalition of fighters under the Islamic State flag to occupy the city.

Hapilon led his own group of fighters, a faction of the Abu Sayyaf Group, which swore allegiance to Islamic State in 2014 and joined the Maute brothers in their occupation of the city. Islamic State leadership later named Hapilon as its "emir," or ruler, in the Philippines.

The remaining militants in Marawi, numbering about 30, the military said, have few among them with a status similar to the Maute brothers' or Hapilon's. The de facto leader, some analysts say, is likely to be Mahmud Ahmad, a Malaysian whose links to Islamic State in the Middle East made him the militants' primary foreign recruiter. The army says he is still thought to be in Marawi.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020171017edah00017



World
U.S. Seeks to Stay Neutral in Iraq Conflict; Trump's declaration comes as Baghdad government forces push into Kirkuk amid conflict with Kurds over disputed territory, threatening to disrupt fight against Islamic State

By Ben Kesling, Nancy A. Youssef and Paul Sonne 
1,312 words
17 October 2017
01:50
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—he U.S. sought to stay on the sidelines as an all-out battle broke out between two of its closest ground partners in the campaign against Islamic State and raised concerns about a broader civil conflict erupting in Iraq.

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi ordered federal troops to push into Kirkuk province early Monday and occupy strategic locations that Kurdish Peshmerga forces had taken in a disputed area during the three-year battle against the Sunni militant group.

The clashes follow a referendum in which the Kurds, who run their own semiautonomous region in northern Iraq, voted overwhelmingly in favor of independence, defying Baghdad, regional powers and the U.S., which warned it would distract from the final battles to defeat Islamic State.

Elite government forces swept through disputed areas and into the regional capital to raise the Iraqi flag over the government center and reassert national control. Kurdish Peshmerga forces appeared unprepared for a coordinated assault, and yielded the heart of Kirkuk faster than many military experts expected.

The situation laid bare the risks of Washington's decision to defeat Islamic State by backing a pair of local forces without addressing their long-simmering resentments against one another. For years, the U.S. has avoided drawing up a definitive plan for dealing with Iraq after the retreat of Islamic State, preferring instead to wait until the group's final defeat and leave the matter up to Iraqi politicians.

President Donald Trump said U.S. forces wouldn't take decisive action to support the Baghdad government or the Iraqi Kurds. "We don't like the fact that they're clashing," Mr. Trump told reporters at the White House on Monday. Nevertheless, he said, "We're not taking sides."

The U.S. neutrality as Iraqi forces reclaimed disputed territory offered a de facto endorsement of Iraq's central government and dealt a blow to Kurdish independence aspirations.

"Inaction is a form of action," said Lukman Faily, a former Iraqi ambassador to the U.S. and a Kurd who favors a united Iraq over a separate Kurdish state.

Kurdish leaders forced the matter with an independence referendum in September that Washington and Baghdad failed to quash. That vote set off a chain of events that led Mr. Abadi to take Monday's actions.

A State Department official called on all sides to stand down and refrain from any further provocative actions. The official warned the biggest winners from tensions would be Islamic State and Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.

"This situation requires a peaceful, political solution," the official said. "The U.S., the government of Iraq, the Kurdistan Regional Government and our entire coalition must be united in prioritizing the final defeat of ISIS."

But Kurdish officials said the move by Baghdad involved Iranian-backed militias and showed Mr. Abadi's willingness to give way to Iranian influence growing in Iraq.

Others, however, said the move was a measure Mr. Abadi needed to take to reassert the integrity of the Iraqi state.

The violence could mark a turning point in Washington's long and close alliance with the Iraqi Kurds, who have served as a critical partner for U.S. forces in the country since the 2003 invasion and now see Washington's backing of Mr. Abadi as a rebuke.

"The Kurds are amazing, and have been through a lot, but we need to get over our sentimentality," said Michael O'Hanlon, a senior fellow in foreign policy at the Brookings Institution. "Their ambitions inside Iraq are not compatible with a stable internal situation for that country."

The Obama administration returned U.S. forces to Iraq in 2014, some 2½ears after their high-profile withdrawal, rushing to the country's aid as Islamic State swept the nation and threatened Baghdad.

At the time, former President Barack Obama, wary of stumbling back into a costly occupation, promised American troops would destroy Islamic State but said they wouldn't "get dragged into another ground war in Iraq."

Instead, the U.S. strategy was to make local forces the tip of the spear and "advise and assist" them, rather than take charge. American troops embedded with Iraq's national security forces and the Kurdish Peshmerga, among other local fighting groups, and provided arms, advice and air support, as the locals pushed back against Islamic State.

As the fight progressed, the uncomfortable question of what would come next dogged U.S. officials. Washington had backed groups that long had been at odds, realizing they could turn on one another after defeating their common enemy.

The Trump administration opted to continue the "advise and assist" strategy, while adjusting tactics to give U.S. troops in the conflict zone more leeway to engage the enemy.

One of the first signs the U.S.'s partners were beginning to turn on one another came when the Kurdish leader Masoud Barzani said in June that Iraqi Kurdistan would hold an independence referendum on Sept. 25.

U.S. diplomats went into overdrive trying to derail the vote, recognizing Kurdish issues with Baghdad but stating that a slapdash referendum amounted to an illegitimate and unilateral attempt to dismantle the Iraqi state.

Mr. Barzani proceeded with the referendum anyway, defying both Baghdad and Washington, as Kurdish officials said they had dealt with Baghdad's dysfunction long enough, suffered in the fight against Islamic State and deserved their own nation.

Baghdad responded on Monday with military action.

The U.S. military sought to play down the extent of the hostilities, saying some reports about the violence in Kirkuk had been overstated.

"We have not seen levels of violence suggested in some media reports," Army Col. Rob Manning told reporters.

Military officials said the territorial moves were the result of coordination between the Kurds and the Iraqi government, noting that Mr. Abadi had long telegraphed his intent to bring Kirkuk back under Baghdad's control.

Conflict with Islamic State shook up borders in Iraq starting in 2014 and led the Kurds to expand their territory by some 40%. In June 2014, Kurdish forces claimed Kirkuk after Iraq's national forces abandoned their positions there during the Islamic State onslaught. Iraqi Kurds consider the city their historic capital and say talks should take place to determine the territory's fate.

It remains unclear whether the Iraqi government will stop its push to reassert control over national territory at Kirkuk. Other contested cities in Iraq changed hands during the three-year battle against Islamic State, including Sinjar. U.S. military officials said they didn't believe Baghdad's action would go any farther "for now."

The Pentagon said U.S. "commanders on the ground are engaged" in encouraging dialogue and stressed that the U.S. priority continued to be the full defeat of Islamic State.

The unrest comes as Iran extends influence in Iraq, in part by backing Shiite militias that have also been fighting Islamic State but without U.S. support.

Jennifer Cafarella, an analyst for the Washington-based Institute for the Study of War, said the U.S. should rethink its strategy in Iraq if it wants to keep Baghdad aligned with Washington instead of Tehran.

"The United States needs to reorient its polices away from the single focus of defeating ISIS," Ms. Cafarella said. "Otherwise it will fail to gain a leadership role over the situation."

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com, Nancy A. Youssef at Nancy.Youssef@wsj.com and Paul Sonne at paul.sonne@wsj.com

Related

* As Islamic State Recedes, Iraqi Forces and Kurds Turn on Each Other

Document WSJO000020171016edag006em



World
Syrian City With Two Regimes Awaits Day of Reckoning; Kurds in Qamishli expect crackdown by Damascus after years of wartime coexistence

By Raja Abdulrahim 
1,119 words
16 October 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

QAMISHLI, Syria—his northern city has long been an anomaly where the Syrian regime and a rival Kurdish administration—ot quite allies and not quite enemies—oexist while the country's multisided war rages around them.

But now the government in Damascus is ascendant, having clawed back from the brink of defeat to decimate rebel forces and regain swaths of territory from a weakened Islamic State. Kurds who have made Qamishli a base for the semiautonomous region they have carved out across much of northern Syria during the yearslong conflict say they know the day is near when the regime will try to retake the entire city.

"The regime still dreams of pre-2011 and thinks it will return to fully control Syria. But that is not realistic," said Abdulkarim Omar, a leader of the Kurdish administration who is based in Qamishli. "We are sure if the regime gets a chance to breathe, then it will come after us."

A mixed city of Kurds, Arabs and Assyrians, Qamishli is the undeclared capital of the Kurdish semi-autonomous region. After parliamentary elections scheduled for early 2018, the administration plans to declare it a capital, said Mr. Omar— move that could further raise tensions with the regime of President Bashar al-Assad.

Every few blocks in Qamishli, there is a photo of Mr. Assad, a statue of his late father with arm raised in a wave, or banners showing the Syrian leader in military uniform with the vow: "We pledge allegiance forever."

These monuments are a constant reminder to the Kurds that the regime will eventually come for them.

Qamishli residents live between the two administrations and get taxed or billed for utilities by both sides. They sometimes even get ticketed by both authorities for the same traffic infraction.

"People are lost between the two sides," said a lawyer who spends his days shuttling between two courthouses that represent the parallel legal systems.

In the early years of the uprising, the Syrian government and its army mostly withdrew from Kurdish-majority areas in the northeast, including Qamishli. It was an effort to appease the Kurds—ho had been denied many basic rights such as getting a passport—nd prevent them from joining the rebels. As a result, the regime and the main Kurdish militia have rarely battled each other.

The Kurdish administration made a point of taking over government buildings here to signal it is the new authority in this city on the Turkish border, an important economic hub in Syria's east. There are no certain estimates for the current population; one local official said there could be as many as 750,000 people living here.

The long-term survival of the Kurdish region in Syria depends on the continued U.S. presence in the area, residents and officials say. But the U.S. has long denied that it is enabling the creation of the region, and the Trump administration has made clear its interests in Syria don't extend beyond fighting Islamic State.

"Our overall mission…s to defeat ISIS" and nothing more, State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert said in August. She was responding to comments by the U.S.-backed and Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, which claimed the U.S. would maintain a presence in Syria for decades.

For now, the U.S. maintains a passing presence in Qamishli, sending truckloads of weapons and armored vehicles through the city's streets to allied Kurdish and Arab forces fighting Islamic State in Raqqa about 170 miles west.

Last month's independence referendum in the autonomous Kurdistan region of neighboring Iraq prompted a political crisis that escalated Monday into clashes between Kurdish and Iraqi forces, which until recently were allied against Islamic State. The move toward independence by Iraqi Kurds has also united regional governments—any of which have their own restive Kurdish populations—hat are opposed to these aspirations.

Syria's more than six-year conflict has been characterized by divided cities controlled by warring parties. In contested cities such as Aleppo and Homs, front lines were marked by sandbags and charred vehicles.

In Qamishli, however, control changes across unseen lines. Battle is conducted more often through competing legal systems than through violence, with each government trying to assert its authority by promulgating rules and regulations.

Drivers must choose license plates issued by either the regime or the Kurdish administration; some favor regime licenses, fearing vehicles without them will be confiscated when Damascus takes control.

Regime traffic police patrol certain roundabouts and streets, issuing parking tickets or stopping men wanted for military service.

Local journalist Jawan Tatar said he was in a taxi once going to run an errand when he suddenly found himself on a street controlled by the regime. He had done two years of mandatory military service but was still wanted for reserve duty.

"I got scared," he said. "I told the taxi driver to drive the wrong way just to get away."

Despite its limited control of Qamishli, the regime has continued to assert its dominance as only a central government can.

A university professor living in the city said one of his relatives was prevented from boarding a plane at Qamishli airport, which is under regime control, because he hadn't paid his utility bills to the regime.

The central government has also withheld salaries for men who have ignored military draft notices.

The regime's courthouse is the only place to officially register births, marriages and deaths. All real-estate transactions and inheritances must be registered with the regime, giving it another advantage in the power struggle.

Even legal decisions reached in the Kurdish administration's courthouse must be registered in the regime courthouse.

"We go to the administration for services and we go to the regime for legal issues," said the lawyer who shuttles between courthouses.

But the Kurdish administration doesn't have any legitimacy beyond its own borders. Attempts at gaining recognition from foreign states have failed.

Though the shared control over Qamishli has been mostly peaceful for years, bloody clashes have broken out on occasion. With two increasingly emboldened sides vying for control, the prospect of an enduring peace seems doubtful.

The Syrian government "will not sacrifice even a hair's breadth" of territory, Deputy Foreign Minister Faisal Mekdad said in August ahead of local elections held by the Kurdish administration, according to state media. "Those dreamers should abandon any more diabolical dreams because that would lead to more killing and more bloodshed."

Write to Raja Abdulrahim at raja.abdulrahim@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020171016edag001gx



World
Iraqi Forces Clash With Kurdish Fighters Near Kirkuk; Skirmishes after prime minister orders troops to advance threatens to escalate and unravel multinational coalition fighting Islamic State

By Ali A. Nabhan in Erbil, Iraq, and Ben Kesling in Washington 
1,186 words
16 October 2017
06:22
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Iraqi forces clashed with fighters from the Kurdish semiautonomous region in the oil-rich province of Kirkuk early Monday, Iraqi and Kurdish officials said, in a standoff over Kurdish independence that threatens to unravel a multinational coalition battling Islamic State.

Before dawn, units from Iraq's Shiite-majority Popular Mobilization Forces as well as elite Iraqi military units moved toward the city of Kirkuk on the orders of Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi. Kurdish Peshmerga troops reacted to the advances, provoking clashes before sunrise.

An Iraqi military official said four Iraqi army vehicles were burned in the clashes, and a number of injured had arrived at Kirkuk's general hospital. The Iraqi forces were passing through a village named Jerdaglu when an explosion destroyed the vehicles, he said. What caused the explosion wasn't immediately clear.

The clashes follow a referendum in which the Kurds, who run their own semiautonomous region in northern Iraq, voted overwhelmingly in favor of independence, defying Baghdad, regional powers and the U.S, which warned it would distract from the final battles to defeat Islamic State.

The fighting not only threatens to unravel the anti-Islamic State coalition, but poses risks to the viability of Iraq itself.

The Iraqi state is made up of Kurds, Sunni Arabs and Shiite Arabs but also has a hodgepodge of other ethnic groups, including those with connections to neighboring Turkey and a large number with ties to Iran, all of which are jockeying for dominance. Analysts warn those centrifugal forces risk pulling Iraq apart, increasing its vulnerability to a re-emergence of Islamic State or a successor group.

"The one major fear of the U.S., that it will be forced to be a referee of post-ISIS Iraq, may come true," said Nicholas Heras, Middle East Security Fellow with Center for a New American Security, a Washington defense think tank. "If that's the case, it becomes a target more quickly."

While the U.S. has been reluctant to back any single party in Iraq, it now might have to pick a side, which could more likely then make it the other group's enemy.

If the U.S. backs the Kurds, it will draw the ire of the central Iraqi government and the Iranian-backed militias. If it backs Iraq, it loses the support of Kurds who have proven capable and often loyal. If it remains neutral, it might just be pushing a simmering fight into the future.

The U.S. is hoping for a decent, not perfect outcome that ends violence but leaves neither Erbil or Baghdad satisfied, which is a recipe for future conflicts, Mr. Heras said. "In post-ISIS Iraq, the U.S. has to decide what flavor of poison it prefers."

Kirkuk was bound to be a flashpoint because of its bountiful oil resources, mishmash of ethnic groups and geographic location in the heart of disputed territories. It also isn't currently part of the Kurdish region, although the Kurds have long laid claim to it.

Kirkuk isn't the only spot that has a potential to flare up. Similar fights are brewing in Nineveh, Salahuddin and Diyala.

In the wake of the referendum, Iraq's parliament authorized Mr. Abadi to deploy troops to retake areas outside the official boundary of the semiautonomous Kurdistan region that have come under Kurdish control during the battle against Islamic State. Kurds have expanded the territory they oversee by as much as 40% during the fight.

The Kurds say much of that territory now under their control is subject to negotiation as to its future.

Baghdad has turned to Iran to help squeeze the Kurds. Turkey has also ratcheted up pressure. Both countries have their own restive Kurdish populations.

Based on a request by the Iraqi government, Iran closed the official border crossings with Kurdistan, a spokesman for the Iraqi foreign ministry said.

Meanwhile, Kurds have said travelers crossing into Turkey in the past few days were warned by Turkish authorities that they might not be able to cross back over the same land border.

Late Sunday, Mr. Abadi chaired a meeting for the Ministerial Council for National Security and his office released a statement detailing grievances by the Iraqi state against the Kurdish semiautonomous region.

The council warned of "the serious escalation and provocations by forces belonging to the Kurdistan region outside the borders of the region, which wants to drag the country into internal strife in order to achieve its goal of dismantling Iraq and the region in order to establish a state on an ethnic basis," according to a release after the meeting.

The council said the Kurds' decision to hold an independence referendum and lay claim to so-called disputed territories like Kirkuk showed the Kurdish government's "deliberate intention to resort to force and impose the status quo."

Bayan Sami Abdul Rahman, the Kurdish regional government's official representative to Washington, said, "We knew this was coming and this was imminent," adding, "It's still not too late to keep this from escalating."

She called on Mr. Abadi to consider the consequences of war and called on the White House to help mediate the matter, blaming much of this on Iranian influence over the Popular Mobilization Forces.

In the event of an all-out war, "Kurdistan will be hurt, but so will Iraq," she said. "No one can be a winner."

Early Monday, Mr. Abadi's office said he had ordered Iraqi forces to "impose security in Kirkuk in cooperation with residents of Kirkuk and the Peshmerga forces."

A senior Iraqi security official said troops from the regular Iraqi Army, the elite Counterterrorism Service and the Emergency Response Division were advancing from the south and west of Kirkuk with no intention to enter the city but rather surround it and assert control over major oil fields and air bases that Kurdish forces claimed after the upheaval of 2014, when Islamic State helped reshape the map of Iraq and Syria.

As of early Monday, Iraq time, the Pentagon said it had no operational updates on reports of clashes between Iraqi government-affiliated units and Peshmerga forces in and around Kirkuk, though said it opposed any further escalation in the country and urged all groups to focus on defeating Islamic State.

"We oppose violence from any party, and urge against destabilizing actions that distract from the fight against ISIS and further undermine Iraq's stability," Defense Department spokeswoman Laura Seal said. "We continue to support a unified Iraq. Despite the Kurdistan regional government's unfortunate decision to pursue a unilateral referendum, dialogue remains the best option to defuse ongoing tensions and longstanding issues, in accordance with the Iraqi constitution."

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Related

* Iraqi Forces Move on Territory Seized by Kurds  (Oct. 13)

* Kurds Voted in Favor of Independence in Disputed Referendum (Sept. 27)

Document WSJO000020171016edag000p1



World News: Syrians Caught as Fight Heats Up

By Raja Abdulrahim 
599 words
14 October 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

According to the monitoring group Deir Ezzour24, about 100 civilians are stuck in the Syrian city of Mayadeen, where airstrikes are seeking to drive out Islamic State. A World News article on Saturday about civilian casualties in Syria incorrectly said 100,000 civilians remain in Mayadeen.

(WSJ October 16, 2017)

(END)

Civilian casualties have surged in the frenzied battles to drive Islamic State from its stronghold in the oil-rich Syrian province of Deir Ezzour, where U.S.-led forces and the Russian-backed regime are conducting separate campaigns against the extremists, according to activists and human-rights groups.

As both sides race to make territorial gains in Deir Ezzour, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nations and activists have called for greater measures to protect civilians caught in the middle of the fighting there and elsewhere.

"While we all recognize that the fighting against ISIL is important, we need to remember that the civilians cannot be punished twice," U.N. Special Envoy for Syria Staffan de Mistura told the U.N. Security Council late last month, using an acronym for Islamic State.

More than 231 civilian deaths have been documented in Deir Ezzour province since Sept. 28, said Omar Abu Leila, who heads the monitoring group Deir Ezzour24, which opposes both Islamic State and the regime of Bashar al-Assad.

With Islamic State clinging to a fast-shrinking swath of territory in Syria, the battlefield against the terror group has become more congested. On Thursday, the regime, backed by Russian airstrikes, said it was advancing deeper into the western neighborhoods of the strategic city of Mayadeen in Deir Ezzour.

Islamic State has ushered its leadership and most valued equipment into Mayadeen as it has been routed from other areas. The city sits near Syria's most important oil fields, which Islamic State controls and uses to fund operations.

With so much strategic importance, the militants are expected to put up a stiff fight for Mayadeen. Deir Ezzour24 estimates there are about 100,000 civilians still stuck in the city and living under intense airstrikes. About 20 people were killed on Oct. 6 in Russian airstrikes on the outskirts of Mayadeen and their bodies haven't yet been retrieved because of the bombardment, Mr. Abu Leila said.

The Russian military Tuesday confirmed that heavy aerial bombardment was continuing in the Deir Ezzour region.

Russia consistently denies targeting civilians, and often criticizes monitoring groups for being Western propagandists or militant sympathizers.

Since the battles against Islamic State kicked off in Deir Ezzour last month, thousands of civilians have fled the fighting. Western diplomats say the U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State was caught off-guard by how quickly the regime advanced and rushed to start its own offensive there.

"The biggest danger for civilians is from above," said Sarmad al-Jilani, an activist with Sound and Picture, a group documenting human-rights violations in eastern Syria. "The Russian and Syrian planes are carrying out airstrikes to enable the advance for the regime army. And the coalition is carrying out airstrikes to enable the advance" of their allied ground forces.

The Syrian regime has consistently denied that its warplanes target civilians.

The U.S.-led coalition said there has been no change to its rules of engagement in Deir Ezzour, despite the accelerated battle plan there. It said it takes every practical measure into consideration to ensure that civilians aren't harmed.

"The battlespace in and around [Deir Ezzour] is complex and congested, with multiple actors operating onc both sides of the Euphrates River to defeat our common enemy, ISIS," the U.S. coalition said. "Ultimately, the coalition believes that ISIS is the root cause of the death and destruction."

---

Nazih Osseiran and Nathan Hodge contributed to this article.



License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020171014edae0002f



World
Syrian Forces Seize Mayadeen From  ISIS , State Media Says; Local activist groups say Syrian military remains on the edge of the city

By Maria Abi-Habib and Nour Alakraa 
813 words
14 October 2017
18:07
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT—yrian government forces on Saturday recaptured the strategic city of Mayadeen from Islamic State, the country's state media reported, even as local activists cautioned that the Damascus regime hadn't clinched control of the entire area.

If the reports from Syria's government are verified, the recapture of Mayadeen would serve a significant blow to the militant group, whose space to operate is rapidly shrinking amid a multipronged assault.

In separate and opposing military offensives led by the U.S. and Damascus over the past three years, Islamic State has been dislodged from dozens of towns and cities in the caliphate it once ruled across Iraq and Syria. With the capture of Mayadeen, an oil-wealthy city in eastern Deir Ezzor province, the group's reign is rapidly approaching an ignominious end.

Syrian "armed forces in cooperation with its allies regained control over Mayadeen city in Deir Ezzor," Syrian state news agency SANA reported Saturday, quoting a "military source." Many Islamic State fighters were killed in the battle, according to SANA.

The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported that Mayadeen was captured after Islamic State had transferred 1,000 fighters to reinforce the city last week. Regime forces and allied militias are now combing through the city, it said.

Local activist groups, however, disputed the reports.

Damascus's military remains on the edges of the city and is carrying out heavy air and mortar strikes on Mayadeen, said Sarmad al-Jilani, an activist with Sound and Picture, a group documenting human-rights violations in eastern Syria.

"The regime is trying to advance but ISIS is repelling these attacks," he said, using a common acronym for the militant group. "The clashes are intense."

The U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State said it was aware of reports that Damascus and its allies had taken Mayadeen but couldn't verify them.

In various battles over the past month, the militant group has typically surrendered rather than fight to the death as expected, according to the coalition's spokesman, U.S. Army Col. Ryan Dillon.

Col. Dillon said he wouldn't be surprised if the rapid assault on Mayadeen and its quick fall to Damascus forces—f proven to be true—as the result of Islamic State fleeing the city to go underground and launch a traditional insurgency. U.S.-backed Iraqi forces expected a grueling fight to dislodge Islamic State from Hawija in Iraq in August and found little resistance. They were able to quickly retake the city in October.

"They've been demoralized and have seen the writing on the wall and they're quitting," he said in a phone interview. "The promise of the caliphate is not very promising anymore."

The Pentagon had hoped to recapture Mayadeen itself and mine the city for intelligence it could use to undermine Islamic State's global network and capture or kill its leadership. But as Damascus and its allies launched a lightning offensive on the city, the U.S.'s local allies, the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, were blocked from moving on Mayadeen.

As Islamic State was uprooted across Syria and Iraq, the group moved its top leadership and military hardware to Mayadeen over the past year. The city also sits nearby Syria's most lucrative oil reserves, making Mayadeen a huge revenue source for the group.

The city has also been a priority for Damascus's military operations. The government is​n dire need of oil reserves to kick-start its sputtering economy and fill up its coffers, tapped out after nearly seven years of war.

Separately on Saturday, local antigovernment activists said U.S.-backed Kurdish forces were nearing a deal to retake the city of Raqqa by negotiating the surrender of hundreds of Islamic State fighters holed up in roughly a square kilometer in the city center. Raqqa once served as the de facto caliphate, or religious empire, of Islamic State's rule in Syria.

A Saturday statement by the U.S.-led coalition, however, said a convoy of vehicles filled with civilians was preparing to depart Raqqa later in the day. Although it didn't say whether local Syrian Islamic State fighters were part of the evacuation deal, it did exclude foreign fighters from the agreement. It didn't say how many people were due to leave Raqqa.

The coalition said the negotiated deal was designed to minimize civilian casualties.

Four months ago, the Iraqi city of Mosul—he second-largest city in Iraq and once the largest under Islamic State's control—as retaken.

Nazih Osseiran and Raja Abdulrahim in Beirut contributed to this article.

Write to Maria Abi-Habib at maria.habib@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020171014edae00105



World
Syrians Caught in Crossfire as Fight Against  ISIS  Heats Up; Civilian casualties have shot up recently in Deir Ezzour province, where the extremists have a stronghold

By Raja Abdulrahim 
1,019 words
14 October 2017
14:01
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

Deir Ezzour24 estimates there are about 100 civilians still stuck in the eastern city of Mayadeen. An earlier version of this article incorrectly put the estimate at about 100,000. (Oct. 14, 2017)

Civilian casualties have surged in the frenzied battles to drive Islamic State from its stronghold in the oil-rich Syrian province of Deir Ezzour, where U.S.-led forces and the Russian-backed regime are conducting separate campaigns against the extremists, according to activists and human-rights groups.

As both sides race to make territorial gains in Deir Ezzour, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nations and activists have called for greater measures to protect civilians caught in the middle of the fighting there and elsewhere.

"While we all recognize that the fighting against ISIL is important, we need to remember that the civilians cannot be punished twice," U.N. Special Envoy for Syria Staffan de Mistura told the U.N. Security Council late last month, using an acronym for Islamic State. "Already because they have been under the rule of ISIL and then because they happen to be unlucky enough to be there when the fighting goes on."

More than 231 civilian deaths have been documented in Deir Ezzour province since Sept. 28, said Omar Abu Leila, who heads the monitoring group Deir Ezzour24, which opposes both Islamic State and the Bashar al-Assad regime.

With Islamic State clinging to a fast-shrinking swath of territory in Syria, the battlefield against the terror group has become more congested. On Thursday, the regime, backed by Russian airstrikes, said it was advancing deeper into the western neighborhoods of the strategic city of Mayadeen in Deir Ezzour, days after encircling it.

Islamic State has ushered its leadership and most valued equipment—ncluding military gear and prisoners—nto Mayadeen over the past year as it has been routed from other areas in Syria and Iraq. The city sits near Syria's most important oil fields, which Islamic State controls and uses to fund its operations.

With so much strategic importance for Islamic State, the militants are expected to put up a stiff fight for Mayadeen. Deir Ezzour24 estimates there are about 100 civilians still stuck in the city and living under intense airstrikes. About 20 people were killed on Oct. 6 in Russian airstrikes on the outskirts of Mayadeen and their bodies haven't yet been retrieved because of the bombardment, Mr. Abu Leila said.

The Russian military on Tuesday confirmed that heavy aerial bombardment was continuing in the Deir Ezzour region, saying that its warplanes were carrying out up to 150 airstrikes a day.

Russia consistently denies targeting civilians, and often criticizes monitoring groups for being Western propagandists or militant sympathizers.

On Thursday, Unicef said it had received reports that an attack on its vaccine cold room in Mayadeen had destroyed at least 140,000 doses of vaccines. Mayadeen is at the center of a polio outbreak, which has so far paralyzed 48 children, according to Unicef.

Since the battles against Islamic State kicked off in Deir Ezzour last month, thousands of civilians have fled the fighting. Western diplomats say the U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State was caught off guard by how quickly the regime advanced and rushed to start its own offensive there.

"The biggest danger for civilians is from above," said Sarmad al-Jilani, an activist with Sound and Picture, a group documenting human-rights violations in eastern Syria. "The Russian and Syrian planes are carrying out airstrikes to enable the advance for the regime army. And the coalition is carrying out airstrikes to enable the advance" of their allied ground forces.

The Syrian regime has consistently denied that its warplanes target civilians.

The U.S.-led coalition said there has been no change to its rules of engagement in Deir Ezzour, despite the accelerated battle plan there. It said it continues to take every practical measure into consideration to ensure that civilians aren't harmed.

"The battlespace in and around [Deir Ezzour] is complex and congested, with multiple actors operating on both sides of the Euphrates River to defeat our common enemy, ISIS," the U.S. coalition said in response to questions. "Ultimately, the coalition believes that ISIS is the root cause of the death and destruction."

The intensification of airstrikes in Deir Ezzour has come as there has been a spike in violence across other parts of Syria, including areas under cease-fire deals such as the rebel-held northern province of Idlib.

In Idlib, about 150 civilians were killed by regime and Russian airstrikes in a period of less than two weeks in late September, according to the opposition group Syrian Network for Human Rights.

On Sept. 26, the Russian Defense Ministry denied reports from the opposition monitoring group Syrian Observatory for Human Rights that Russian airstrikes in Idlib had killed dozens of civilians and instead said its attacks were on "terrorists."

September was the bloodiest month so far this year, with more than 3,000 people—bout 1,000 of them civilians—illed across the country, according to the Observatory.

The Red Cross said last week that levels of violence across Syria are the worst since the monthslong battle for the city of Aleppo last year.

In Deir Ezzour, civilians trying to flee the battles must use dangerous routes. On Oct. 4, nearly 100 people were killed in three attacks along the Euphrates River when suspected Russian warplanes carried out airstrikes on ferryboats carrying civilians fleeing the violence, according to Mr. Jilani and Deir Ezzour24. Photos and videos posted online in the wake of the attack showed parts of the river red with blood, according to activists.

As a result of the intense airstrikes from multiple sides, Airwars, an independent monitoring group that tracks civilian casualties in Syria and Iraq, has had trouble saying which side is responsible for specific attacks in which civilians are injured or killed.

"It's chaos," said Kinda Haddad, head of the Syria team at Airwars.

Nazih Osseiran and Nathan Hodge contributed to this article.

Write to Raja Abdulrahim at raja.abdulrahim@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020171013edad001me



World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,144 words
13 October 2017
13:05
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Questionable Outcome

Some employees at Outcome Health, a hot tech startup that installs video screens in doctors' offices and charges pharmaceutical companies to run ads on them, misled advertisers by charging them for placements on more screens than were installed and manipulating data on how well ads performed, according to former employees, several advertisers and company documents. Outcome has hired a law firm "to review allegations about certain employees' conduct that have been raised internally," a spokesman said. Investors including Goldman Sachs and Google parent Alphabet poured around $500 million into Outcome at what the Chicago company said was a valuation of $5.5 billion in May. Its charismatic 31-year-old CEO, Rishi Shah, has parlayed his startup into connections with political and financial heavyweights.

Out of Patience

The Trump administration said Thursday it intends to end billions of dollars in payments to insurers for subsidizing low-income consumers under the Affordable Care Act, saying they can't lawfully be made because Congress hasn't appropriated the money. President Trump, though, has told at least one lawmaker that the payments may continue if a bipartisan health-care deal is reached, according to people familiar with the matter. Earlier in the day, he signed an executive order directing several departments to explore ways to expand access to cheaper health-care plans with fewer benefits than the ACA mandates. Critics say this will drain the ACA market of healthier customers, sending costs soaring for the older and sicker people who remain.

Fed Outlook

Mr. Trump is nearing a decision on who will lead the Federal Reserve after Janet Yellen's current four-year term as chairwoman expires in February. He met with Stanford University economist John Taylor Wednesday for an interview also attended by Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin and Vice President Mike Pence, according to a White House official. The other three candidates, say people familiar with the matter, are former Fed governor Kevin Warsh and current Fed governor Jerome Powell—ho had meetings with Mr. Trump last month—nd Ms. Yellen. The four offer two contrasting views: Ms. Yellen and Mr. Powell have advocated easy-money policies and favored gradual interest-rate increases, while Mr. Taylor and Mr. Warsh have criticized the Fed's aggressive monetary easing and called for changes in how it sets policy. It isn't clear which way the president is leaning.

Business Backpackers

While besuited businessmen haven't entirely abandoned briefcases and messenger bags, the backpack is gaining ground, as office elevators everywhere make clear. Sales of adult men's backpacks have grown steadily in the past two years, according to retail-trend tracker NPD, including a 5% increase between August 2016 and August 2017, to $864 million—8% of the entire U.S. backpack market. Driving that uptick, in part, is the backpack's evolution into a higher species of bag, with labels across the board crafting versions suited to the C-suite. "Men's backpacks have gotten more executive," explained NPD analyst Marshal Cohen. Elsewhere in our Off Duty section, explore Transylvania's more peaceable—nd less Dracula-inspired—harms, from stylish guesthouses to picturesque villages. Also, our auto columnist Dan Neil explains why the new Mazda MX-5 Miata RF belongs in the car Hall of Fame.

Today's Video

California Wine Country Burns

More than 20 major fires continued to burn across Northern California, sending tens of thousands of people fleeing. The fires are expected to burn for weeks.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Shifting Conditions, Poor Communications Complicate California Wildfires

House Passes Disaster Relief, Puerto Rico Credit Bill

WORLD

Syrians Caught in Crossfire as Fight Against \b ISIS\b0  Heats Up

Palestinian Authority, Hamas Reach Reconciliation Deal After 10-Year Feud

BUSINESS

Cord-Cutters Sap AT&T's TV Business

Amazon Suspends Entertainment Chief Roy Price

MARKETS

Cost Cuts, Credit-Card Lending Buoy Bank Earnings

Star Fidelity Manager Gavin Baker Fired Over Sexual Harassment Allegations

Number of the Day

14.5 trillion

The quarterly operating profit forecast by Samsung Electronics, in South Korean won ($12.8 billion)— record, and up 179% from a year earlier. But in a surprise, the head of Samsung's lucrative components business announced his resignation.

Today's Question

What are your thoughts on the how President Donald Trump's executive order will impact the U.S. health-care system? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Charity L. Scott

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on the Boy Scouts welcoming girls, John Connor of Michigan wrote: "As a former scout and scout leader, recent decisions by the Boy Scouts of America are unfortunate and will result in even lower membership over time. The national leadership clearly does not understand their core market demographic or the appeal of Boy Scouts to parents or the boys. This is a slow-moving train wreck." Marybeth Beard of Kentucky shared: "I come from a scout family; my maternal grandfather was a scout leader; he, along with my uncle and brother all achieved the Eagle Scout rank. Boy Scouts are for boys, and Girl Scouts are for girls. Keep it that way, and keep the tradition alive. Embrace and promote the tradition of the scouts. This latest move is a grave mistake." And Dan Greenebaum of New York said: "I think this is a phenomenal development. As a former Cub Scout I think one of the best things about the experience was being taken and merited based on accomplishments. It gives kids a sense of self-worth and work ethic and none of that is gender specific. I understand the pushback from the Girl Scouts, but I know so many people who talk about their Eagle Scout status with pride and the only time I hear people talk about their time in Girl Scouts it is more of a statement that they did it without any real lasting connection. The programs provide different experiences and I think there is value in allowing children to choose which route they wish to go."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020171013edad0025t



World
Tensions Rise Between Iraqis and Kurds After Referendum; As the threat of  ISIS  recedes, the risk that Iraqi and Kurdish forces could clash in the future is growing

By Isabel Coles and Ali A. Nabhan 
1,079 words
8 October 2017
21:02
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

DAQUQ, Iraq—or more than three years, the weapons along a front line held by Kurdish forces in northern Iraq have been aimed at Islamic State militants occupying the nearby city of Hawija.

Now, they are pointed toward Iraqi forces who have just routed the militants from Hawija—he latest in a series of victories that have brought Islamic State to the verge of defeat in Iraq.

Islamic State's loss of Hawija removed the last buffer between Kurdish and Iraqi forces just as tensions between their respective leaders are intensifying over last month's referendum in which Kurds voted overwhelmingly for independence.

Up until now, the two forces cooperated for years to oust Islamic State, sharing intelligence and coordinating troop movements.

"We used to have a common enemy, but now things are changing," said Col. Aso Ali Ahmed, a deputy commander of a brigade of Kurdish Peshmerga forces stationed near Hawija. "There may be war or there may not."

As the threat of Islamic State recedes and the alliance between Kurdish and Iraqi forces weakens, the risk that the one-time partners will turn their guns on each other in future is growing, though leaders on both sides say they want to avoid conflict.

In the wake of the referendum, Iraq's parliament authorized Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi to deploy troops to retake areas outside the official boundary of the semiautonomous Kurdistan region that have come under Kurdish control in recent years, including during the fight against Islamic State.

Mr. Abadi also accused the Kurds of seeking to delay the Hawija operation, which was launched four days before the Kurdish independence referendum, which took place on Sept. 25. A Peshmerga official denied that.

The central government in Baghdad and the Kurds—acked by the U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State—ame together to fight the terror group after it overran around about a third of Iraq in 2014, setting aside differences over land and resources that have strained relations for more than a decade.

The areas taken over by the Kurds during the war on Islamic State include the oil-rich province of Kirkuk, from which the Kurds have been exporting crude without the blessing of the central government in Baghdad.

Iraq is the second-largest oil producer in the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, and its economy is heavily dependent on oil. A significant portion of those resources are in the north, some within the Kurdistan region and some in territory controlled by Kurdish forces.

The most controversial aspect of the Kurdish referendum was the decision to conduct the vote in areas controlled by Kurdish forces outside the official boundary of the semiautonomous region of Kurdistan.

Kurdish leaders vow that they will not relinquish the territory they seized or protected from Islamic State—specially Kirkuk, which is economically and symbolically indispensable to the state the Kurds dream of declaring.

Masoud Barzani, the Kurdish regional president, visited Peshmerga commanders in Kirkuk last week and instructed them to fortify their positions as Iraqi forces advanced in Hawija.

At one outpost on this front line, Peshmerga fighters surveyed the changing landscape on Friday, picking out the flags of Iraqi security forces and assorted government-backed paramilitary groups on the other side of the berm. The mood was relaxed, but wary.

"We don't know what their intention is, where they are going, or what they want to do," said Capt. Beevan Mohammed. "We won't attack anyone, but we won't accept anyone attacking us."

A makeshift shrine at another outpost commemorates 21 Peshmerga fighters killed defending a stretch along the front.

"We paid for this with blood and it will take blood to make us leave," said Cpl. Hiwa Ahmed.

So far, Mr. Abadi has eschewed force, instead imposing a ban on international flights to and from the landlocked Kurdistan region. He also threatened to seize Kurdish border crossings with Iran and Turkey, which shared Baghdad's opposition to the referendum and staged joint military exercises with Iraqi forces to express their anger.

"We don't want armed confrontation. We don't want clashes. But federal authority must prevail," Mr. Abadi said during a visit to France on Thursday, where he announced the victory in Hawija, the last territory the terror group controlled in northern Iraq.

Although the referendum doesn't automatically confer statehood, the government in Baghdad opposed it, as did the U.S., which warned of more conflict and chaos in the Middle East.

The Kurdish leadership also says it doesn't want conflict, and has called for dialogue with Baghdad, and diplomats are seeking to defuse tensions.

But there has also been aggressive rhetoric, including from leaders of some government-backed Shiite paramilitary groups known collectively as the Popular Mobilization Forces, which have fought Islamic State alongside the Iraqi military.

"Until recently there were people who said dialogue would work with the separatists, but they [the Kurds] did as they pleased because they were not dealt with by force," Qais al-Khazaali, who heads one group that is part of the Popular Mobilization Forces, said in a recent speech.

Some of the militias within the Popular Mobilization Forces are loyal to Iran, which has been one of the staunchest opponents of the referendum and could mobilize its allies in Iraq against the Kurds.

Both sides have recruited local residents from the disputed territories in northern Iraq. It took an intervention by senior Kurdish, Iraqi and Iranian officials to end clashes last year between members of the local ethnic Turkmen minority who have joined Shiite paramilitary groups, and Kurdish forces in a town south of Kirkuk.

Among those who fought in the Hawija operation was Arab tribal leader Sheikh Burhan al-Assi, who assembled a small militia of 75 fighters to recapture his own village just yards from the new front line with the Kurds.

Mr. Assi, who is also a member of the Kirkuk provincial council, said he hoped Baghdad and the Kurds would reach an agreement. "I am not against self-determination for the Kurdish people as long as it does not infringe upon the rights of others," he said.

Ghassan Adnan contributed to this article.

Write to Isabel Coles at isabel.coles@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020171008eda80025t



Life
Russia's New Charm Offensive in Syria; As Bashar al-Assad's forces advance, his patrons in Moscow hope a public-relations push will win hearts and minds

By Nathan Hodge 
1,319 words
6 October 2017
19:20
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The Umayyad Mosque in Aleppo was a symbol of Syria's tragedy: The Unesco World Heritage site was battered in fighting between the Syrian regime and its rebel foes, its minaret toppled and its ornate courtyard pitted by gunfire and shrapnel.

Now the medieval mosque has become a centerpiece for Russia's efforts to win hearts and minds in the Middle East.

Russian President Vladimir Putin intervened in Syria two years ago for several geopolitical reasons: to divert attention from the crisis in Ukraine, to strike a blow against U.S. dominance in the region and to prop up a longtime client state. Today, even as Russian bombing continues, the Kremlin is playing up a campaign of historic preservation, a move that appears aimed at deflecting international criticism of its support for Syria's emboldened president, Bashar al-Assad.

In mid-September, the Russian military flew two small planeloads of Russian and international journalists to Aleppo as part of a public-relations push meant to advertise the recent battlefield advances of the Moscow-backed Syrian government. The visiting reporters were brought to a school, where they were greeted by children singing patriotic songs and officials who praised the Russians. The journalists were shown a newly spruced-up square decorated with billboards of Mr. Assad, some saying "I believe in Syria"—n English.

The messaging was even more pointed at the 12th-century mosque. In the damaged courtyard, Mahmoud Akkam, the mufti of Aleppo, said that a private foundation based in Russia's Muslim-majority republic of Chechnya had committed $14 million toward restoring the mosque, one of the architectural masterpieces of the Muslim world.

The foundation is overseen by the family of Ramzan Kadyrov, Chechnya's powerful regional leader and an important ally of Mr. Putin's. Mr. Kadyrov once fought the Russian government during Chechnya's brutal separatist conflict between 1994 and 1996; now, he is at the vanguard of Russian efforts to combat militant Islam at home and abroad.

"Ramzan Kadyrov, like us, is a believer in the same religion," Mr. Akkam said. "We are united with him in the fight against terrorism."

A French reporter asked Mr. Akkam who had caused the damage to the mosque. "Les autres" ("the others"), he replied, referring to anti-Assad rebel groups that had been based in the mosque and its environs during the fighting.

Human-rights activists have long accused Mr. Kadyrov of serious abuses, including arbitrary detention and extrajudicial killings. Mr. Kadyrov denies the charges. When Mr. Akkam was asked about his benefactor's reputation, Russian military handlers instructed an interpreter not to translate the question.

Mr. Kadyrov's foot soldiers are now playing an important role in Syria. Russia has deployed military police units drawn in part from Chechnya to Aleppo, which Mr. Assad's forces retook late last year. These troops now patrol the city's devastated landscape, clearing mines and unexploded ordnance. And the deployment of military police from Muslim-majority republics of the Caucasus seems to be another Russian gambit to win some hearts and minds in Syria.

Mr. Putin's intervention in Syria has paid Moscow significant strategic dividends for a relatively modest military deployment. Russia's Defense Ministry won't disclose how many troops it has on the ground in Syria, but it operates dozens of drones, attack helicopters and strike aircraft from an air base in Latakia province. Russia also stations warships at a naval base in the Syrian port of Tartus.

Russian operations have largely focused on providing air support to the Syrian regime and its allies, including Shiite militias and Iranian combat troops. In mid-September, Lt. Gen. Alexander Lapin, the chief of staff of Russia's forces in Syria, said that his warplanes were flying some 50 sorties daily. The Russians say that their special-operations troops and advisers provide key intelligence and targeting support to Mr. Assad's forces. Syria has also been a testing ground for some of Russia's most up-to-date weaponry, including ship- and submarine-launched cruise missiles.

The Russian military presence on the ground has expanded in recent months. In September, Russian military engineers built a pontoon bridge across the Euphrates River, allowing Mr. Assad's troops to continue their dash into Deir Ezzour, the province that is the last major Syrian stronghold for Islamic State militants.

"The message from the Russian military is that the Syrian civil war is over, and reconstruction can begin," said Genevieve Casagrande, a Syria research analyst at the Washington-based Institute for the Study of War.

But the fighting in Syria isn't over, and Mr. Assad's regime, along with its Russian and Iranian backers, now face insurgents in areas where it has made gains.

"It's going to be a long, hard fight," Ms. Casagrande said. "Although the Russians are messaging that the war is over…t's now more of a jihadist opposition led by al Qaeda that Russia, Iran and the regime are going to have to battle."

As the propaganda war continues, Russian officials have routinely railed against the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a U.K.-based opposition monitoring group that collects data on civilian casualties through a network of volunteers inside Syria. Moscow has also accused the White Helmets, a group of first responders that works in rebel-held areas, of links to terrorist groups and of fabricating evidence of atrocities.

The reason for the defensiveness is clear: Russia's use of heavy firepower in Syria has drawn widespread international condemnation. Late last year, as Syrian regime forces backed by Russian air power besieged Aleppo, the Obama administration called for Russia and Syria to be investigated for war crimes over their attacks on hospitals and civilians. Then-Secretary of State John Kerry compared the devastation of Aleppo to Russia's block-by-block assault in late 1999 and early 2000 to retake Grozny, the capital of the then-breakaway republic of Chechnya.

Mr. Putin came to power vowing to show no quarter to terrorists, famously threatening to find Chechen separatists and "waste them in the outhouse." But the picture that Russia is now showing to foreign journalists in Syria—rom the mosque refurbishment to images of Russian soldiers distributing humanitarian aid—mphasizes a kinder, gentler phase of operations.

The messaging has a domestic component. Russia has a substantial Muslim minority, which the CIA estimates at some 10% to 15% of the country's population, and Mr. Putin often nods to Russia's religious diversity. In Syria, Russia's showcases of efforts at historic preservation seem designed to draw a contrast with the vicious tactics of Islamic State.

After Russian-backed Syrian troops retook the ancient city of Palmyra from Islamic State in 2016, the Russian military ferried in reporters—o see a concert conducted by maestro Valery Gergiev in the town's Roman amphitheater. And Russia's most recent scripted media tour in Syria was also heavy on the antiquities: In addition to the Umayyad Mosque, reporters also visited the Citadel of Aleppo, a medieval fortress that looms over the city, and the Krak des Chevaliers, a Crusader castle in Homs province.

Fyodor Lukyanov, a Russian foreign-policy expert, said that events such as the Palmyra concert were meant to emphasize Russia's contribution to defending the world, not just itself. "Putin clearly wants to be seen as the guarantor of civilization, as someone who can restore it," Mr. Lukyanov said.

Thomas Grove contributed to this article.

Write to Nathan Hodge at nathan.hodge@wsj.com

The Agonies of Syria

* Assad Regime Detains Opponents as It Reasserts Control

* Russian Special Forces Seen as Key to Assad's Aleppo Victory

* In Syria, New Conflict Looms as \b ISIS\b0  Loses Ground

Document WSJO000020171006eda6004h7



Politics
Three Men Charged With Plotting Attacks in New York City to Support Islamic State; Prosecutors say men planned to bomb Times Square and subway system

By Nicole Hong 
911 words
7 October 2017
01:21
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Federal authorities on Friday unsealed criminal charges against three men who allegedly plotted bombings and shootings last year in New York City to support the terrorist group Islamic State.

The three defendants are Abdulrahman El Bahnasawy, a 19-year-old Canadian citizen; Talha Haroon, a 19-year-old U.S. citizen living in Pakistan; and Russell Salic, a 37-year-old Philippine citizen.

The Manhattan U.S. attorney's office said the three men plotted to conduct bombings in heavily populated areas of New York City, including in Times Square and the subway system. They also allegedly plotted to shoot civilians at specific concert venues.

The defendants were planning to carry out the attacks during Ramadan, the holiest month in the Islamic calendar, around June through July of 2016, prosecutors said.

Authorities said the Federal Bureau of Investigation and New York Police Department successfully thwarted the plot, largely through the use of an undercover agent who pretended to be a supporter of Islamic State, or ISIS, and to prepare to carry out the attacks with them.

Mr. El Bahnasawy was arrested last year and pleaded guilty to seven charges, including conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction, which carries a maximum penalty of life in prison. Mr. Haroon and Mr. Salic were arrested in Pakistan and the Philippines, respectively, where they are pending extradition, according to the Manhattan U.S. attorney's office.

Lawyers for the three men could not immediately be identified.

Authorities in New York have thwarted several plots against the city in recent years.

John Miller, deputy commissioner of the NYPD's counterterrorism and intelligence unit, said in June that there have been about 25 terrorist plots against New York City since the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, most of which were thwarted. Common targets included Times Square, the Brooklyn Bridge and John F. Kennedy Airport, he said.

In this case, the undercover agent had been talking to the men since at least late April 2016, according to court documents.

In electronic communications with the agent, Mr. El Bahnasawy and Mr. Haroon allegedly declared their allegiance to ISIS and expressed their desire to carry out terrorist attacks in New York City similar to those in Paris and Brussels.

The attacks in Paris on the night of Nov. 13, 2015, which included gunmen shooting spectators at a popular concert venue, killed 130 people. In the Brussels attack on March 22, 2016, 32 people died after explosions hit the Brussels airport and a subway station.

The defendants identified subway lines where bombs could be detonated. Mr. Haroon allegedly told the undercover agent that they should shoot as many passengers on the subway as possible, including "women or kids."

Prosecutors said Mr. El Bahnasawy sent the agent an image of Times Square, saying, "[W]e seriously need a car bomb at times square...Look at these crowds of people!" He said he aspired to "create the next 9/11."

Mr. Haroon said the plan could include "[d]rive by or we surround the whole street and trap them and kill as many as possible," according to officials. He discussed attempting to execute the attacks as early as Memorial Day weekend.

Mr. Haroon said he was in contact with ISIS associates within a province in Pakistan, where a branch of the terrorist group is active, according to prosecutors. Mr. Haroon allegedly met with an explosives expert in Pakistan and said he would travel to New York City as soon as feasible to carry out the attacks.

Meanwhile, Mr. El Bahnasawy bought bomb-making materials in Canada, including about 40 pounds of hydrogen peroxide, which is commonly used in explosive devices, according to court documents. He sent the materials to the undercover agent in the U.S.

Prosecutors accused Mr. Salic of funding the operation. Mr. Salic allegedly wired around $423 from the Philippines to the undercover agent to help finance the planned attack, and said he was "desperate" to travel to Syria to join ISIS. Mr. Salic suggested that if he couldn't travel to Syria to join ISIS, he might carry out an attack himself, law enforcement said.

Mr. Salic, who identified himself as a doctor, told the agent he was funding the activities of other ISIS supporters in other countries. The criminal complaint said Mr. Salic wired about $426 to an individual in Malaysia who was later arrested and charged with participating in a grenade attack at a Kuala Lumpur nightclub in 2016.

Authorities said Mr. Haroon and Mr. El Bahnasawy planned to build the explosive devices with the undercover agent at a rural cabin within driving distance of New York.

On May 21, 2016, Mr. El Bahnasawy traveled from Canada to the New York City area to carry out the attacks. He was arrested that night in Cranford, N.J., and pleaded guilty a few months later.

Mr. Haroon was arrested around September 2016 in Pakistan, while Mr. Salic was arrested in the Philippines earlier this year.

Write to Nicole Hong at nicole.hong@wsj.com

READ MORE

* New York City Police Department to Create New Counterterrorism Unit (Jan. 29, 2015)

* FBI Says \b ISIS\b0  Used eBay to Send Terror Cash to U.S. (Aug. 10, 2017)

* \b ISIS\b0  Leader Pulls From bin Laden Playbook in New Message (Sept. 29, 2017)

Document WSJO000020171006eda600692



Business World
What if Paddock Were al Qaeda?

By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr. 
863 words
4 October 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A15
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Those who say gun control is the answer to massacres like Sunday's in Las Vegas are really saying they are willing to live with such outrages.

Gun-control proposals always float up in the aftermath of mass shootings, singularly detached from any plan that could be carried out, much less command majority support from the U.S. electorate. A law banning gun sales is not in the cards. A law seriously curtailing private gun ownership, as exists in the U.K., is not in the cards. If it were, enforcing it would be a whole other nightmare.

Non-meaningful gun regulations, in fact, were the specialty of a Democratic senator who long represented Nevada, scene of Sunday's killings. Harry Reid had a lifetime "B" rating from the National Rifle Association. A New York Times columnist on Monday, under the web headline "Preventing Mass Shootings Like the Vegas Strip Attack," proposed eight steps that, whatever their slight utility in lowering the rate of other kinds of gun crimes and suicides, even the writer admitted would have no "overwhelming effect" on gun deaths, let alone mass shootings.

Mass shootings of the modern ilk are a lot more like terrorist attacks than they are like routine gun crimes, in which guns are used to settle an argument, facilitate a robbery or eliminate a rival.

Mass shootings typically involve a substantial measure of planning and preparation. Stephen Paddock walked into a luxury hotel -- correction, he walked into a hotel-casino, where it's part of the business model to know and watch customers carefully -- with 23 weapons, ammo and related equipment. Here's a question: Do you think Paddock, if he had also spent 30 minutes on an al Qaeda or ISIS website, would have been allowed to get this far?

America's surveillance state -- yes, we have one -- finds what it's programmed to look for.

The actor John Leguizamo is currently seen on New York TV in a public-service ad singing the praise of license-plate readers that have replaced tollbooths and will snap your picture and send you a bill in the mail. Google and other ad servers know -- God, do they know -- if you happen to be interested in motorcycles. Facebook, until it discovered media blowback, allowed its algorithms to service anyone seeking to market his wares to self-identified "Jew haters."

Microsoft showed that search-engine queries can predict with a degree of accuracy who will be subsequently diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. Has anybody tried to reconstruct the electronic history of recent mass shooters to see if their actions might also have been predictable?

Mark Barton, a day trader, killed nine people at two Atlanta trading firms in 1999 after losing a bunch of money on internet stocks. He vowed revenge on those who "greedily sought my destruction." Paddock is said to have been worth $2 million thanks to real-estate investments, and to have spent his last years living the life of a "professional casino gambler."

These two claims would seem a tad incompatible. Casino odds are designed to favor the house (otherwise there wouldn't be a casino business). Anybody who plays for an extended period can expect to empty his bank account and fill the casino's. "Professional casino gambler" is a polite term for somebody psychologically addicted to losing money.

What's more, casinos keep tabs on how much their best customers are spending and losing. They are obliged by law to report to the federal government cash transactions of more than $10,000, which Paddock was in the habit of making. If they haven't already, casinos surely will be deploying face recognition as part of their careful monitoring of their premises.

Like Mark Barton, it wouldn't be surprising to learn that Paddock decided to go on a killing spree after gambling away his fortune. It wouldn't be surprising to learn he wasn't a normal, balanced person who just "snapped" -- Mark Barton was shown in the aftermath to have been a demonstrable psychopath whom the law never quite managed to catch up with.

This column has always been partial to Dean Martin's theory of gun control. The singer was arrested with an illegal weapon in his car. When asked by a reporter if everybody should carry a gun, he joked, "No, just me."

Unfortunately, this is not a realistic basis for legislating for 330 million people. Let's stop covering our eyes with respect to the potential of big data. As a top U.S. intelligence official pointed out after 9/11, nearly every transaction and communication nowadays leaves an electronic trail -- if we could only make use of it.

The information exists. It would be a job for algorithms, not human snoops, to rake through the unimaginable piles of data for the telltale patterns. Protection of privacy could be programmed into such a system, with rules specifying how such information can be surfaced for human consideration. So let's at least be willing to find out what the potential is.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020171004eda400017



Mayor Vows to Improve School Safety

By Leslie Brody 
505 words
3 October 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A12B
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Scores of parent leaders packed a Harlem library Monday to grill New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio about school safety after last week's fatal stabbing of a student inside a Bronx high school.

Bullying appeared to be a factor in the killing, and several parents asked why schools weren't doing more to fight such harassment.

Speakers from around the city said calls to staff to report bullying had elicited too little action; that some schools had too few social workers or psychologists; and that it is too hard for parents to get up-to-date information on violence at their children's schools.

One parent from Queens, Souad Kirama, said she had worked as an advocate for Muslim elementary students who were called ISIS by bullies, and a school principal hadn't returned her call for help. In some cases, she was directed to staffers who had no experience or power to handle such problems. "We'd like to see more compassion, more seriousness," Ms. Kirama said.

The mayor said his administration had sent a message, and "will send it even more rigorously, to everyone in the school community, never ignore an instance of bullying."

Abel Cedeno, 18 years old, was charged with murder last week in the stabbing death of a 15-year-old classmate at the Urban Assembly School for Wildlife Conservation in the Bronx. Mr. Cedeno's lawyers at the Legal Aid Society said he had endured a "long history of bullying." Mr. Cedeno didn't specify that the victim was among those that harassed him, according to police.

Mr. de Blasio was often on the defensive during the meeting that lasted about 1 1/2 hours. He emphasized the city's efforts to teach school staff to de-escalate conflicts, beef up peer mediation, and improve mental-health services.

The mayor said schools had become safer, but parents, police and school staff must communicate better. "We have more to do and we have to do it together."

Schools Chancellor Carmen Farina said professional-development sessions will be held for all teachers, covering conflict resolution and review of protocols for reporting bullying.

Gigs Taylor-Stephenson, a parent-association president at Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing & Visual Arts in Harlem, said such training mattered only if staff used the lessons. "What do we do as parents to make sure the accountability is there when teachers show up for training because they have to, but they ignore it?" she asked.

Renesha Westbrooks, a parent on the Community Education Council in District 32 Brooklyn, said she was horrified several times to see children hopping around in classrooms, throwing papers in front of teachers who had no control. "I've watched safety guards actually sit there in one spot," she added. "I don't see security guards budge."

The mayor told her "a classroom that is not in order is something we don't accept."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020171003eda30001c



World
Suspected Terrorist Attack Injures Five in Canada; Officials identified the suspect as a Somali refugee who was known to police

By Vipal Monga and Paul Vieira 
665 words
2 October 2017
01:18
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Canadian officials identified the man who stabbed a police officer and drove a van into four pedestrians in a suspected terrorist attack in Edmonton, Alberta, Saturday night as Somali refugee who had been known to police.

At a press conference in Edmonton, Marlin Degrand, an official from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, said someone had filed a complaint against the suspect in 2015 for "espousing radical ideology." Police officers investigated the complaint and interviewed the suspect, but found no cause to press charges, Mr. Degrand said.

He said initial findings from the investigation suggested the suspect was acting alone.

Edmonton police said that on Saturday night, near the city's Commonwealth Stadium, the unidentified man crashed a white Chevrolet Malibu through traffic barricades and hit a police officer, sending him flying 15 feet through the air. The driver jumped out of the car and began stabbing the officer. The attacker then ran away.

About three hours later, police stopped a man in a U-Haul truck. An officer recognized the name on the license as similar to that of the owner the Chevrolet. The driver fled, leading to a high-speed chase through downtown Edmonton. The driver of the truck hit four pedestrians during the chase, before his van flipped over and he was captured.

Edmonton Police Chief Rod Knecht confirmed during a morning press conference that there was an ISIS flag in the Chevrolet Malibu.

The police officer is expected to recover, he said, during a later update on the situation. The pedestrians' injuries ranged from broken limbs to brain bleeding, said Mr. Knecht. Two of them have left the hospital, while the others remain under observation. He declined to identify them.

In a statement released Sunday, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said he was "deeply concerned and outraged by the tragedy.""We cannot—nd will not—et violent extremism take root in our communities," Mr. Trudeau said.

The attack comes amid growing concern among some Canadians about a rising wave of refugees and asylum seekers coming into the country.

Canada has processed 27,440 asylum seekers in the first eight months of this year, more than in any of the last entire six years, according to the Canada border and immigration officials.

On Saturday, police closed a Quebec border crossing that had been the site of many refugee crossings, amid a protest from far-right groups and pro-immigrant counter protesters.

In August, anti-immigration protesters in Quebec City clashed with police and counter protesters, a day after about 100 people marched in Vancouver, British Columbia, protesting Islam and the Canadian government's policies on refugees and asylum seekers.

In the past several years, Canada hasn't been immune to terrorist attacks, or cases of Canadians involved in suspected terrorism.

A Montreal man originally from Tunisia was charged in June after a police officer was stabbed at the airport in Flint, Michigan, in what U.S. officials said was a terrorist attack.

Authorities said the attacker yelled "God is great" in Arabic before the officer was stabbed in the neck. Amor Ftouhi faces a charge of committing violence at an international airport, and his case is before the courts in the U.S.

Early in 2017, six Muslim men were shot dead at a mosque in Quebec City during prayer service, an incident Mr. Trudeau called a terrorist act.

In October, 2014, a gunman shot and killed a soldier guarding Canada's National War Memorial in Ottawa before being killed himself inside the country's main parliament building. That came two days after two soldiers were run over in Quebec by another Canadian man whom authorities were investigating for terror links. One of those soldiers later died.

Write to Vipal Monga at vipal.monga@wsj.com and Paul Vieira at paul.vieira@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020171001eda1000ul



US
Trial of Accused 'Chelsea' Bomber Is Set to Begin; Prosecutors allege Ahmad Rahimi planted bombs throughout NYC and N.J.

By Nicole Hong 
709 words
1 October 2017
15:00
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Federal prosecutors in Manhattan will seek to convince jurors this week that Ahmad Rahimi is the man who set off bombs in New York City and New Jersey last year that wounded more than two dozen people.

Mr. Rahimi, a 29-year-old U.S. citizen who was born in Afghanistan, faces mandatory life imprisonment if he is convicted of all eight charges, which include using weapons of mass destruction and bombing a place of public use.

He has pleaded not guilty.

Going to trial may have been Mr. Rahimi's best chance to avoid a possible life sentence, legal experts say. They say a guilty plea likely also would have resulted in life imprisonment.

Prosecutors accuse Mr. Rahimi, a former resident of Elizabeth, N.J., of planting bombs throughout New York City and New Jersey, including one that detonated in Manhattan's Chelsea neighborhood on the night of Sept. 17, 2016. The blast injured approximately 31 people and caused millions of dollars in property damage, according to law enforcement officials.

The explosions set off a manhunt across two states. Mr. Rahimi was captured two days later after a shootout with police in Linden, N.J.

The attack highlighted the difficulty for law enforcement in finding out when an individual is buying suspicious materials to carry out a possible terrorist attack. In the months before the incident, an eBay user with the registered username "ahmad rahimi" bought citric acid and other materials commonly used in improvised explosives, according to law enforcement.

The trial, which is expected to last at least two weeks, will feature surveillance video that officials say will tie Mr. Rahimi to the attack.

On the morning of Sept. 17 last year, the first explosive device detonated along the route of a charity 5K race in Seaside Park, N.J. before the race had begun. Later that day, a device that had been placed inside a pressure cooker packed with ball bearings and left in a dumpster blew up in Chelsea. Last week, , a federal judge granted the government's request to bring the dumpster into the courthouse as a proposed trial exhibit.

Shortly after the explosions, law enforcement found another pressure-cooker bomb a few blocks away in Chelsea. The next day, multiple explosive devices were discovered inside a backpack near an Elizabeth train station.

At the trial, expert witnesses are expected to testify that Mr. Rahimi's fingerprints were found on several of the bomb components and on materials in the backpack. The government will show jurors the contents of a notebook that Mr. Rahimi carried at the time of his arrest as evidence of his intent to commit a terrorist act, according to court filings.

The notebook contained a letter allegedly written by Mr. Rahimi to the U.S. government saying the attacks were an effort to cause "Death to Your OPPRESSION" and "Gun shots to your Police," according to court filings. The letter also references Osama bin Laden and other terrorists.

Mr. Rahimi intended for years to "engage in violent jihad motivated by propaganda and other directives from terrorist leaders," prosecutors wrote in a filing.

Mr. Rahimi's court-appointed lawyers will likely try to undermine the government's claim that the notebook belonged to Mr. Rahimi, saying in a court filing that "the government has not offered proof of authorship."

The defense may also challenge evidence from Mr. Rahimi's laptop on First Amendment grounds. Prosecutors are expected to show emails from Mr. Rahimi that contain information about jihad, as well as his internet searches for propaganda magazines from terrorist groups like Islamic State, or ISIS.

In a court filing, the defense wrote that many of the electronic communications occurred in 2012, years before the attack, and that sending links to articles about jihad does not point to a "serious expression of an intention to use a weapon of mass destruction." His lawyers said he engaged in "lawful speech, no matter how unpopular."

Write to Nicole Hong at nicole.hong@wsj.com

Related

* Chelsea, After the Bombing: Cleaned Up, Moved On

* Benghazi Suspect's Trial to Begin

Document WSJO000020171001eda1000ma



World News:  ISIS  Says It Released Audio Recording of Its Leader

By Maria Abi-Habib and Nancy A. Youssef 
635 words
29 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Islamic State said it released the first speech in nearly a year from its leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, with the remarks defying speculation that he was dead and lashing out against the U.S.

The audio recording, about 45 minutes long, sought to reassure Islamic State members that their losses across the Mideast -- from Libya to Iraq -- will lead to their enemies' eventual downfall.

Although the speech gave no indication of when it was recorded, Mr. Baghdadi referred to the political negotiations in Astana, Kazakhstan, between the Syrian opposition and the government. Whether the voice on the recording was Mr. Baghdadi's couldn't be independently verified.

The Russian military said in June that it was investigating whether Mr. Baghdadi was killed in a May airstrike against Islamic State leaders. Russia's foreign minister subsequently qualified that claim, saying reports of his death couldn't be corroborated with 100% certainty. Western and Iraqi officials were skeptical of the report.

The purported speech released Thursday would be the first by Mr. Baghdadi since Islamic State lost Mosul in Iraq this summer, once the largest city under its control, and while U.S.-backed forces are about to cement control over Raqqa in Syria. Both Raqqa and Mosul were the de facto capitals of Islamic State's caliphate, or religious empire.

In Washington, U.S. officials were scrutinizing the message but said they couldn't confirm it was Mr. Baghdadi. "We haven't been able to independently verify," a U.S. military official said. The official said there was no reason at this point not to think it was Mr. Baghdadi on the recording.

Mr. Baghdadi mocks the U.S. on the recording, claiming it "thought it was the greatest nation in the world and has lost its place as the only superpower while falling into huge debts" with a poorly executed Middle East policy. "Russia used this weakness to take America's place as the superpower [in Syria]."

The purported message comes as Pentagon officials fret that Islamic State is planning to become an insurgency in places like Iraq and Syria as its self-proclaimed state collapses.

In Syria, it is among the last remaining forces that could successfully mount a campaign against the regime of President Bashar al-Assad, which depends on help from Iran and Russia to regain territory.

Mr. Assad's tenuous grip, coupled with his dependency on Iran, could create room for ISIS to present itself as the vanguard of Syria's Sunni communities. "That is the fear. They are hanging low and integrating themselves into the population," a defense official explained.

Some military officials celebrated Mr. Baghdadi's message as a concession that the U.S.-led coalition campaign has worked in shrinking the organization's land holdings.

"He's admitting defeat," the first military official said. But he added: "A safe haven is the lifeblood of the insurgency."

Mr. Baghdadi's fortunes have taken a sharp turn downward from his first recorded public appearance in July 2014, when he took the pulpit of Mosul's al-Nuri mosque, establishing his caliphate and declaring himself the leader of the world's Muslim population. He is now believed by U.S. officials to be hiding out in eastern Syria.

Islamic State militants continue to carry out attacks against government forces across the Mideast while a mixture of its supporters and its operatives conduct terror attacks against mostly civilians in the West, leaving Europe on edge.

In the recording Thursday, Mr. Baghdadi appeared to renew a call for fresh recruits while he rallied existing members weary after multiple defeats.

---

Leena Saidi contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170929ed9t0001h



World News:  ISIS  Says It Put Out Speech By Leader

By Maria Abi-Habib and Nancy A. Youssef 
368 words
29 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Islamic State said it released the first speech in nearly a year from its leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, with the remarks defying speculation that he was dead and lashing out against the U.S.

The audio recording, about 45 minutes long, sought to reassure Islamic State members that their losses across the Mideast will lead to their enemies' eventual downfall.

Although the speech gave no indication of when it was recorded, Mr. Baghdadi referred to the political negotiations in Astana, Kazakhstan, between the Syrian opposition and the government. Whether the voice on the recording was Mr. Baghdadi couldn't be independently verified.

The Russian military said in June that it was investigating whether Mr. Baghdadi was killed in a May airstrike against Islamic State leaders. Russia's foreign minister subsequently qualified that claim, saying reports couldn't be corroborated with 100% certainty. Western and Iraqi officials were skeptical of the report.

The purported speech released Thursday would be the first by Mr. Baghdadi since Islamic State lost Mosul in Iraq this summer, once the largest city under its control, and while U.S.-backed forces are about to cement control over Raqqa in Syria. Both Raqqa and Mosul were the de facto capitals of Islamic State's caliphate, or religious empire. At its height in 2014, the caliphate straddled Iraq and Syria, a contiguous territory the size of Belgium and had satellites across the Mideast.

U.S. officials were scrutinizing the message, but said they couldn't confirm it was Mr. Baghdadi. "We haven't been able to independently verify," a U.S. military official said. The official added there was no reason at this point not to think it was Mr. Baghdadi on the recording.

Mr. Baghdadi mocks the U.S. on the recording, claiming it "thought it was the greatest nation in the world and has lost its place as the only superpower while falling into huge debts" with a poorly executed Middle East policy. "Russia used this weakness to take America's place as the superpower [in Syria]."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170929ed9t0001v



World
Iran's Chief Diplomat: 'When We Make a Deal, We Stick to It'; Javad Zarif says Iran remains committed to 2015 nuclear agreement with the U.S. and other world powers

By Farnaz Fassihi 
576 words
29 September 2017
00:26
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Iran's top diplomat staunchly defended the Islamic Republic's regional military involvements and weapons programs, while saying it also remains committed to the 2015 nuclear agreement with the U.S. and other world powers.

"When we make a deal, we stick to it," Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif said, speaking Wednesday night before an audience at the Asia Society in New York.

Mr. Zarif offered insight into ways in which the Islamic Republic was hardening its positions in response to Washington, yet also willing to consider potential negotiations on security matters and dual-citizen detainees.

He addressed recent criticism by President Donald Trump, who called the clerical government "a corrupt dictatorship" and denounced the nuclear agreement as "an embarrassment" in a United Nations speech last week, and targeted Iran this week in a new policy restricting travel to the U.S.

"I cannot accept any American president to insult my country," said Mr. Zarif, citing a Persian proverb in addressing U.S. demands on Iran: "Prove your brotherhood first, and then ask for your inheritance."

Experts have said that in general, the Trump administration's hard-line stance is having an effect on Iran.

"Trump is moving the mainstream of the Iranian politics to the right. That will have long term negative consequences for the U.S. and Iran's role in the region," said Ali Vaez, senior Iran analyst for the International Crisis Group, a research organization.

Mr. Zarif, a longtime diplomat, held to a defiant tone on most issues, lecturing moderator Charlie Rose and the audience on the history of America's foreign policy in the Middle East, citing what he presented as contradictions and shortcomings.

"Who prevented Damascus, Baghdad and Erbil from falling to ISIS? Iran did," Mr. Zarif said.

He boasted about Iran's military interventions in the region, which have been conducted through its elite Revolutionary Guard Corps, the Qods Forces and proxy groups like Hezbollah and various Shiite militia in Iraq, and said they had stabilized and saved the region from the wrath of terrorist groups.

"Iranian policy in the region is very clear," said Mr. Zarif, "The Arab world is our business."

But he also indicated that Iranian leaders may be willing to hold discussions about prisoners or even issues related to the nuclear deal.

Asked about Iranian-American and American prisoners held in Iran, Mr. Zarif said he was equally concerned about Iranians in the U.S. charged with evading sanctions against Iran. Iran currently is holding at least four dual American nationals and one American-Chinese scholar from Princeton University. All have been charged with spying.

He reiterated Iran's position that the nuclear deal was a closed matter, saying: "You can't pocket concessions and then ask for more after the deal is done."

But he also suggested that if the U.S. Congress "behaved," Iran would consider additional side agreements. Lawmakers have threatened to impose new sanctions against Iran.

Write to Farnaz Fassihi at farnaz.fassihi@wsj.com

Related

* U.S. Keeps Iran Nuclear Deal in Place but Imposes Other Sanctions (Sept. 14)

* U.S. Treasury Adds 11 New Entities and Individuals to Iran Sanctions List (Sept. 14)

* Trump Administration Again Certifies Iran Is Complying With Nuclear Deal (July 18)

Document WSJO000020170928ed9s006y1



World News:  ISIS  Militants Strike in Iraqi City

By Ghassan Adnan and Isabel Coles 
338 words
28 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

BAGHDAD -- Islamic State militants attacked the western Iraqi city of Ramadi on three fronts Wednesday, clashing with security forces even as Iraq's army routs the terror group from its few remaining strongholds in the country.

The attack comes as Iraqi forces wage dual offensives to recapture western Anbar province, of which Ramadi is the capital, and the Hawija pocket in the country's north -- the last two major areas held by Islamic State, which seized around one-third of the country in a 2014 blitz.

Security officials in Ramadi said the insurgents had tricked Iraqi forces by pretending to be tribal fighters, enabling them to infiltrate parts of the city, some 55 miles west of Baghdad.

Civilians fled parts of western Ramadi after militants took over several buildings there and clashed with security forces, said police Col. Adel al-Alwani.

At least 13 Islamic State fighters, including suicide bombers, were killed in clashes with security forces in the Majar area south of the city, local official Ali Dawood said.

A photograph from clashes in a neighboring area showed members of Iraq's security forces pushing a wheelbarrow loaded with the dead bodies of at least two insurgents.

A total of 58 militants were killed in the clashes, according to the Anbar police directorate. The provincial health directorate said 16 civilians and members of the security forces were also killed.

U.S.-backed Iraqi forces in July routed the militants from the northern city of Mosul, the largest city under their control, and last month retook the symbolic insurgent bastion of Tal Afar, near the border with Syria.

Islamic State is also under pressure in that country, where a Kurdish-led militia is chipping away at its operational base, Raqqa.

As the militants lose territory, they are resorting to more conventional insurgent tactics such as bombings and hit-and-run attacks against security forces and civilians.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170928ed9s0000x



Pro Cyber
Editor's News Picks

433 words
26 September 2017
12:50
WSJ Pro Cybersecurity
RSTPROCY
English
Copyright ©017, Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

Illinois Privacy Bill Vetoed: Illinois Governor Bruce Rauner has vetoed a bill that would have required mobile app makers to obtain a user's explicit permission, and explain how their data would be used, before collecting their location data. Mr. Rauner, a Republican, said the rules would represent "an unnecessary and byzantine layer of regulation" and said the issue of protecting consumer privacy should be addressed in the form of federal regulation, as quoted by the Associated Press  .

Changing Security Incentives: Security professionals have long complained that without government regulation or private sector momentum, organizations will have little motivation to invest in effective risk mitigation techniques. But

Dark Reading notes   that sinking Equifax stock, which has fallen by more than one-third since the data breach there earlier this month, could represent a watershed moment if other business leaders nervous about their own vulnerability recognize the need to protect their bottom line and reputation.

Polish GDPR Guidance: Poland has published a package of new draft laws that aim to align the country's data protection laws with the upcoming General Data Protection Regulation. The International Association of Privacy Professionals breaks down the law  , which clarifies the responsibilities of the Polish data protection authority and explains what types of information--including IT systems and corporate networks--that DPA is authorized to access. Next, the draft will go through a public consultation period with industry before its formalized into law.

SEC Rules Reexamined: The Investment Company Institute, a global investor group, is urging the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission to delay new rules meant to spark the collection of data on firms' security practices. The effort comes after the SEC announced last week it was targeted as part of a data breach that may have enabled insider trading. Now, ICO executives tell Reuters   the SEC should hold off implementing new rules until "a full inquiry" from the Government Accountability Office explains "exactly what happened here."

Cyber Terror Fail: Business leaders trying to prioritize their cyberrisk threats should not dedicate too many resources to fending off cyberterrorism from the so-called Islamic State terrorist group, according to a new report. Would-be Islamic State hackers stopped trying to develop their own secure communications, per The Register  , and, while ISIS members may have invested in low-level hacking tools available on cybercrime forums, they have yet to successfully leverage malicious software. "[As] it stands ISIS are not hugely operationally capable online," one expert told The Register. "As it is right now we should be concerned, of course, but within reason."

Document RSTPROCY20170926ed9q00001



World News: World Watch

426 words
25 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A12
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

NEW ZEALAND

Small Party Set to Be

Coalition Kingmaker

New Zealand faces an anxious wait to see which of its major political parties can form a government after a hotly contested election Saturday failed to deliver a clear result.

The leader of the populist New Zealand First party, Winston Peters, will be in the position to decide whether to give the current center-right government a fourth term or empower a resurgent center-left Labour Party, which rocketed back into contention with a new leader.

The campaign divided the South Pacific nation of nearly five million between those who have benefited from the ruling National Party's nine-year stewardship of the economy, which has outpaced most other developed nations, and others who feel they have been left behind.

Mr. Peters, who served as a deputy prime minister in a former National government, is expected to speak with both National and Labour before deciding which to support.

Under the country's German-style mixed-member proportional system, adopted in 1996, New Zealanders vote for a preferred party as well as a candidate to represent their electorate in the 120-seat Parliament.

Immigration was one of the biggest policy differences between the two major parties. New Zealand First takes an especially tough line on immigration.

-- Ben Collins

---

FRANCE

Senate Elections

Are Hit for Macron

French President Emmanuel Macron's centrist party suffered its first electoral blow Sunday, as traditional conservatives dominated Senate elections.

The results are a hit for Mr. Macron as he embarks on a labor-law overhaul he hopes will invigorate the economy.

Truckers plan to block highways Monday in the latest show of defiance.

Mr. Macron could still pass his revamp. The lower house of Parliament has the final say in legislation over the Senate, and lawmakers from the center-right Les Republicains party support many of Mr. Macron's pro-business policy plans.

-- Associated Press

---

LIBYA

U.S. Airstrikes Kill

17 ISIS Militants

U.S. airstrikes killed 17 Islamic State militants in Libya, the U.S. military said. The six "precision airstrikes" on Friday hit an Islamic State desert camp about 50 miles southeast of Sirte, the U.S. Africa Command said.

The camp was used "by ISIS to move fighters in and out of the country; stockpile weapons and equipment; and to plot and conduct attacks," it said.

The strikes were carried out in conjunction with the Libyan military and aligned forces, the U.S. Africa Command said.

-- Associated Press

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170925ed9p0001x



World
Airstrikes Kill 17 Islamic State Militants in Libya, U.S. Says; Desert camp used to conduct attacks was targeted

Associated Press
116 words
25 September 2017
04:21
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—.S. airstrikes killed 17 Islamic State militants in Libya, the U.S. military said Sunday.              

The six "precision airstrikes," carried out on Friday, hit an Islamic State desert camp about 50 miles southeast of Sirte, the U.S. Africa Command said.              

The camp was used "by ISIS to move fighters in and out of the country; stockpile weapons and equipment; and to plot and conduct attacks," the U.S. Africa Command said.             

The strikes were carried out in conjunction with the Libyan military and aligned forces, the U.S. Africa Command said.             

Document WSJO000020170925ed9p0008d



REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
The Kurds' Catalonian Turn

537 words
25 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Do Iraq's Kurds want a self-sufficient, internationally recognized independent state or, like the Catalonians of Spain, a permanent grievance to complain about? One has to wonder, given plans for a Monday plebescite that threatens the ethnic group's security and economic prosperity.

Masoud Barzani, the head of the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG), announced his intention to hold a referendum in 2014, but postponed the measure to help Baghdad and Washington beat back Islamic State advances in Iraq. Now that the terrorists are in retreat, he says the time is right for a vote.

Mr. Barzani says his people have a "natural, god-given right" to self-determination, and it's easy to sympathize. The Kurds, spread across Iran, Iraq, Syria and Turkey, share a common language, culture and geography. They've proved a reliable partner for Washington fighting Islamic terrorism and protecting their territory, which is why the U.S. enforced a decade-long no-fly zone to protect them from Saddam Hussein's depredations after the first Gulf War.

The strategic question isn't the sincerity of long-held Kurdish aspirations for self-governance, but whether Monday's vote would help or hurt their cause. Certainly the referendum lacks legal standing; Iraq's constitution doesn't have an opt-out clause, and earlier this month the country's Supreme Court put a temporary hold on the vote.

Nor is it clear that the Kurds would improve their economic circumstances by voting yes. Mr. Barzani may believe a nonbinding vote will give him political leverage to negotiate more autonomy and better economic support from Baghdad. In reality, it will kill a U.S.-brokered deal already on the table that would assuage Kurdish concerns about border security, oil revenues and regional relations. The vote would also undermine the government of Iraq's prime minister, Haider al-Abadi.

Then there's the real threat of military conflict and ethnic strife if the vote proceeds. Istanbul and Tehran oppose the KRG's referendum, fearing it will stoke Kurdish uprisings in their own countries. Turkey has already held tank drills on its border with the Iraqi Kurdish region, and those tanks could roll south quickly if Monday's vote proceeds. Iran, which dislikes Mr. al-Abadi's close relationship with Washington and wants to see him ejected from power, would cheer.

The Trump Administration denounced the vote on Wednesday, warning "the decision to hold the referendum in disputed areas is especially de-stabilizing, raising tensions which ISIS and other extremist groups are now seeking to exploit." Washington has an interest in not further inflaming an Arab-Kurd conflict, and keeping Iraq steady while the White House deals with Iran, the Syrian conflict, and the Gulf spat between Saudi Arabia and Qatar.

Mr. Barzani has backed himself into a corner by pushing ahead with a vote that wasn't supported by his allies or particularly well-conceived. It won't be easy for him to save face now, but postponing the vote and suffering political embarrassment is a small price to pay to protect the long-term interests of the Kurds he says he wants to help.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170924ed9p0000w



Houses of Worship
How to Help Iraq's Religious Minorities

By Nina Shea 
862 words
22 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A13
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

As Islamic State heads toward defeat in Iraq, Christian and Yazidi survivors of genocide should be returning to their hometowns in Nineveh province. Instead, these fragile minority communities mostly remain stranded at displacement shelters in Kurdistan without the means to rebuild their villages. Many are fleeing Iraq, and the country now risks losing these religious minorities entirely. The Trump administration is making the situation worse by continuing Obama policies that effectively exclude these non-Muslims from U.S. aid in Iraq.

Today there are fewer than 250,000 Christians in Iraq, according to the State Department, down from as many as 1.4 million before the 2003 invasion. These Christians speak Aramaic, like Jesus of Nazareth, and trace their faith to Thomas the Apostle, whose relics were spirited from Nineveh by Orthodox monks as ISIS approached. The Iraqi Jewish community, its roots in the Babylonian exile, was forced out over the past 70 years; fewer than 10 Jewish families remain in Baghdad. Yazidis -- who have lived near the Sinjar Mountains -- number about 400,000. Nadia Murad, the voice for thousands of Yazidis enslaved by ISIS, warned a congressional panel earlier this year that her people could soon disappear because of emigration. This would signal the end of Iraq's indigenous non-Muslim communities.

Since fiscal 2014, the U.S. has provided $1.4 billion in humanitarian aid for Iraq, but very little of it has reached the beleaguered Christian and Yazidi communities. This is because the Obama administration decided to channel most of it through United Nations refugee and development agencies, a practice the new administration has continued. There is no protection for religious minorities in the U.N.'s overwhelmingly Muslim camps, and Christians and Yazidis are terrified of entering them. The U.N. doesn't operate camps in Iraq for displaced Christians, and the international body has enough resources to shelter only half the Yazidis who congregate around Dohuk, in Iraqi Kurdistan. U.N. programs also exclude the local churches that struggle to care for these minorities, forcing them to raise aid on a piecemeal and insecure basis from other sources.

President Trump has spoken about the plight of Christians in the Middle East, but he has done little to effect change. Far lower percentages of Christians and Yazidis are returning from displacement to their homes in the devastated Nineveh Plains and Sinjar, respectively, compared with the larger religious groups in Tikrit, Fallujah and Mosul. The prior administration decided to have U.S. reconstruction assistance, now at $265 million since fiscal 2015, also flow through the U.N. The director of the U.S. Agency for International Development, Mark Green, started only last month and has not yet moved to change this policy.

USAID lacks direct oversight in Nineveh and relies heavily on U.N. Development Program reports that claim progress in Christian towns. One local church authority told me the U.N. reports "grossly overstate the quality and substance of the actual work" and their projects' influence is "minimal or nonexistent." A representative from the Nineveh Reconstruction Committee, a unified church group, told me earlier this month that the only major projects under way are its own. These are supported by Hungary and the Knights of Columbus. Samaritan's Purse and Aid to the Church in Need are planning projects in Qaraqosh, also without U.S. government assistance. These private charities can rebuild houses, but large infrastructure projects need government aid.

The U.N. acknowledges that most of the displaced minorities have not returned home and have shown "a reluctance to return without guarantees of their security and the stability of their towns and villages." Church leaders close to the displaced are excluded from U.N. and Iraqi government committees that decide stabilization projects, track progress and ensure locals are hired for them. Rex Tillerson's State Department has not changed this policy. Nor has it answered my request for information.

Security remains a problem and threatens America's regional interests. Iran is moving in on the towns minorities have been unable to reclaim. The U.N. has focused on minor projects in Bartella, a main Christian town. Yet on Sept. 15 the "Imam Khomeini" elementary school and mosque complex opened there at an official ceremony, a "gift from the Islamic Republic of Iran." In several towns, Iranian-backed militias stand guard.

President Trump can take immediate steps to ensure U.S. aid reaches Iraq's most vulnerable minorities. First, he can direct his administration to address their humanitarian and stabilization needs. This should include dropping the U.N. as a pass-through for U.S. aid. He can also appoint an interagency coordinator to ensure that bureaucratic hurdles don't interfere with getting aid to all groups. These relatively small tweaks would help preserve the region's religious minorities.

Iraq's religious minorities are small in number, but assisting them would affirm that the U.S. stands against genocide, protects religious freedom and aids vulnerable minority groups.

---

Ms. Shea is director of the Hudson Institute's Center for Religious Freedom.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170922ed9m00011



World News: Iraq Set to Move On  ISIS  Redoubt

By Ben Kesling and Ghassan Adnan 
398 words
22 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- Iraq's army launched an offensive to drive Islamic State from the town of Hawija, one of the group's few remaining strongholds in the country and a hub it uses to threaten the oil-rich city Kirkuk and Iraq's semiautonomous Kurdish region.

The operation on Thursday comes days after Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi announced the military had begun clearing the militants from areas that remain under their control in Anbar province, some along the Syrian border. The dual offensives mark one of the final steps in the campaign to oust Islamic State from Iraq.

"Hawija provides a strategic position and a main source for Daesh funding," counterterrorism forces spokesman Sabah al-Noman said, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

Hawija is used by the group as a center to build explosives including car bombs, and to launch attacks on surrounding areas including Mosul. It is also home to four Islamic State training camps, Mr. Noman said.

The town "now comes second in significance only to Raqqa in Syria," he said, referring to the group's de facto capital in Syria, which is under assault from an array of Syrian and Kurdish forces.

Mr. Abadi, announcing the start of the Hawija operation, called it "a fulfillment to our pledge to our people to liberate all Iraqi lands and cleanse them from Daesh terrorist gangs."

Iraqi troops are pushing through the outskirts of Hawija, which once had a population of over 400,000 people but is now home to just 45,000. Troops are expected to begin an assault on the town in early October, according to an Iraqi official.

In Anbar province, meanwhile, Iraqi forces announced the retaking Thursday of their first major objective, the town of Ana. They will later push toward the top prize in western Iraq, the border crossing town of al-Qaim.

The operations to retake Hawija and towns in Anbar launched as the Kurdish region in Iraq's north prepares to hold a controversial independence referendum on Sept. 25. The Iraqi government, United Nations and U.S., along with most of the international community, have opposed the vote's timing in large part because it coincides with the final stages of the battle against Islamic State.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170922ed9m0000v



World News: Iraq Moves to Retake  ISIS  Redoubt

By Ben Kesling and Ghassan Adnan 
495 words
22 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

BAGHDAD -- Iraq's army launched an offensive to drive Islamic State from the town of Hawija, one of the group's few remaining strongholds in the country and a hub it uses to threaten the oil-rich city Kirkuk and Iraq's semiautonomous Kurdish region.

The operation comes days after Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi announced the military had begun clearing the militants from areas that remain under their control in Anbar province, some along the Syrian border. The dual offensives mark one of the final steps in the campaign to oust Islamic State from Iraq.

"Hawija provides a strategic position and a main source for Daesh funding," counterterrorism forces spokesman Sabah al-Noman said, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

Hawija is used by the group as a center to build explosives including car bombs, and to launch attacks on surrounding areas including Mosul. It is also home to four Islamic State training camps, Mr. Noman said.

The town "now comes second in significance only to Raqqa in Syria," he said, referring to the group's de facto capital in Syria, which is under assault from an array of Syrian and Kurdish forces.

Mr. Abadi, announcing the start of the Hawija operation, called it "a fulfillment to our pledge to our people to liberate all Iraqi lands and cleanse them from Daesh terrorist gangs."

Iraqi troops are pushing through the outskirts of Hawija, which once had a population of over 400,000 people but is now home to just 45,000. Troops are expected to begin an assault on the town in early October, according to an Iraqi official.

In Anbar province, meanwhile, Iraqi forces announced the retaking Thursday of their first major objective, the town of Ana. They will later push toward the top prize in western Iraq, the border crossing town of al-Qaim.

The operations to retake Hawija and towns in Anbar launched as the Kurdish region in Iraq's north prepares to hold a controversial independence referendum on Monday. The Iraqi government, United Nations and U.S., along with most of the international community, have opposed the vote's timing in large part because it coincides with the final stages of the battle against Islamic State.

The district of Hawija makes up some 30% of Kirkuk province, according to Iraqi officials. Though Kirkuk falls under the control of Mr. Abadi's Baghdad government, Kurds claim the land should be part of their semiautonomous region.

Kirkuk's city and provincial leadership is Kurdish, and the city is largely protected by the Kurdish military forces known as the Peshmerga.

The area, riven with ethnic divisions, has become a potential flashpoint for unrest as plans for the referendum move forward.

Kurdish leaders have said they are willing to consider calling off the referendum at this time if given certain concessions.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170922ed9m0001n



After Islamic State, Is There Still an Iraq?

By Michael Dempsey 
954 words
21 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A19
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

As the U.S.-led coalition effort to destroy Islamic State's physical caliphate nears its endgame in Iraq, a major question hangs over the country: Is there still an Iraq?

ISIS has suffered a series of crippling blows, including its loss of the strategically important town of Tal Afar in Nineveh province. The U.S.-led coalition will next focus on driving ISIS out of Hawijah, some 200 miles north of Baghdad. Hawijah has an outsize military importance because ISIS has used it as a staging area from which to attack Baghdad with hundreds of improvised explosive devices, including car bombs. When the Hawijah operation is complete, the coalition will focus on attacking ISIS in its remaining enclaves along the border with Syria.

Once ISIS has been deprived of the territory it holds, can Iraq's major communities come together to share power and build a common future? That question is sparking increasingly heated debate in Iraq and the international community. In my opinion (which does not reflect the view of the intelligence community or the U.S. government), the answer will be determined by how the Iraqis respond to five key unresolved issues:

First, the Kurdish independence referendum, originally scheduled for Sept. 25, is threatening to spark a full-blown crisis even before ISIS is defeated on the battlefield. At issue is whether a large chunk of Iraq will eventually break away entirely or redefine its relationship with the central government. Complicating the issue is the inclusion in the vote of disputed territories, including the oil-rich city of Kirkuk, which is held by Kurdish forces but claimed by Baghdad.

On Monday Iraq's Supreme Court ordered the referendum suspended until it can assess the vote's legality. United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres is also calling for a delay, as are Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and the Turkish and Iranian governments. Kurdish leader Masoud Barzani has previously hinted that he might delay the referendum until after national elections next April, but only at the price of concessions and assurances about the Kurds' future status. Whether or not the referendum is held next week, it's likely to be only the opening act in lengthy negotiations between the parties, and resolving the question in a way that doesn't undermine Baghdad's legitimacy and threaten Iraq's neighbors is critically important.

Second, to ensure that ISIS remains marginalized, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi must accelerate long-delayed political reconciliation efforts, specifically by easing de-Baathification efforts and providing more local power and job opportunities to Sunni communities. This is a difficult task given the deep divisions over this issue within the Iraqi parliament, but Sunni isolation fueled ISIS' rise, and progress must be made on this issue soon.

Third, Baghdad must exercise tight control over the thousands of Shiite militia fighters (many of whom participated in Tal Afar's liberation) and limit their authority in traditional Sunni areas. Mr. Abadi must ensure that the Shiite militias are not allowed to determine unilaterally which populations are allowed to re-enter liberated areas, and that the bulk of reconstruction aid from Baghdad is not distributed only to Shiite communities. The Shiite militias are deeply distrusted by the Sunni populations of Nineveh and Anbar provinces, and they are a potential flashpoint in the delicate Shiite-Sunni relationship.

Fourth, as winter approaches, Baghdad must make progress in improving living conditions throughout the country. ISIS devastated infrastructure in the areas it controlled. The latest U.N. estimate is that some 11 million Iraqis require humanitarian assistance, with more than three million displaced across the country, more than one million living in temporary housing settlements, and more than 200,000 refugees abroad. The critical work of providing food and shelter to displaced Iraqis is a top priority.

The recent claim by Iraq's minister of water resources that the Mosul Dam is no longer in danger is worrisome, especially if it reflects a willingness of the central government to gloss over difficult infrastructure-related challenges. The grouting work performed by an Italian firm to shore up the dam's foundation was widely viewed as only a temporary solution, and most experts still believe there is the potential for a catastrophic dam breach.

Fifth, Mr. Abadi has to begin preparing for local and national elections. Despite a surge in his popularity following the Iraqi military's victories against ISIS, he will likely face a significant re-election challenge from, among others, Hadi al-Amiri, a longstanding ally of Iran. Mr. Abadi has been a strong partner for the U.S. in the counter-ISIS campaign, and his re-election offers the best hope for continuing a positive working relationship between Washington and Baghdad, and for balancing Tehran's growing influence in Iraq.

Other challenges will eventually have to be addressed -- among them closing the government's budget deficit, modernizing the oil infrastructure, and strengthening the banking sector. But the five challenges I've identified are urgent.

After nearly three years of a grueling fight against ISIS and a huge commitment of U.S. blood and treasure, there is finally reason to be optimistic about Iraq's future. But the country is nearing an inflection point, and only with mature and inclusive leadership in Baghdad, sustained U.S. engagement, and support from key allies in the West and the Gulf Cooperation Council will it be possible for Iraq to achieve a future with less violence and suffering and more reconciliation.

---

Mr. Dempsey is national intelligence fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, a fellowship sponsored by the U.S. government.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170921ed9l0000m



World News: Rivals Vie for Edge as  ISIS  Falters --- U.S.-backed forces are in a contest with the Syrian and Russian militaries in Deir Ezzour

By Maria Abi-Habib and Raja Abdulrahim in Beirut and Nathan Hodge in Okeirbat, Syria 
611 words
19 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

In the last Syrian province largely under Islamic State control, U.S.-backed forces are on a collision course with the Syrian and Russian militaries as both sides scramble to strengthen their hands ahead of postwar negotiations.

The contest for territory is playing out in Deir Ezzour, an oil-rich province where Islamic State has fought to protect its revenue streams and preserve what remains of its rapidly shrinking caliphate.

The Syrian government, backed by Russia and Iran, wants Deir Ezzour's resources to repair a shattered economy and replenish its coffers by exporting oil. It could also help Tehran establish a route over land to Beirut to support its Lebanese allies.

The U.S.-backed forces, who are led by Kurds, are also fighting Islamic State but wary of giving ground to the Syrian regime. Kurdish leaders want to use the province's wealth as a bargaining chip that could help them secure greater autonomy in Syria.

"The Kurds are trying to get as many cards in their hands as possible for the time when everyone sits around the table to play the big game. The scorecards that everyone will be looking at when they sit around the table and think, 'Who has the most and can ask for the most?'" said a senior Western diplomat who is based in the Middle East and focused on the Syria conflict.

With these different armed groups closing in on Deir Ezzour, forces backed by the U.S. and Russia are sometimes fighting within a few miles of each other, raising the risk of missteps that could inflame tensions.

On Saturday, Russian military forces attacked a location in Deir Ezzour east of the Euphrates River where they knew troops from the U.S.-led coalition and allied Syrian rebels were operating, the U.S. military said.

The strike injured several members of the U.S.-backed group, known as the Syrian Democratic Forces, according to a statement from the U.S.-led coalition.The statement added that the U.S. would seek talks with its Russian counterparts to avoid future conflicts.

The Russian military provided extensive air support to Syrian government forces during their lightning advance on Deir Ezzour. And this past week, Russia's defense ministry launched a major public-relations offensive to capitalize on those gains by the central government.

Russian military helicopters ferried international news crews to Deir Ezzour on Friday, capturing scenes of life returning to a semblance of normalcy in government-held areas of the provincial capital, also known as Deir Ezzour.

The Russian military also brought reporters to Okeirbat, a town in central Syria that was recaptured from Islamic State militants at the beginning of the month, enabling the government advance.

Over the past two months, the U.S. has pushed for a deconfliction line along the Euphrates River to coordinate the separate battles to retake Islamic State-held territory in Deir Ezzour. Washington has reached agreement with its Russian counterparts on deconfliction in other parts of Syria.

The talks between Washington and Moscow stalled, according to a U.S. official, and earlier this month Damascus and its allies advanced into Deir Ezzour city.

Days later, the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, backed by the U.S. military, pushed south to box in regime forces, potentially cutting off Damascus and Moscow from advancing farther east, toward the Iraqi border and the province's lucrative oil fields.



Document J000000020170919ed9j00009



World
Iraqi Kurds Plan to Vote on Independence, Despite Court Ruling; After Iraqi Supreme Court halts next week's referendum, Kurdish region's foreign relations minister says it will still be held

By Ben Kesling in Baghdad and Paul Sonne at the United Nations 
955 words
19 September 2017
03:46
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A ruling from Iraq's Supreme Court halting an independence referendum next week in the semiautonomous Kurdish region will have no bearing on the vote, the Kurdish region's foreign relations minister said Monday, vowing to proceed with the plebiscite anyway.

Falah Mustafa, foreign relations minister for the Kurdistan regional government, said the judicial system in Iraq had been politicized long ago and had failed to uphold constitutional guarantees to the Kurds.

"We don't have the feeling that there is a judiciary system in this country that's functioning in order to protect law, order and also rights," Mr. Mustafa said in an interview on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly in New York. "This decision in no way will affect the region of Kurdistan, the feelings of the people of Kurdistan or the leadership."

Iraq's Supreme Court ruled Monday that the Kurdish region should temporarily halt the independence referendum scheduled for next week, marking the latest opposition—oth local and international—o the vote the Iraqi Kurds have called aiming to carve a new country out of Iraq.

The temporary court order came after Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, a staunch opponent of the referendum, filed a request to the court to declare the vote unconstitutional. The court did not say when it would make a final decision on the matter.

In recent days, U.S. and international diplomats have shuttled back and forth to the country in a last-ditch effort to convince the Kurds to wait on the vote, scheduled for Sept. 25.

The White House on Friday issued a statement against the effort. The United Nations also opposes the timeline, saying it will distract against the fight against Islamic State. Kurdish forces, known as the Peshmerga, have played a critical role in the U.S.-led campaign against Islamic State.

"We don't support the planned Kurdish referendum on Sept. 25 because we feel that that takes the eye off the ball of ISIS and that we should all remain focused on ISIS," State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert said last week.

The U.S. has warned of increased instability and violence as a result of such a referendum—n eventuality Kurdish officials dismiss.

Brett McGurk, the U.S. special presidential envoy to the counter-ISIS coalition, said last week there is no international support or legitimacy for the referendum and urged Kurdish officials to find an alternative path.

But the region's president, Masoud Barzani, so far has refused all such entreaties, a move senior Western diplomats said indicated he could be holding out for greater concessions.

Kurdish officials say a door is still open to postpone the referendum but only if the U.S. and other nations urging a delay to the vote agree to uphold the result when the time comes.

"There have been some papers forwarded but they have not been to the level of our expectation, nor what we wanted to get," Mr. Mustafa said. "We have been approached by the United States, the United Kingdom, the United Nations and other countries in the neighborhood, but still we are not there."

Mr. Mustafa said the proposals still envisioned Kurdistan as part of a federalized Iraq, but for years Baghdad has failed to uphold its obligations to the semiautonomous region.

"We are not ready to go back to the old formula," he said. "We are not ready to go back to pre-ISIS Iraq. It has failed, and we are not to be blamed for it. Baghdad is to be blamed for it."

Mr. Mustafa said so far the offers from the U.S. and other partner nations fell short of guaranteeing the independence the Kurdish region seeks. To delay the referendum, Kurdish authorities need the U.S. and other nations to issue "a clear statement about the right to self determination and the right of our nation to be independent in the future," he said.

The top Kurdish official said his region wouldn't declare independence the day after the referendum but rather would take the popular mandate to Baghdad and begin talks on an amicable split. He urged the U.S. and other nations to begin preparing for those talks.

Mr. Abadi on Saturday said he would consider deploying Iraqi troops and using military force if the referendum triggers violence.

Voting is scheduled to take place not just in predominantly Kurdish area, where the referendum is likely to be wildly popular, but in ethnically mixed areas whose populations have been shuffled and displaced by the continuing war against Islamic State.

Mr. Mustafa, asked about Mr. Abadi's comments said: "We don't believe that Prime Minister Abadi means it, because we hope that these days are over when armies will be used to sort out critical differences."

Iraqi Kurds have long sought independence. They chafed under the rule of late dictator Saddam Hussein, who eventually granted them de facto semiautonomous status, and they built on that status after his ouster in 2003.

Today, the region fields its own military, the Peshmerga. It doesn't require visitors to obtain an Iraqi visa to enter despite the fact is technically Iraqi soil, instead making only some visitors get a Kurdish visa.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com and Paul Sonne at paul.sonne@wsj.com

Related

* Iraq's Supreme Court Tells Kurds to Suspend Independence Referendum

* Planned Kurdish Referendum on Independence Unsettles Iraqis, U.S.

Document WSJO000020170919ed9j0008d



World News:  ISIS  Seeks Revival in Libya, Gate to Europe --- Small cells of fighters operate in the country a year after the group lost control of Sirte

By Hassan Morajea in Tunis, Tunisia, and Benoit Faucon in London 
1,026 words
19 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Islamic State has formed a number of clandestine cells in Libya a year after losing its main stronghold in the chaotic North African country, part of the militant group's efforts to regroup on Europe's doorstep.

The small cells, comprising up to several dozen fighters, have set up new bases outside Libyan towns in the past several months and started making money by hijacking commercial trucks and extorting migrant-smuggling rings, according to Libyan and European security officials.

Islamic State has also told fighters to go to Libya from Syria, where a U.S.-led coalition is pushing the terror group from its de facto capital of Raqqa, according to a defector and European security officials.

"They consider Libya to be the main entrance to Europe," said Abu Baara al-Ansari, a Syrian who says he defected from Islamic State in June. Mr. al-Ansari said he worked in Raqqa for Islamic State in the office that tracked visitors to the group's territory. He is now in Turkey and was interviewed via the Telegram messaging system.

The group's efforts to stage a comeback in Libya after losing control of the coastal city of Sirte last year have sparked concern among European officials.

A resurgent Islamic State "is definitely becoming a problem in Libya," a European security official said.

Members of Libya's Presidential Council, which presides over the Tripoli government, didn't respond to requests to comment about Islamic State's activities in the country.

Islamic State said two years ago it planned to infiltrate migrant groups and carry out attacks in Europe.

Salman Abedi, a British citizen of Libyan descent, blew himself up outside a concert in Manchester in May, killing 22 people. Abedi had recently returned from a trip to Libya, and European security officials say the type of bomb he used indicates he may have been trained by Islamic State fighters there.

Since the death of Col. Moammar Gadhafi in 2011, warring factions have carved Libya into fiefs and fought over its oil fields, leaving the economy in tatters.

"Daesh is exploiting the security vacuum," said an intelligence officer from the city of Misrata who works with forces loyal to Tripoli, using the Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

Militias from Misrata -- who support the United Nations-backed Government of National Accord in the capital, Tripoli -- led the successful campaign to oust Islamic State from Sirte.

An estimate by the U.S. Africa Command, which oversees American military operations on the continent, indicates there are only about 500 Islamic State members active in Libya now. That is down from a peak of about 3,000 fighters when the group held Sirte in 2016.

But other officials said it is difficult to know how many Islamic State fighters are currently in Libya. And they say the group's ability to operate relatively unhindered around the country raises concerns.

Since driving Islamic State out of Sirte, the U.S. has seen "a marked decrease" in the number of foreign fighters traveling to or from the conflict in Libya, according to a U.S. State Department official.

European security officials and the Islamic State defector say the group's fighters -- including Syrians and Iraqis, as well as Libyans -- have been trying to enter Libya in hopes of reaching Europe to launch attacks.

Islamic State members have in the past flown from Turkey to Sudan before going overland to Libya, according to European security officials. Meanwhile, Libyan forces in the south are monitoring a group of Islamic State recruits who made their way to Sudan from Syria and are trying to cross into Libya, according to a security official from the area with forces loyal to Tripoli.

Libyans were among those who trained at Islamic State's weapons lab in Raqqa, according to another Islamic State defector. Some of the devices were intended both for battlefield use and for carrying out attacks in Europe, said the defector, who said that he was involved in their design and that he left the group in 2016.

In Libya, a rival government operates in the east of the country, where a group allied with Islamic State was ousted this year from the city of Benghazi. In late May, two members of the allied group were dispatched by Islamic State from Benghazi to go to Istanbul, according to a third person who said he had defected from Islamic State and who said he remains in contact with the group in Raqqa.

They were directed to make their way from Istanbul to Athens and to wait for orders about carrying out an attack in Europe, the defector said. A European security official said last month the movements of the two men were being monitored.

Islamic State fighters who escaped Sirte fled to other parts of Libya such as Bani Walid, west of Sirte. The fighters remained hidden in the surrounding valleys for months, but now have started to "set up checkpoints at times and hijack trucks and any goods in them," said the intelligence officer from Misrata.

Other fighters escaped to the southwestern town of Ghat, near the Algerian border. The group has since expanded its presence in that part of the country to the desert oasis of Ubari, with fighters holding regular meetings in the town and moving freely in the vicinity of Libya's largest oil field, according to the security official from southern Libya.

In May, Islamic State seized three fuel trucks en route to Jufra, a district between Sirte and Ubari, according to an Aug. 22 report from the U.N. Security Council.

Islamic State also has a presence in other Libyan cities and towns, and groups that can range from 5 to 50 fighters roam outside urban areas, the intelligence officer from Misrata said.

---

Ben Kesling, Nicholas Bariyo, Nour Malas, Nour Alakraa and Jenny Gross contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170918ed9j0001f



World
As  ISIS  Falters, U.S. Allies and Syrian Regime Maneuver for Advantage; The contest is playing out in Deir Ezzour, the last Syrian province largely under the extremists' control

By Maria Abi-Habib and Raja Abdulrahim in Beirut and Nathan Hodge in Okeirbat, Syria 
1,201 words
18 September 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

In the last Syrian province largely under Islamic State control, U.S.-backed forces are on a collision course with the Syrian and Russian militaries as both sides scramble to strengthen their hands ahead of postwar negotiations.

The contest for territory is playing out in Deir Ezzour, an oil-rich province where Islamic State has fought to protect its revenue streams  and preserve what remains of its rapidly shrinking caliphate.

The Damascus-based Syrian government, backed by Russia and Iran, wants Deir Ezzour's resources to repair a shattered economy and replenish its coffers by exporting oil. It could also help Tehran establish a route over land to Beirut to support its Lebanese allies.

The U.S.-backed forces, who are led by Kurds, are also fighting Islamic State but wary of giving ground to the Syrian regime. Kurdish leaders want to use the province's wealth as a bargaining chip that could help them secure greater autonomy in Syria.

"The Kurds are trying to get as many cards in their hands as possible for the time when everyone sits around the table to play the big game. The scorecards that everyone will be looking at when they sit around the table and think, 'Who has the most and can ask for the most?" said a senior Western diplomat who is based in the Middle East and focused on the Syria conflict.

With these different armed groups closing in on Deir Ezzour, forces backed by the U.S. and Russia are sometimes fighting within a few miles of each other, raising the risk of missteps that could inflame tensions.

On Saturday, Russian military forces attacked a location in Deir Ezzour east of the Euphrates River  where they knew troops from the U.S.-led coalition and allied Syrian rebels were operating, the U.S. military said.

The strike injured several members of the U.S.-backed group, known as the Syrian Democratic Forces, according to a statement from the U.S.-led coalition. The statement added that the U.S. would seek talks with its Russian counterparts to avoid future conflicts.

The incident is the latest of several where different sides fighting Islamic State have collided in Syria. In June, the U.S. military downed a Syrian government warplane  after it had attacked Syrian Democratic Forces on the ground.

Western diplomats representing countries closely allied with the U.S. say that Washington's plans in Syria are unclear and it lacks a longer-term strategic objective beyond driving Islamic State from Raqqa , the de facto Syrian capital of its self-declared caliphate.

"The U.S. knows what it's doing in...the short term," said a Western diplomat. "First Raqqa and then let's see."

The U.S. military said Sunday it was working with its allies in Syria to defeat Islamic State and agreeing with Moscow on ways to avoid the risk of conflict "while ensuring physical separation between regime and antiregime forces."

Even as Washington and Moscow discuss ways to avoid clashes in Syria, Russian forces continue to support the Syrian regime's march on Deir Ezzour.

The Russian military provided extensive air support to Syrian government forces during their lightning advance on Deir Ezzour . And this past week, Russia's defense ministry launched a major public-relations offensive to capitalize on those gains by the central government.

Russian military helicopters ferried international news crews to Deir Ezzour on Friday, capturing scenes of life returning to a semblance of normalcy in government-held areas of the provincial capital, also known as Deir Ezzour.

The Russian military also brought reporters to Okeirbat, a town in central Syria that was recaptured from Islamic State militants at the beginning of the month, enabling the government advance.

The town, emptied of inhabitants, still bore signs of heavy fighting, including airstrikes that had penetrated concrete warehouses Islamic State fighters used for maintaining captured tanks and converting armored vehicles into massive suicide bombs, Russian military officials said.

Lt. Gen. Alexander Lapin, chief of staff of Russian forces in Syria, told journalists that Syrian government forces, supported by Russian air power, engaged in house-to-house fighting to dislodge fighters from fortified positions and a network of underground tunnels.

"A key breakthrough took place here in the fight against ISIS," he said, referring to Islamic State. "The successful and decisive offensive on Deir Ezzour began from here."

Over the past two months, the U.S. has pushed for a deconfliction line along the Euphrates River to coordinate the separate battles to retake Islamic State-held territory in Deir Ezzour. Washington has reached agreement with its Russian counterparts on deconfliction in other parts of Syria.

The talks between Washington and Moscow stalled, according to a U.S. official, and earlier this month Damascus and its allies advanced into Deir Ezzour city.

Days later, the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, backed by the U.S. military, pushed south to box in regime forces, potentially cutting off Damascus and Moscow from advancing further east, toward the Iraqi border and the province's lucrative oil fields.

Delsos Derrik, an SDF commander involved in the push along the Euphrates River, said his forces hadn't expected to advance into Deir Ezzour province until Raqqa had been fully captured. But they didn't trust the regime to remain west of the river.

"For that reason we have advanced in order to block them," Mr. Derrik said.

Russia's Gen. Lapin declined to answer a question on possible coordination or deconfliction with the SDF and the Americans in Deir Ezzour.

Syria's Kurdish minority has used the country's multisided civil war to carve out a semiautonomous region in Syria's north  while mostly avoiding conflict with Damascus and its allies on the battlefield.

The Kurdish minority is now scrambling for as much territory as it can effectively hold to increase leverage in any postwar negotiations, according to Western diplomats. In Deir Ezzour province, the Kurdish presence is negligible but the oil fields are seen as one of the biggest prizes left to be conquered in Syria as Islamic State's hold weakens.

That has left the Kurds and the Damascus government separated only by the Euphrates River, now about 2 miles apart. The U.S.-led coalition recently said it wouldn't move into Deir Ezzour city, on the western side of the Euphrates.

It isn't yet clear whether Washington and Moscow and can reach an agreement to allow the Kurdish-led forces to take the lead and recapture the province's oil fields. If no agreement is reached, diplomats say, the situation could devolve into a race to seize Syria's oil assets.

"There is no grand deconfliction plan," a Western diplomat said.

Write to Maria Abi-Habib at maria.habib@wsj.com , Raja Abdulrahim at raja.abdulrahim@wsj.com  and Nathan Hodge at nathan.hodge@wsj.com  and Nathan Hodge at 

Document WSJO000020170918ed9i0015q



World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,121 words
18 September 2017
12:42
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Will We Still Have Paris?

White House economic chief Gary Cohn is expected Monday to outline the administration's proposals to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions while restating that its stance on the Paris climate accord hasn't changed. Mr. Cohn's planned breakfast discussion in New York—n how the U.S. can continue to cut emissions without sacrificing its re-emergence as a leading energy producer—ollows signals over the weekend that the U.S. is exploring ways to remain in the 2015 pact. Trump administration officials on Sunday confirmed the president is open to revising U.S. commitments under the accord rather than quitting it entirely. The White House has said this isn't a shift: In announcing the U.S. exit in June, Mr. Trump left open the possibility of re-entering the deal or crafting a new one "on terms that are fair to the United States." But he has since repeatedly boasted of withdrawing from the "job-killing" accord and hasn't emphasized revising U.S. participation.

Bank of Parts of America

Since the financial crisis, Bank of America has gotten rid of around 1,600 branches— striking departure for a bank built over decades on the idea of offering a coast-to-coast network in areas urban and rural. From 2009 to 2016, the bank reduced the number of U.S. counties in which it has branches by more than a third. But it is moving into a number of big metropolitan areas where it previously didn't have branches, a rare move for a big bank in recent years. We look at why Bank of America is retreating from its "bigger is better" approach: The shift is driven by both demographic changes and fallout from the financial crisis, and stems in part from two large acquisitions, of U.S. Trust and Merrill Lynch.

Hack of the Ages

The massive data breach at Equifax has reverberated through the credit-reporting industry, spooked consumers and sparked a federal criminal investigation. From about mid-May to July 30, hackers ransacked vast troves of information, potentially exposing the personal information of 143 million Americans. We take a close look at what happened: A focus for inquiry is a software glitch, initially reported by Cisco in March, that appears to be how the intruders got in. Equifax said Friday its technology experts worked at the time of the report to identify and patch vulnerable systems. Although investigators are still working on who was behind the break-in, the scale of the breach, sophistication of the hack and nature of the stolen data all point toward a state-sponsored actor.

Plaudits and Politics

At the 69th Emmys Sunday night, Hulu planted a flag by winning the award for Outstanding Drama Series in the first year it was nominated in the category. The streaming service's "The Handmaid's Tale" beat out nominees from established Emmy contenders AMC, HBO, NBC and Netflix. In comedy, though, continuity reigned: HBO's "Veep" won for the third year in a row. At times political barbs threatened to upstage the honorees. Host Stephen Colbert took digs at President Trump's TV-watching habits and the lack of Emmy wins for "The Celebrity Apprentice." In a surprise turn, former press secretary Sean Spicer took the stage to deliver superlatives about the size of the Emmy audience. See a full recap of the show here. 

Today's Video

Four Times the Fun

When a coach told Jeremy Easterbrook he would never be good enough to play badminton in the Olympics, he didn't give up the game, but instead took up three more: The 28-year-old is now ranked second in Canada in racketlon, which combines table tennis, badminton, squash and tennis in a single match against the same opponent. He shows us the proper swings in each sport.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Texas Cities Struggle to House Thousands Displaced by Hurricane Harvey

Russia Probe Takes Financial Toll on Trump Aides

WORLD

U.K. Considers Arming More Police

As \b ISIS\b0  Falters, U.S. Allies and Syrian Regime Maneuver for Advantage

BUSINESS

CFO at 29? Kraft Heinz Move Spotlights a Pattern at Investor 3G Capital

Unlike Most Industries, Drone Makers and Operators Clamor for Federal Regulation

MARKETS

How Traders Are Making Money as Oil Prices Go Nowhere

China Scrambles to Catch Up With Runaway Boom in Fintech Investment

Number of the Day

$7.8 billion

The price Northrop Grumman is paying for fellow defense contractor Orbital, as acquisition activity in the aerospace industry ramps up.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, do you think the U.S. should withdraw from the Paris accord? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to Friday's question on North Korea's firing another missile over Japan, Eric Y. Larson of Virginia said: "Perhaps the U.S. should let China and Russia know we will no longer provide the strictest security for nuclear technology and nuclear material when in receipt of inquiries from South Korea and Japan." Bill Sanders of Colorado wrote: "North Korea is a symptom; the problem is a nuclear-armed world, including many more rogue countries. We need a Trump Doctrine on foreign policy as definitive as the Monroe Doctrine was in 1823, that America will not tolerate any further nuclear-armed countries including North Korea and Iran and that we will use all forces necessary to make that happen. America is the only nation that can enforce such a doctrine and this is the last time we can. This may sound harsh, but think of the alternative and the world down the road." And Stephen Pearcy of South Carolina commented: "The more often they do this, the more likely a malfunction with impact on Japan. That will put a permanent end to North Korean missile launches."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170918ed9i001jl



World Watch
World Watch

706 words
18 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

CUBA

U.S. Mulls Closing

Embassy in Havana

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said the U.S. is considering closing its embassy in Cuba in response to what he has described as "health attacks" on American diplomats there that have caused hearing loss, concussions and other symptoms.

The health problems began in December and recurred as recently as August, the State Department has said. The department has confirmed that at least 21 Americans have been affected.

Officials haven't determined a cause of the episodes, but have speculated they came from sonic waves from covert listening devices, though such devices haven't been found.

The State Department hasn't blamed Cuba for the incidents. Cuba is cooperating with an investigation and has denied involvement. U.S. and Cuban officials discussed the incidents in Washington on Friday.

-- Felicia Schwartz

---

EUROPEAN UNION

Views on Tech Taxes

Converge in Estonia

European Union finance ministers on Saturday expressed cautious support to pursue new tax rules for technology giants such as Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Facebook Inc., though they stressed it would be necessary to find a permanent, global solution that includes the U.S.

At a meeting in Tallinn, Estonia, EU finance chiefs agreed to move forward on finding better ways to tax digital services, though some ministers differed on how to proceed.

"Despite some diverging opinions, we eventually came to several common conclusions," said Toomas Toniste, the finance minister of Estonia. "Everyone agreed that the problem exists," he said, referring to inadequate taxation of tech companies.

The push is part of the EU's latest attempt to crack down on what officials see as tax avoidance in Europe and to assure citizens that large companies are paying their fair share.

The EU is seeking to modernize corporate tax rules, which traditionally have been designed on the basis of physical assets and where a company operates. Officials would like to account for virtual operations, such as a search engine selling targeted advertising from data collected in a country where it has no permanent establishment.

-- Natalia Drozdiak

---

IRAQ

ISIS Militants Driven

From Border Area

Iraqi forces expelled Islamic State militants from an area in the western desert near the borders with Syria and Jordan on Saturday, making further inroads into the group's last remaining territory in the country.

The recapture of the area, Akashat, helps secure a newly reopened border crossing with Jordan and will facilitate future operations to clear Islamic State from the rest of the western province of Anbar, Iraqi military officials said.

Iraqi commanders said security forces and allied paramilitaries had faced little resistance from the militants in Akashat, attributing that to the extremist group's low morale after two major defeats in recent months including the loss of its stronghold Mosul.

The Iraqi air force dropped leaflets over Akashat before the assault was launched early in the morning, informing civilians of their imminent "salvation," and issuing an ultimatum to the militants: surrender or be killed.

"Liberating Akashat means securing the international road with Jordan and increasing the pressure on terrorists in western Anbar," Brigadier General Yahya Rasoul, the spokesman for Iraq's joint operations command, told state television.

Western Anbar is one of the last major pockets of territory controlled by Islamic State in Iraq, besides Hawija in the north of the country, which Iraq's army has said it plans to attack soon.

-- Ghassan Adnan and Isabel Coles

---

MALAYSIA

Seven Youths Held

After a Deadly Fire

Police have detained seven youths in connection with a predawn fire at an Islamic boarding school, saying that a verbal dispute between them and students at the school led to an arson attack that killed at least 23 people on Thursday.

Kuala Lumpur Police Chief Amar Singh said Saturday that the suspects, who were between the ages of 11 and 18, would remain in custody while the case was investigated under the penal codes for "mischief by fire" and murder. Mr. Singh said two of the suspects had criminal records. None has been charged.

Twenty-one of the dead were students and two were teachers, trapped in a dormitory with a locked door and window grilles.

-- Yantoultra Ngui

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170918ed9i00022



 ISIS  Seeks To Revive Its Fortunes In Libya

By Hassan Morajea in Tunis, Tunisia, and Benoit Faucon in London 
979 words
18 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

A year after losing its main Libyan stronghold, Islamic State has formed a number of clandestine cells around the chaotic North African country as the militants seek to regroup on Europe's doorstep.

The small cells, some comprised of up to several dozen fighters, have set up new bases outside Libyan towns in the past several months and started making money by hijacking commercial trucks and extorting migrant smuggling rings, according to Libyan and European security officials.

Islamic State has also told fighters to go to Libya from Syria, where a U.S.-led coalition is pushing the terror group from its de facto capital of Raqqa, according to a defector and security officials.

"They consider Libya to be the main entrance to Europe," said Abu Baara al-Ansari, a Syrian who defected from Islamic State in June. Mr. al-Ansari said he worked in Raqqa for Islamic State in the office that tracked visitors to the group's territory. He is now in Turkey, and was interviewed via the Telegram messaging system.

The group's efforts to stage a comeback in Libya after losing control of the city of Sirte last year have sparked particular concern among European officials. Attackers who traveled from Syria to Europe have taken part in a number of attacks in recent years.

A resurgent Islamic State "is definitely becoming a problem in Libya," a European security official said. The terror group can raise revenue in Libya by tapping lucrative rackets and take advantage of weapon stockpiles in a country that is both vast and politically unstable, he said.

Members of Libya's Presidential Council, which presides over the Tripoli government, didn't respond to requests for comment about Islamic State's activities.

Islamic State said two years ago it planned to infiltrate migrant groups and carry out attacks in Europe. Thousands of migrants have crossed the Mediterranean Sea from Libya and arrived in Italy this year.

Salman Abedi, a British citizen of Libyan descent, blew himself up outside a concert in Manchester in May, killing 22 people. Abedi had recently returned from Libya, and European security officials say the type of bomb he used indicates he may have been trained by Islamic State.

Since the death of Col. Moammar Gadhafi in 2011, warring factions have carved Libya into fiefs and fought over its oil fields, leaving the economy in tatters.

"Daesh is exploiting the security vacuum," said an intelligence officer from the city of Misrata who works with forces loyal to Tripoli, using the Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

Militias from Misrata -- who support the United Nations-backed Government of National Accord in the capital, Tripoli -- led the successful campaign to oust Islamic State from Sirte.

There are about 500 Islamic State members active in Libya now, according to an estimate by the U.S. Africa Command, which oversees American military operations on the continent. That is down from about 3,000 fighters when the group held Sirte in 2016.

But other officials said it is difficult to know how many Islamic State fighters are currently in Libya. And they say the group's ability to operate relatively unhindered around the country raises concerns.

Since driving Islamic State out of Sirte, the U.S. has seen "a marked decrease" in the number of foreign fighters traveling to or from the conflict in Libya, according to a U.S. State Department official.

Security officials and the Islamic State defector say the group's fighters -- including Syrians and Iraqis, as well as Libyans -- have been trying to enter Libya in hopes of reaching Europe to launch attacks.

Islamic State members have in the past flown from Turkey to Sudan before going overland to Libya, according to two European security officials. Meanwhile, Libyan forces in the south are monitoring a group of Islamic State recruits who made their way to Sudan from Syria and are trying to cross into Libya, according to a security official from the area.

Sudan is aware some fighters have taken advantage of its porous western border to infiltrate Libya, according to Rabie Abdelaty, who heads the political bureau at Sudan's ruling National Congress Party. He says the government has deployed forces to stem the infiltration.

Libyans were among those who trained at Islamic State's weapons lab in Raqqa, according to another Islamic State defector. Some of the devices were intended both for battlefield use and for carrying out attacks in Europe, said the defector, who was involved in their design and who left the group in 2016. Components are cheap and easy to get, and Islamic State videos show how to assemble them, he added.

In Libya, a rival government operates in the east of the country, where a group allied with Islamic State was ousted earlier this year from the city of Benghazi. In late May, around the time of the ouster, two members of the allied group were dispatched by Islamic State from Benghazi to go to Istanbul, according to a third Islamic State defector who remains in contact with the group in Raqqa.

They were directed to make their way from Istanbul to Athens and to wait for orders about an attack in Europe, the defector said. A European security official said last month the movements of the men were being monitored.

Islamic State fighters who escaped Sirte fled to parts of Libya such as Bani Walid, west of Sirte. The fighters remained hidden in the surrounding valleys for months, but now have started to "set up checkpoints at times and hijack trucks and any goods in them," said the intelligence officer from Misrata.

---

Ben Kesling, Nicholas Bariyo, Nour Malas, Nour Alakraa and Jenny Gross contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170918ed9i0001f



World
U.S. Says Russia Attacked Site Near American-Led Coalition in Syria; Russian forces hit a target near Deir Ezzour

By Ben Kesling in Baghdad, Nathan Hodge in Latakia, Syria and Felicia Schwartz in Washington 
490 words
17 September 2017
01:10
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Russian military forces on Saturday attacked a location in Syria where they knew troops from the U.S.-led coalition and allied Syrian rebels were operating, the U.S. military said.

The strike injured several Syrian Democratic Forces troops but didn't wound any members of the U.S.-led coalition, according to the statement from the Combined Joint Task Force--Operation Inherent Resolve, after the Russian forces hit a target east of the Euphrates River near Deir Ezzour.

Maj. Gen. Igor Konashenkov, a spokesman for the Russian Defense Ministry, said such an incident wasn't possible but didn't elaborate.

American and Russian forces have an open communications line to discuss operations that could overlap, especially air operations, to prevent midair collisions or the targeting of troops incorrectly. The communications line apparently wasn't used in this instance.

"Coalition officials are available and the deconfliction line with Russia is open 24 hours per day," said the top-ranking American officer in the coalition, Lt. Gen. Paul Funk, in the statement released Saturday.

The coalition didn't respond to requests to clarify whether the attack was an airstrike and provided no further details on the matter.

The statement didn't say whether the coalition troops threatened to fire at the Russian forces, but it reiterated that "coalition forces and partners always retain the right of self-defense."

Russia has recently stepped up its military efforts in Deir Ezzour where Islamic State still has a stronghold. The Russians have taken journalists on one of their Navy frigates to watch the launch of cruise missiles into Deir Ezzour as a public demonstration of their capabilities and as a rebuke to U.S.-led coalition forces, who Russians say aren't doing enough.

Russian forces have also ramped up their air campaign, sending more sorties into Syria to bomb Islamic State-held areas and to show their support for the regime of Bashar al-Assad. That has included actions against moderate groups opposed to Mr. Assad, not just Islamic State.

"The recent U.S.-Russian de-escalation deal in southwest Syria, which gave the regime and Shiite militias a chance to fight ISIS, was supposed to come with greater Russian commitments to deconflict with the U.S. and its proxy the SDF along the Euphrates River," said Andrew Tabler, a fellow at the Washington Institute for Middle East Peace who focuses on Syria. "Today's strike, as well as Russian announcements in last few days that it and the regime intend to cross over the Euphrates, has called the deal into question."

Ben Leubsdorf contributed to this article.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com and Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170916ed9g001gt



World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,285 words
15 September 2017
12:50
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Terror on the Tube

An explosion hit a London subway train Friday morning, injuring 18 people, in what police are treating as a terrorist incident. Police said an improvised explosive device detonated on the train at Parsons Green station in West London. Witnesses described a burst of flames and scenes of panic during the morning rush. Emergency services said none of the injured are in serious or life-threatening condition. London's top counterterrorism police officer said most of the injuries were flash burns.

The GOP Resistance

Top congressional Republicans signaled Thursday they wouldn't be pressured into enacting an immigration framework reached between President Trump and top Democrats, as conservatives reacted with alarm to reports of a fledgling deal to protect young people brought to the U.S. illegally as children. The framework marked the second time in a week that Mr. Trump bypassed his party and dealt directly with Democrats. The president, who ran on a hard-line immigration platform, jolted many of his own supporters by agreeing to pair legal status for the group of young people—ften called "Dreamers"—ith enhanced border-security measures. Mr. Trump also agreed that the package would omit funding for his promised wall on the border with Mexico. He said nothing about including other enforcement measures aimed at finding and deporting people living illegally in the U.S. After President Trump said House Speaker Paul Ryan and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell were "on board" with his approach, the GOP leaders said negotiations would take on a broad set of immigration issues, including enforcement measures beyond border security.

Soft Money

SoftBank is nearing an ambitious deal to take a substantial stake in Uber—ut only if the Japanese technology investor can persuade shareholders to sell enough stock at a steep discount. After weeks of deliberation, Uber's board in recent days has been hashing out its response to a potential investment led by SoftBank that could total as much as $10 billion. If successful, that would be among the largest single investments in a private venture-backed startup. It would also give SoftBank—hose chief executive, Masayoshi Son, has predicted that companies such as Uber will transform the world—ajor stakes in nearly all the world's top ride-hailing companies. Elsewhere, Google parent Alphabet has held talks to invest about $1 billion in Lyft, which would further an alliance against Uber.

Missile Launch

For the second time in a month, North Korea fired a missile over Japan, defying rising international efforts to force it to abandon course. In a rare move, South Korea responded by immediately conducting a simulated strike of the North Korean launch site, an air base near Pyongyang. In Japan, alerts were sent early Friday local time to smartphones of people living in areas where the missile was projected to pass over soon after the launch had been detected. No injuries or damage were reported. The launch was of a shorter-range projectile that wouldn't be able to reach the U.S. mainland. The U.N. Security Council will hold an emergency meeting Friday at the request of the U.S. and Japan. A new violation by Pyongyang had been anticipated in response to the Security Council's adoption of new sanctions Monday, some diplomats said, raising the stakes for finding a diplomatic solution.

Style Icons

This weekend, Jared Leto stars on the cover of WSJ. Magazine's September Men's Style issue. From what is referred to as his base— 100,000-square-foot decommissioned Air Force station he converted into a private residence—he actor, tech entrepreneur, stadium-filling rock star, fashion icon and successful Silicon Valley investor brings us inside his highflying life. Also in the issue, an exclusive tour of Palais de la Zahia, French iconoclast Bernard-Henri Léy's sprawling riad in the heart of the medina in Marrakesh, Morocco; the late Pierre Bergé on partner Yves Saint Laurent's legacy; a look inside the world's first major museum devoted to contemporary African art; Nathalie Du Pasquier, a founder of the Memphis Group, finally gets her due; dancer and choreographer Benjamin Millepied takes us through his day; the resurgence of modernist pioneers Anni and Josef Albers; and a new film from artist Alex Israel. Plus, the future of Rag & Bone under co-founder Marcus Wainwright, a whimsical fashion portfolio inspired by decades past and the latest in streetwear.

Today's Video

Mission Accomplished

After 20 years in space, the Cassini-Huygens spacecraft will make its suicide plunge into Saturn's atmosphere Friday. For the team of scientists who began working on the project in the 1980s, it means the end of decades of work that led to scientific progress and never-before-seen images of Saturn's rings, moons and surface.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

House, Senate Tax Proposals Likely to Diverge

An Illinois City Aims to Move Better Policing Right Into the Neighborhood

WORLD

Central Banks Edge Away From Easy Money as BOE Signals Rate Rise

\b ISIS\b0  Convoy Reaches Militant-Held Syria After Coalition Stops Strikes, Activists Say

BUSINESS

The Second-Class Office Workers

Verizon Looks to Cut $10 Billion in Costs by 2021

MARKETS

Florida Is Short on Insurance Adjusters, and That Could Stall Recovery Efforts

Some Equifax Customers Who Sought Safety Got Burned in the Data Breach

Number of the Day

22

The number of consecutive games the Cleveland Indians have won, after a thrilling 3-2 victory over the Kansas City Royals on Thursday night that featured a dramatic comeback and extra-inning heroics. The Indians are now chasing the 1916 New York Giants' all-time streak of 26 games.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on North Korea's firing of another missile over Japan? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on the immigration agreement taking shape between Democrats and President Trump, Penny Freimark of New Jersey said: "It should be no deal unless the Democrats are willing to fund a wall…e would just have more illegal aliens enter our country. What kind of compromise would that be? Mr. Trump had better stay firm on his promise." Catherine Learoyd of Texas shared: "The wall of water we've just experienced in Harvey and Irma should have our priority, not a wall of hate and exclusion. It is high time to get DACA settled and move on to rebuilding our soggy infrastructure." And Daniel Souza of Connecticut commented: "Hooray! Finally, the longstanding and maddening logjam in Washington could be broken. We need to get things going, one way or another, whatever it takes. For critics of Mr. Trump like myself, he could very well turn out to be the broken clock that still tells the right times twice a day."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170915ed9f0018k



World
Islamic State Claims Responsibility for Deadly Attack in Southern Iraq; Gunmen stormed a restaurant after blowing up a car bomb, killing 84 people and wounding almost 100

By Ghassan Adnan, Ali A. Nabhan and Isabel Coles 
676 words
15 September 2017
12:19
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD—unmen stormed a restaurant in southern Iraq after blowing up a car bomb outside, killing 84 people, an Iraqi official said, in an attack for which Islamic State has claimed responsibility.

Thursday's attack, along a highway near the southern city of Nassiriya, was one of the deadliest in the country in recent months and comes as Islamic State's days of ruling over vast areas of Iraq near an end.

The Sunni Muslim extremist group claimed responsibility for the assault, saying three groups of fighters clad with explosive belts had killed "rejectionist idolaters"—lurs it uses to denote Shiite Muslims.

Almost 100 people were wounded and 84 people were killed, according to Jasim Al Khalidi, head of the provincial health directorate.

An interior ministry official said a bomb first exploded in the restaurant parking area. Gunmen disguised as members of Iraq's paramilitary forces then got out of a second vehicle and entered the restaurant, opening fire on diners. The second vehicle subsequently blew up.

Eight Iranians were killed, according to Iran state television. They had stopped for a rest on their way to visit Shiite shrines in southern Iraq, an Iraqi interior ministry official said.

Photographs from the scene showed people carrying human remains away in blankets and mangled frames of vehicles impacted by the blast. Inside the restaurant, a security forces member held up what appeared to be a blood-soaked tablecloth.

Iran's foreign ministry strongly condemned the attacks.

"The organizations in charge, including the Iranian embassy in Baghdad, are examining the details of the incident and identity of the martyrs and injured people," foreign ministry spokesman Bahram Ghasemi was quoted as saying by the official Islamic Republic News Agency.

Islamic State has carried out hundreds of attacks across Iraq, and continues to pose a threat, despite losing most of the Iraqi territory it seized in 2014 as it declared a modern-day caliphate.

U.S.-backed Iraqi forces routed the militants from Mosul, the largest city under their control, in July, and last month retook the insurgent bastion of Tal Afar.

The group is also under pressure in neighboring Syria, where a Kurdish-led militia is chipping away at its operational base, Raqqa.

Facing defeat on the battlefield, Islamic State is expected to return underground and revert to conventional insurgent tactics using sleeper cells to carry out bombings and assassinations. The group has also directed its followers in the West to strike targets there.

Thursday's attack bore the hallmarks of Islamic State "aiming at causing maximum casualties among people," said Yahya Al Nassiri, governor of Dhi Qar province, where it took place. Security forces had succeeded in foiling other plots in the province, he said. Southern Iraq, where most of the country's oil is produced, is relatively secure in comparison with other parts of the country.

Provincial lawmaker Khalid Al Asadi blamed "weak intelligence work" and carelessness by security forces controlling checkpoints for failing to avert the attack. Frequent guerilla-style attacks by Islamic State have in the past fueled anger among Iraqis toward the government of Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, who is seeking to capitalize on victory over the militants to outmaneuver his political rivals.

A massive July 2016 Islamic State blast in Baghdad's central Karrada neighborhood killed some 300 people, the single deadliest vehicle bombing in Iraq since the U.S. invasion in 2003. It fueled public outcry over the country's weak security, leading protesters to heckle Mr. Abadi at the site. Earlier that year, demonstrators in the capital called for government reform.

Aresu Eqbali contributed to this article.

Write to Isabel Coles at isabel.coles@wsj.com

READ MORE

* Islamic State Is Near Defeat in Iraq, Prime Minister Says (June 29, 2017)

* Beyond Syria and Iraq, Faraway \b ISIS\b0  'Provinces' Fight On (July 20, 2017)

Document WSJO000020170914ed9e0048u



World News:  ISIS  Convoy Reaches Militant-Held Syria --- The U.S.-led coalition had ceased airstrikes on the jihadists at Russia's request

By Raja Abdulrahim and Ben Kesling 
661 words
15 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT -- Islamic State militants stranded in the Syrian desert for two weeks have reached their destination in eastern Syria, opposition activists said, after the U.S.-led coalition heeded Russia's request to cease airstrikes on the convoy's route.

The convoy of buses traveled across Syria as part of a controversial deal brokered in August by the Lebanese militia group Hezbollah that allowed 600 people -- Islamic State fighters and their families -- to withdraw from the Lebanese border in southwestern Syria and head toward its border with Iraq.

The convoy was able to reach Deir Ezzour province, an Islamic State-held area in eastern Syria, after the coalition ended its aerial surveillance and airstrikes on the group, according to the U.K.-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which has a network of activists across the country.

Col. Ryan Dillon, spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition in Iraq and Syria, said Thursday morning he couldn't confirm that the buses reached their final destination and said that the coalition hadn't had persistent surveillance of them for days.

The U.S. had been preventing the Islamic State convoy from moving toward the Iraqi border by bombing roadways and using aircraft to attack fighters who attempted to move forward. But it set aside those efforts and withdrew U.S. aircraft from the area last week at the request of Russian officials who cited a "deconfliction" agreement between Moscow and Washington, Pentagon officials said in a statement at the time.

The Russian officials said their planes were involved in operations against Islamic State in Deir Ezzour, Pentagon officials said in a statement. At the same time, fighters described as pro-Syrian regime forces advanced past the Islamic State convoy. Pentagon officials said they would continue to take steps to prevent Islamic State fighters from moving toward Iraq, but haven't specified how they intend to stop them.

"From the start of this situation on Aug. 29, we have placed responsibility for the buses and passengers on the Syrian regime, who in conjunction with Lebanese Hezbollah, brokered a deal with ISIS to move its terrorists into Iraq," Brig. Gen. Jon Braga, director of operations for the U.S. coalition, said in a statement.

Previously, the coalition had criticized the deal, launching airstrikes that cratered a road and destroyed a bridge, preventing the convoy from continuing its journey.

The coalition then targeted Islamic State fighters trying to reach the convoy to assist it, striking 85 militants and more than 40 vehicles -- describing it as an unexpected boon in the fight against the group.

"It presented an opportunity for the coalition to strike and remove several ISIS fighters and resources from the battlefield," said coalition spokesman Col. Dillon.

Deir Ezzour is one of Islamic State's last strongholds, but faces separate offensives by Syrian regime forces and the U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic Forces.

The deal to allow the convoy safe passage was reached after the Lebanese army and Syrian regime forces backed by Hezbollah launched simultaneous offensives to clear Islamic State from a mountainous Lebanese area bordering Syria.

In return, Islamic State provided information on the remains of eight Lebanese soldiers who had been kidnapped in 2014 and handed over the bodies of two Hezbollah fighters and an Iranian military adviser.

One Hezbollah prisoner who remained with the convoy as insurance for its safe passage was released once it reached Islamic State-controlled territory, according to the Observatory.

The deal was criticized by both the U.S.-led coalition and Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, who called it "an insult to the Iraqi people."

"We are fighting terrorism in Iraq and we are killing them in Iraq. We don't send them to Syria," he said.



License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170915ed9f0000z



World News: World Watch

310 words
15 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

IRAQ

ISIS Raid in South

Leaves Dozens Dead

Islamic State gunmen stormed a restaurant in southern Iraq after detonating a car bomb outside, killing more than 50 people, Iraqi officials said.

The attack, along a highway near the southern city of Nassiriya, was one of the deadliest in the country in recent months. The Sunni Muslim extremist group claimed the assault via its official Amaq news agency.

A bomb exploded in the parking area, an interior ministry official said. Men disguised as members of the mainly Shiite Muslim paramilitary forces got out of a second vehicle and entered the building, opening fire on diners, the official said. Another vehicle then blew up.

-- Ghassan Adnan

---

MALAYSIA

Blaze Kills at Least 23

At Boarding School

A predawn fire tore through an Islamic boarding school in the Malaysian capital, killing at least 23 people, mostly students trapped in their bedrooms, officials said.

Initial investigations showed the small, all-boys school was operating without a fire-safety permit, though it had applied for one, fire authorities said. The school started operating three years ago.

Students were between 13 and 17 years old.

A fire official said investigators were looking at a short-circuit or a burning mosquito coil as possible causes.

-- Yantoultra Ngui

---

UNITED KINGDOM

Officials Open Inquiry

Into London Fire

The U.K. opened an inquiry into the Grenfell Tower fire that killed at least 80 people, with its chairman pledging to find answers to how a tragedy of its scale could happen in London.

Martin Moore-Bick, a retired judge appointed by the government to head the inquiry, said he recognized the anger and betrayal felt by survivors, many of whom lost everything in the June fire in the 24-story low-income apartment block in West London.

-- Jenny Gross

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170915ed9f0001n



World News: World Watch

621 words
15 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

IRAQ

ISIS Raid in South

Leaves Dozens Dead

Islamic State gunmen stormed a restaurant in southern Iraq after blowing up a car bomb outside, killing more than 50 people, Iraqi officials said, including Iranian pilgrims having a meal.

The attack, along a highway near the southern city of Nassiriya, was one of the deadliest in the country in recent months. The Sunni Muslim extremist group claimed the assault via its official Amaq news agency, saying it had killed dozens of Shiite Muslims, whom it brands as apostates.

A bomb exploded in the restaurant parking area, an interior ministry official said. Gunmen disguised as members of Iraq's mainly Shiite Muslim paramilitary forces then got out of a second vehicle and entered the building, opening fire on diners, the official said. A second vehicle then blew up.

At least 16 of the victims were Iranians who had stopped for a rest on their way to visit Shiite shrines in southern Iraq, an interior ministry official said, and another 85 people were wounded.

-- Ghassan Adnan, Ali A. Nabhan and Isabel Coles

---

MALAYSIA

Blaze Kills at Least 23

At Boarding School

A predawn fire tore through an Islamic boarding school in the Malaysian capital, killing at least 23 people, mostly students trapped in their bedrooms, officials said.

Initial investigations showed the small, all-boys school was operating without a fire-safety permit, though it had applied for one, fire authorities said. The school started operating three years ago.

The fire left 21 of the school's 36 students dead, along with two of its six teachers, officials said. Students of the school were between 13 and 17 years old. The blaze was the deadliest to hit this Southeast Asian country in many years, fire officials said.

Kuala Lumpur Police Chief Amar Singh said there was no reason to suspect arson.

-- Yantoultra Ngui

---

CHINA

Business Activity

Slowed in August

China posted a surprise slowdown in business activity in August, a sign that rising borrowing costs and property restrictions are having a more severe effect on the economy than expected.

The rise in value-added industrial output, a rough proxy for economic growth, slowed for a second straight month, climbing 6% in August, compared with a 6.4% increase in July, the National Bureau of Statistics said. The increase came in lower than the median forecast of 6.6% growth from a poll of economists.

In a potentially even more ominous sign, growth in investments was the slowest in almost 18 years.

Officials blamed August's slowdown on bad weather but economists say a clampdown on credit, a cooling property market and waning effects from previous stimulus measures may have damped domestic demand.

-- Liyan Qi and Grace Zhu

---

UNITED KINGDOM

Officials Open Inquiry

On London Fire

The U.K. opened an inquiry into the Grenfell Tower fire that killed at least 80 people, with its chairman pledging to provide answers to how a tragedy of its scale could happen in modern-day London.

Martin Moore-Bick, a retired judge appointed by the government to head the inquiry, said he recognized the anger and betrayal felt by survivors, many of whom lost everything in the June fire in the 24-story low-income apartment block in West London.

The scale of the inquiry highlights the difficulties for the government in deciding how and whether to hold people and corporations to account. The first phase will cover how the fire began and spread and the second will look at how the building design may have exposed it to serious risk.

A focus will be on the flammable exterior cladding that is suspected of contributing.

-- Jenny Gross

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170914ed9f0001q

Magazine
An Exclusive Tour of a French Iconoclast's Moroccan Getaway; In a corner of Marrakech's medina, Bernard-Henri Léy has restored and expanded the Palais de la Zahia— place to retreat to with his wife, Arielle Dombasle, while communing with the riad's storied past

By Sarah Medford 
2,945 words
12 September 2017
11:58
WSJ. The Magazine from The Wall Street Journal
WSJM
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The French film Day and Night seemed to have a lot going for it on the eve of its release in February 1997. The romantic drama, which co-starred Alain Delon and Arielle Dombasle (with Lauren Bacall in a minor role), had been bankrolled by French luxury-goods magnate Françis Pinault and his friend Andrééy, an industrialist who was also the father of its director, the celebrated writer Bernard-Henri Léy. But the critical response was immediate—nd brutal. The chastened director and his leading lady, who was also his wife, escaped to Delon's holiday home in Morocco, tucked away in the medina of Marrakech. They swam in its palm-shaded pool and took sun on the crenelated roof terrace, which overlooks the Koutoubia Mosque and most of the ancient pink-walled city.

"We came supposedly for one week, and after the week I told him, 'I don't want to move! I'll buy it,' " Léy says of the house. Delon demurred, according to Léy, but not for long. "A new lady in his life— Pol Pot of the feelings—as making things difficult for him. And finally, he said, 'Why not? I'll sell.' "

Léy and Dombasle acquired the Palais de la Zahia, as it is known, in 1998. Over the past two decades, they've expanded the centuries-old riad with additional guest rooms, public and private areas for sheltering from the day's heat and gardens that alternately delineate and obscure its meandering courtyards. From the start, they've worked on the project with their friend Louis Benech, France's preeminent landscape designer.

The historic palace has remained a hushed, bewitching getaway from the couple's home in Paris. Léy, in particular, has taken a keen interest in the characters who have passed through its doors, including the feudal warlord Thami el Glaoui, diplomat Hubert Lyautey—he first French resident-general in Morocco—nd the Swiss writer-adventurer Isabelle Eberhardt.

In 1966, Palais de la Zahia took a dip into the counterculture when John Paul Getty Jr. purchased it as a wedding present for his second wife, the Dutch model Talitha Pol. Getty's father, J. Paul Getty Sr., was listed that year in The Guinness Book of World Records as the world's richest private citizen for his holdings in the oil company he'd co-founded, and soon a rivulet of Senior's cash was making its way into a full restoration of the palace. Leading the work was Bill Willis, a Memphis-born antiques dealer and self-taught decorator who'd already cut a swath with the younger Gettys through Morocco. The couple's hedonistic days and nights at La Zahia were summed up in a now-famous image taken by Patrick Lichfield for Vogue in 1969, in which Talitha, dressed in an embroidered djellaba, harem pants and white go-go boots, lounges before Paul on the darkening roof terrace. (Two years later she died of a heroin overdose in their Rome apartment, after which Getty sold the Marrakech house.)

Léy finds the flamboyant and somewhat debauched history of La Zahia intriguing. Trailing the Gettys to its door was a creative coven that included Yves Saint Laurent and Pierre Bergé Marianne Faithfull, Gore Vidal and Michelangelo Antonioni, among others. "My passion is really the memoirs," he says. "The house was documented as the only place on earth where the Beatles met the Rolling Stones. They spent a Christmas here together. A few nights, with their ladies." The episode was recorded by Fabrice Gaignault in his 2006 book, Sixties Muses; Léy mentions that he also corroborated it with his houseman, Mohsine, who was born at La Zahia and whose late father looked after it before him.

Mohsine has just delivered a tray bearing espresso in porcelain cups to the terrace, where Léy is relaxing after his morning swim, dressed in an aloe-green bath towel and wraparound sunglasses. He regrets not meeting Paul Getty in person, he says. "One of his sons came back here one day, with great emotion, and wanted to make a sort of pilgrimage. I think he was happy with how we've kept it, I don't know."

The French couple bring their own version of celebrity to La Zahia. Dombasle, after several decades as an actress, has segued into a career as a singer and occasional film director. (Her latest, the 2013 Opium, was inspired by Jean Cocteau's classic memoir.) Wasp-waisted and vivacious, Dombasle is the shimmering sun to Léy's taciturn moon. He's a writer-adventurer in the spirit of Eberhardt, hitting the road in dusty, perilous landscapes in search of a story, and is best known as an outspoken public intellectual, a self-described humanist who has taken controversial stands on matters of international policy—ost recently in Bosnia, Libya and across the Middle East.

Now 68, Léy came onto the French scene in the 1970s, first as a war correspondent for the left-wing newspaper Combat and then as the author of Barbarism With a Human Face, an impassioned repudiation of Marxism. A fortune accrued by his father in the timber business has allowed him to lead a comfortable life, and he pursues projects only as they interest him. The list is long: Léy has produced so much—nd had so many professional ups and downs—hat they are beyond count. His 2006 book American Vertigo, subtitled Traveling America in the Footsteps of Tocqueville, was a bestseller in the U.S. as well as France despite an incendiary review by Garrison Keillor in the New York Times that began, "Any American with a big urge to write a book explaining France to the French should read this book first, to get a sense of the hazards involved." Alternately celebrated and lampooned in the French press for his high-minded exploits (he's regularly entarté or given a pie in the face), Léy has been rebranded in France simply as "BHL." He is also a dandy and a well-documented ladies' man: If BHL had his own emoji, it would sport a black suit and a white Charvet shirt with a stand-up collar, open at the neck.

In Marrakech, Léy works to the exclusion of almost everything else. "I never move from here," he says, glancing around the densely shaded courtyard. "I work all day. And all evening. Sometimes I'm alone, and sometimes it's a good way to get work done." He admits that he leaves a lot of the details surrounding La Zahia to Dombasle.

"My wife likes making a house," Léy says. "What I like in a house is people. The history. My history—nd the people who came before. This is a little bit of a haunted house."

Palais de la Zahia is unquestionably a big house, a grand riad that dates to the 16th or the 18th century, depending on whom you ask. Thought to have been built by the Glaoui, or ruling pashas, of Marrakech, it bears all the markings of a rich man's trophy: rooms faced in zellige (glittering, richly patterned mosaic tile); cedar-wood ceilings, almost Nordic in their intricate floral motifs, carved and painted with botanical dyes; deep, arched fireplaces and walls of tadelakt (glazed and pigmented plaster). At some point, a smaller riad was annexed to the larger one and used as a harem. As Mohsine explains, this is where Marlon Brando spent a few months shacked up with the Gettys in the late '60s.

The first time Léy and Dombasle returned to La Zahia as its owners, they brought along Benech and his then-partner, Christian Louboutin, to consult on various home improvements. "As a person, I like Louis's tenderness," Léy says. "And as a professional, I love that he believes plants are living creatures. He really communicates with plants. They are the partners of his life."

Léy has soaked up a bit of this thinking himself. "Louis taught me that plants had a life," he says. "And strangely enough, he convinced me of my relation to this world. The Americans love their dogs and their cats. For me, perhaps it's pet plants. Introduced by Louis Benech. 'Mr. Léy, meet your pet plant.' "

Benech got his start among the rain-misted gardens of Normandy, but several early projects had introduced him to North Africa's parched, unremitting climate, and the challenges of garden making there fueled his imagination. "The landscape tradition in Morocco is a bit Alhambresque," he says from the terrace of his Paris home and office, a modest townhouse in the ninth arrondissement. "There is sometimes a big reservoir surrounded by fruit trees—itrus or olive, as in the Agdal Gardens of Marrakech. And then there is the riad garden, an interior courtyard with raised walkways and sunken beds. It's a gravitational watering system—hough not as clever as the ones in Iran."

In the early '80s, Benech designed a slim water canal in the Moorish style at Dar Zuylen, the estate of Guy and Marie-Héèe de Rothschild in the Palmerie, a new residential community outside the medina. "It was lined with artichokes, which have such a beautiful leaf," he says. Having stayed at the house one summer, Léy and Dombasle craved a canal of their own. Beyond that, their requests for La Zahia were personal: Dombasle wanted a certain apricot rose, a hybrid tea named Just Joey; her husband wanted the world in microcosm.

"My little idea," Léy explains, "was that in this house, you should be able to experiment with all sorts of relationships between shadow and light. There should be a place for sunlight, for deep shadow, for coolness and for burning heat. A place for being surrounded by plants and then seeing plants at a distance. Not a variety of plants, but a variety of behaviors of me and my friends. I wanted the framework to be set in order to create a variety of relationships with plants."

Benech says he doesn't recall this dialectical tale, but the result was achieved anyway—n its beguiling complexity, La Zahia offered a range of horticultural opportunities. The existing trees in the riad's courtyard garden were magnificent: jacarandas, figs, palms, flame trees and Persian silk trees approaching the height of the upper-story bedrooms. At eye level, though, the sunken beds looked empty and rather sad. Léy and Dombasle suggested raising the soil to the level of the green-tiled walkways, but Benech argued that this would "strangle" the trees. Instead, he persuaded them to plant a proper understory mixed with potted ferns and flowering climbers—osy pink bougainvillea, persimmon-hued crossvine—hat would soon infiltrate the courtyard with a primitive jungle on the order of Henri Rousseau. "At the time of the Gettys, there were just the big trees," Léy says. "Now there is a sort of clever and wild composition, and it is like this all year round."

Barefoot and still draped in a towel, Léy rises from a velvet-cushioned campaign chair and pads through an arched doorway in the courtyard to an area he annexed some years after buying the house. The transition is from night to day: A sun-struck garden in fiery oranges and yellows encircles a newly built wing. Here Benech planted citrus trees and fragrant, trailing moonflower, wisteria and jasmine vines to make an opulent stage for the hybrid tea roses Dombasle favors, which are laced among hibiscus and an almost-vermillion lantana to ensure that the garden is constantly in color. Flowing down the middle is a turquoise-tiled canal that culminates in a small pool where calla lilies, bird of paradise and other showy bloomers perform.

"Although it looks wild, it's very geometric," Dombasle says of the rectangular plot. "Louis makes very sophisticated gardens that never look like gardens àa françise. It's not his style at all. But he's so passionate."

Renowned for his encyclopedic knowledge of plants, Benech prefers using native species whenever possible. In Marrakech, frustrated by the poor selection of natives in the nurseries, he resorted at one point to smuggling in seeds and seedlings from abroad, a practice that soon took on a narcotic allure. He supplemented his stowaways with local specimen plants scavenged one by one. "Louis was like a collector who knows that a piece of art exists somewhere, and he has to find it," Léy says. "He would take a car to the desert and come back with a little pot. Now the plants are not so little. It was a big commitment, and he did it with heart."

The same could be said for Léy's expansion of the illustrious riad. "This is a little more than a house, so there is a transmission that has to be true and consistent, a legacy," he explains. "I did not change it. I added. And I got in touch with Bill Willis, because I wanted the same spirit as the Gettys. But Bill worked in close contact with Louis."

Willis had stayed on in Marrakech after restoring Palais de la Zahia in the '60s, becoming the city's unlikely shaman of the decorative arts. "Bill created the Marrakech look, and it started with that house," says the decorator Jacques Grange, who visited La Zahia with Yves Saint Laurent in 1972. "Yves was very close friends with Talitha. She had died by then, but we spent time there with Paul."

In 2002, Willis reprised his role at La Zahia. Then in his 60s and somewhat of a recluse, the designer threw out one far-fetched idea after the next, and Benech—ith input from Louboutin, who is no slouch when it comes to houses—id what he could to shape them into workable plans. Willis died in 2009, and Léy and Dombasle emerged from the adventure with a few choice stories. They still use the furniture Willis designed for the Gettys, including a four-poster bed painted like the Good Ship Lollipop in a fantasia of ice cream colors and Berber-inspired motifs. In Talitha Getty's former boudoir, Dombasle stirred Willis's haute-bohemian pot by placing a red-satin chaise once owned by the Italian fashion designer Elsa Schiaparelli beside a soaking tub paved with psychedelic zellige tiles. "It's so amusing," Dombasle says of the result, taking a drag on her cigarette and smiling.

Certain rooms at La Zahia still breathe the stately air of the 19th century. When the couple host late dinners for friends, a long table in one of the salons is set with colored votive candles, and the fireplace is lit on cool evenings. Léy says he prefers to dine at home. "In 20 years, I never went to a dinner, a party, to a lunch here." This sounds unbelievable, but he insists. "People come from abroad," he says. "A coterie, no. But it's a place where my best friends come. And sometimes the house has been used to have people meet, and take time together discreetly." Meaning? "A few political discussions have taken place here," he says cryptically. "In 2000, there were some meetings, some talks here. Between Israelis and Palestinians. In 2011, there were some talks with Libya, factions of the Libyan revolution. But generally, it is not that. Generally, it is really a place for me to write and to get together with my friends."

The Middle East has been Léy's focus for more than a decade, and in the past two years he's made a pair of documentaries on the rise of ISIS. "As you can guess, you don't come back from such an adventure absolutely intact," he says of filming in northern Iraq. "It takes time, and I am…n recovery." To ease back into the general public discourse, he's working on a new book about populism, he says. "Trump, Putin, Europe. How to understand it, how to get rid of it."

Reconciling the many contrasts of Léy's life is no easy matter, a fact that becomes even clearer after a trip to La Zahia's basement, where a series of rooms is lined with images of him and a galaxy of acquaintances from childhood to the present.

Cameos by everyone from his two children, his two ex-wives, Omar Sharif, Nicolas Sarkozy and Charlie Rose to camo-clad soldiers and Russian dissidents tell an unfathomable number of stories. Benech refers to the place as "the Dombaslothèue"—here the still-glamorous chanteuse lets loose in the evenings to entertain friends. "This is a crazy place," Léy says, before leading the way through to the underground gym.

In 2000, on a trip to Tangier, Léy fell in love with the view from a clifftop bluff and asked the late French designer André Putman to build him a contemporary villa there. The two Moroccan houses couldn't be more different, he says—Like Mac and PC. Like Beatles and Rolling Stones. Like Racine and Corneille." In July, though, he put the pristine Tangier house on the market; he rarely found himself going there. Instead, he's been spending more time in the ancient arms of La Zahia. He can be alone here, to a point. "This is a very old house, with many ghosts. Good ghosts."

Document WSJM000020170912ed9c00001



The Air Force Needs a Budget That Aims Higher

By Heather Wilson and David Goldfein 
765 words
12 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A17
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

We recently stood on the tarmac at Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan and watched as the brothers-in-arms of a young Green Beret carried a flag-draped transfer case containing his remains toward the aircraft that would bring him home. He was killed fighting Islamic State.

We visited Afghanistan and Iraq to meet with airmen and assess Air Force operations. We met B-52 crews in Qatar who had launched 573 sorties without once being canceled for maintenance, as well as Air Force surgical teams deployed in a bombed-out bunker to provide trauma care for Iraqi soldiers. We heard stories from heavy-construction crews keeping wells operating and runways open in 120-degree heat. We watched as combat air controllers choreographed layers of air support over Tal Afar, Iraq, and Raqqa, Syria.

Americans should be proud of U.S. airmen and their brethren in all of the services. They are competent citizens of character. But lingering in our minds at every stop was a question: Will these men and women get the support they need to remain ready when called?

The American military has surged to the fight in Iraq and Afghanistan, but surges aren't sustainable. The Air Force as currently constituted is too small to do what the nation expects of it. In 1991, when the U.S. went to war to drive Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait, the Air Force had 134 fighter squadrons, which typically have 18 to 24 aircraft each. Today, the Air Force has only 55 fighter squadrons, and 1,500 fewer pilots than it needs. We have been doing too much, with too little, for too long.

On an average sortie protecting ground forces in Syria and Iraq, an American fighter aircraft refuels eight times. It takes about 60 tanker sorties a day to support U.S. operations in Iraq, Syria and Afghanistan. As a result, tanker pilots today have six months in a combat theater and six months at home. And when they are home, they are not really home. They have to cram in the training they were not able to accomplish while "in the desert."

U.S.-based remotely piloted aircraft crews work 12-hour shifts -- six days on with one day off. And the cycle doesn't end. Despite their dedication and that of their families, going six, seven or eight years at this rate leaves people exhausted. They become increasingly likely to try a different career that will afford them a more normal life. As a result, we lose the skilled people we need to continue the fight.

The readiness of those who stay is also compromised by an operating tempo too high for a force of our size. Those B-52 crews that have done 573 straight missions against ISIS will return home soon. Ten days after arriving at home base, they will undergo inspection to make sure they are ready for their mission carrying nuclear weapons, for which they will not have practiced in at least four months.

In addition to the risk posed by the enemy, the lack of a defense budget puts U.S. forces at risk. The Air Force has requested $132.4 billion for fiscal 2018. We cannot continue on last year's funding level of $123.8 billion indefinitely.

Much worse would be a return to sequester. A budget this year at sequester levels -- while we take the fight to ISIS, deter aggression in the Pacific, and support emergency responders at home -- would almost certainly result in significant cuts in flying hours. Squadrons deployed or preparing to deploy would get to fly, but we would likely be forced to ground entire squadrons at home. During sequestration in 2013, the Air Force grounded 13 squadrons of combat aircraft, rendering them ineffective. No training and no flying today would worsen the exodus of pilots and other skilled airmen. Airlines are eager to hire them.

The effects of a sequester-level budget on weapons purchases and munitions would also reduce readiness and lethality. We worry most about the effect on our airmen. Their skills are vital to our success, and, once gone, they cannot be quickly replaced.

On the ramp at Bagram, hundreds of airmen saluted a fallen soldier. They are the best our nation has and are committed to its defense. The nation must commit to them.

---

Ms. Wilson is secretary of the Air Force. Gen. Goldfein is Air Force chief of staff.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170912ed9c0000i



REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
The Next Middle East War

434 words
11 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Israel launched airstrikes on a military compound in Syria on Thursday, and the bombing should alert the Trump Administration as much as the Syrians. They carry a warning about the next war in the Middle East that could draw in the U.S.

Israel doesn't confirm or deny its military strikes, but former officials said they were aimed at a base for training and a warehouse for short- and midrange missiles. The strikes also hit a facility that the U.S. cited this year for involvement in making chemical weapons.

The larger context is the confrontation that is building between Israel and Iran as the war against Islamic State moves to a conclusion in Syria and Iraq. Iran is using Syria's civil war, and the battle against Islamic State, as cause to gain a permanent military foothold in Syria that can threaten Israel either directly or via its proxies in Syria and Lebanon.

Tehran has helped Hezbollah stockpile tens of thousands of missiles that will be launched against Israel in the next inevitable conflict. If it can also dominate southern Syria, Iran can establish a second front on the border near the Golan Heights that would further stretch Israel's ability to defend itself.

Israel may have to make more such strikes in Syria because Iran isn't likely to give up on this strategic opening. Iran's Revolutionary Guards know they have Russia's backing in Syria, and the U.S. is signaling that it is loathe to do anything to change that once Islamic State is routed from Raqqa.

"As far as Syria is concerned, we have very little to do with Syria other than killing ISIS," President Trump said Thursday at a White House press conference with the emir of Kuwait. "What we do is we kill ISIS. And we have succeeded in that respect. We have done better in eight months of my Presidency than the previous eight years against ISIS."

Great, but the problem is that the end of Islamic State won't bring stability to Syria, and American interests in the Middle East don't end with Islamic State. The danger of a proxy war or even a direct war between Iran and Israel is growing, and it will increase as Iran's presence builds in Syria. Mr. Trump may not like it, but he needs a strategy for post-Islamic State Syria that contains Iran if he doesn't want the U.S. to be pulled back into another Middle East war.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170911ed9b00009



World News -- Middle East Crossroads: In Syria, a New Conflict Looms as  ISIS  Loses Ground

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
761 words
8 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The Syrian regime's successful offensive in Deir Ezzour this week pushed it ahead in the race against America's Kurdish-led allies over who will inherit Islamic State's remaining Syrian real estate.

With the extremist group losing ground fast, President Bashar al-Assad has emerged in his strongest position since the Syrian uprising began in 2011. Yet large parts of the country remain outside his reach, including an American-protected zone run by the Kurds in northeastern Syria.

The question now is where precisely the line between regime and Kurdish areas will be drawn after Islamic State's defeat and whether it will solidify into a semi-permanent partition of the country or spark a new bout of violence that could force the U.S. to make difficult choices.

American military planning calls for the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, currently finishing the battle to take Raqqa from Islamic State, to push south down the Euphrates River and to seize the extremist group's remaining cities of Mayadeen and then al-Bukamal on the Iraqi border. That swath of Syria also holds most of its oil and gas reserves.

This week's blitz by the Syrian army and its Shiite militia allies to relieve a besieged garrison in Deir Ezzour could within days cut off the way for such SDF advances. Large parts of the city remain under Islamic State control.

"It was a race but once the regime takes Deir Ezzour, it's game over for the U.S.-led coalition. They will have to stop," said Monzer Akbik, a leader of the mostly Arab Tayyar al-Ghad party loosely allied with the SDF. "After Deir Ezzour, the regime will be able to go to al-Bukamal, and once al-Bukamal is taken, the Iranians will have achieved an uninterrupted land route from Tehran to Baghdad to Damascus to Hezbollah in Beirut."

The regime and SDF aren't enemies, so far. They share a hostility to Turkey and Turkey's Syrian proxies, who occupy an area northeast of Aleppo. Despite skirmishes over the past year, regime-held enclaves operate in Kurdish territory in the cities of Hasakah and Qamishli, while the Kurdish enclave of Afrin in western Syria is connected to the rest of the world through regime territory.

"The SDF and the regime generally did not fight each other until now. We will see soon whether this will still hold true," said Andrew Tabler, a Syria expert at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

"The idea in U.S. policy circles is that we will now have a soft partition of Syria along the Euphrates," he said. "But the regime and the Iranians are not interested in a soft partition. What they are after is a military victory."

Indeed, Mr. Assad has rejected the idea of maintaining Kurdish autonomy in northern Syria. Safwan Akkash, one of the leaders of the moderate and predominantly Sunni Arab Syrian opposition, predicted that the regime will eventually attack America's Kurdish allies.

"The regime will not tolerate a Kurdish autonomous region," he said. "The current conflict will be followed by another conflict."

That may not happen immediately. But such a conflict appears imminent and should it erupt, it would confront Washington with an unpalatable choice of either abandoning its Kurdish allies or taking direct military action against the Assad regime, said Robert Ford, the U.S. ambassador to Syria under the Obama administration who is a fellow at the Middle East Institute in Washington.

"Sooner or later, the government in Damascus will try to reimpose its authority," Mr. Ford said. "That will be a big decision for the Trump administration: Should they use American armed forces to protect the Syrian Kurdish autonomous region? If they do, it would be against international law, and I don't think there is any country in the region that would support it."

One hope of avoiding such a scenario lies in the United Nations-sponsored peace process in Geneva. There, however, the Kurdish movement isn't even represented because of Turkish objections.

This means that, for Mr. Assad, there are few reasons to be flexible in the peace process now, said Kamal Alam, a visiting fellow at the Royal United Services Institute in London who frequently travels to Damascus. "They will still go to the talks, but they no longer have the pressure to give up too much."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170908ed980000l



World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,055 words
7 September 2017
12:56
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Double-Crossing the Aisle

President Trump stunned Republicans on Wednesday when he sided with Democrats on a proposal to attach aid for Hurricane Harvey victims to measures to keep the government funded and its borrowing limit suspended until mid-December. Mr. Trump's decision to ignore pleas from GOP congressional leaders upended the partisan alliances that have long set the boundaries of congressional policy-making—nd is likely to inflame tensions with his fellow Republicans. It also raises the question of whether he will now turn to Democrats to reach deals on tax reform and immigration. If approved by Congress, Wednesday's agreement would defer the threat of a partial government shutdown and a default on the country's debt until Dec. 15 and dispatch the first $7.85 billion installment of Harvey relief.

No-Go Cohn

After months of dangling the possibility that he would make him Federal Reserve chairman, President Trump is now unlikely to nominate Gary Cohn, his top economic adviser, to succeed Janet Yellen as Fed chief when her term expires in early February—dding to the uncertainty over central-bank leadership and policies. Mr. Trump had said in July that he was considering Mr. Cohn, and his change in thinking potentially bolsters the odds of his nominating Ms. Yellen for a second term. On Wednesday Fed Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer said he will resign next month for personal reasons, creating a fourth vacancy on the powerful seven-member Fed board of governors. His departure accelerates Mr. Trump's opportunity to put his stamp on the central bank.

Chinese Studies

How have North Korea's nuclear and missile programs advanced so rapidly despite international efforts to keep the technology out of its hands? Our deep dive suggests the answer may lie in expertise brought home by North Korean scientists who studied abroad, from China to India to Italy. We also report that a U.S. proposal for new United Nations sanctions against North Korea would clamp an embargo on its oil and textile trade and slap a full asset freeze and world-wide travel ban on leader Kim Jong Un and key regime members and institutions—ignificantly escalating pressure on Pyongyang. Diplomats said they expect a vote on Sept. 11; veto-holding China and Russia are the highest hurdles to passage. A new U.N. report alleges that member nations are helping North Korea evade the current sanctions. The Trump administration also told top lawmakers that terminating a free-trade agreement with South Korea, much maligned by the president, is no longer an immediate priority.

Narrow Appeal

Four years ago Bombardier rolled out a passenger jet with wide seats, ample overhead bins and an extra-quiet engine. It isn't selling well. While there are many reasons for that, the lack of interest highlights the low priority that airlines believe passengers place on comfort. "Passengers get into anything that flies if the ticket is cheap," says the chief executive of Air Baltic, one of two small European airlines flying the C Series planes. New fuel-efficient engines and lighter airframe materials allowed Bombardier to keep operating costs low and still offer a wide cabin. The question is whether airlines care enough to buy.

Today's Video

Fire and Fury

As tensions rise around the Korean Peninsula, American leaders have been openly discussing what was once unthinkable: A military intervention in North Korea. If this were to happen, here's how specialists on North Korean security see things playing out.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Teacher Shortage Prompts Some States to Lower the Bar

Senators Discuss Bipartisan Approach to Repair Obamacare

WORLD

Court Rules Hungary Must Take Migrants, Deepening Tensions in EU

In Syria, New Conflict Looms as \b ISIS\b0  Loses Ground

BUSINESS

After Revamp at Hewlett-Packard, What Is Next for Meg Whitman?

Sanofi Stops Work on Two Zika Vaccines

MARKETS

'Hurricane Deductibles' Shift Home-Repair Costs to Consumers

Yuan's Sharp Rise Muddles China's Growth Picture

Number of the Day

$100,000

The advertising spending Facebook said it has identified by about 500 "inauthentic" accounts it believes have ties to Russia, following a review in response to intelligence-community concerns about Russian activity during the 2016 election. It is Facebook's first acknowledgment that Russian actors may have used its platform during the presidential campaign.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on President Trump's debt-ceiling deal with Democrats? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on the latest WSJ/NBC News survey, Mike Furlong of Alabama said: "The survey is just the latest example of polarization in our society. We increasingly listen only to those people who agree with us and ignore those who don't. In the interest of keeping their jobs rather than doing their jobs, officeholders feed and exacerbate this separation. This will change only with courageous leadership, and frankly and fearfully, I see no signs of it." Steve Shannon of New Jersey shared: "It would behoove our nation if more Democrats attended religious services and more Republicans gave science similar due. Leaders of both parties should take heed rather than dig in on their heels." And Kevin Freiert of Connecticut wrote: "I think America is ready for new political parties so that people can choose the candidate that reflects their positions on a wide range of issues instead of settling for the best of the bad options."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170907ed97001rx



World News: Syrian Military Advances, Ramping Up Pressure on  ISIS 

By Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut and Nour Alakraa in Berlin 
455 words
6 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The Syrian army broke a three-year Islamic State siege in the eastern city of Deir Ezzour on Tuesday, handing the extremist group a significant setback in one of its most important remaining strongholds.

The regime's advance adds to the pressure on Islamic State fighters in surrounding Deir Ezzour province, which many of the group's leaders fled to as it came under attack and lost territory across Syria and Iraq over the past year.

The Syrian military has been moving toward the city of Deir Ezzour for weeks. The U.S. and Russia, Syria's main ally, agreed recently on a plan to avoid clashes between the regime and the U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State, which is currently battling the extremists in the neighboring province of Raqqa to the north.

As Islamic State is forced into a shrinking patch of territory in Syria, the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and its allies find themselves fighting in increasingly close proximity to U.S.-backed forces.

The advance by Syrian forces was met with fierce resistance by Islamic State, according to activists opposed to both the regime and Islamic State. Syrian military units moved in from the western side of Deir Ezzour province and linked up with another brigade inside one of two government-held enclaves inside the provincial capital, according to Syrian state-run media.

"Army units, which have been advancing from the west side of [Deir Ezzour] province, have met with the garrison of the 137th Regiment this afternoon, breaking the siege imposed on the city for more than three years," said state-controlled Syrian Arab News Agency, or SANA.

Much of Islamic State's leadership, prisoners and most-valued military gear is now believed to be in Mayadeen, about 30 miles southeast of the city of Deir Ezzour. Islamic State still controls Syria's most important oil fields, which are spread throughout the province and which the group uses to fund its operations.

Despite long being at odds with the Assad regime and supporting opposition groups, Washington has opened the door to an expanded role for the Syrian military in fighting Islamic State. "We are here to fight ISIS as a coalition, but if others want to fight ISIS and defeat them, then we absolutely have no problem with that," Col. Ryan Dillon, spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition, said in June. "We as a coalition are not in the land-grab business. We're in the killing ISIS business."

---

Raja Abdulrahim in Beirut contributed to this article.



License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170906ed960001k



World News: Stalled Convoy Baits Trap for Islamic State

By Margherita Stancati 
418 words
5 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State said a convoy of militants stranded in Syria has proved an unexpected boon, drawing other fighters from the extremist group seeking to reach the buses into the open and turning them into easy targets.

The buses, which were supposed to transport hundreds of Islamic State fighters and their families to a town in eastern Syria near the Iraqi border from the Lebanese border in southwestern Syria, have been stuck for nearly a week after U.S. airstrikes blocked them from reaching their destination. They were being evacuated under a controversial deal brokered by the Iran-backed Lebanese militant group Hezbollah that the U.S. opposed.

"It has been quite lucrative for the coalition because of all the assets that ISIS has put toward it," said the coalition spokesman, U.S. Army Col. Ryan Dillon. "They have exposed themselves as part of this event, and we were able to capitalize on it," he said. "It presented an opportunity for the coalition to strike and remove several ISIS fighters and resources from the battlefield."

The buses were en route to Deir Ezzour province in eastern Syria, one of last remaining strongholds of Islamic State.

U.S. airstrikes cratered a road and destroyed a bridge to prevent the convoy from advancing and have repeatedly targeted Islamic State fighters trying to reach the buses. Col. Dillon said so far, some 85 militants and more than 40 vehicles have been hit by airstrikes. The strikes also targeted artillery systems, pickup trucks mounted with weapons and a tank.

Over the weekend, the convoy split up, with six of the 17 buses that originally left the Lebanese border turning back into Syrian-government controlled territory outside Deir Ezzour province. They stopped near the Syrian village of al-Sukhnah, said the coalition, which continues to monitor the 11 stranded buses. The coalition has refused to strike the buses directly because there are women and children on board. About 300 Islamic State fighters and 300 of their relatives evacuated Syria's mountainous border area with Lebanon after the Lebanese army and Syrian government forces backed by Hezbollah launched simultaneous but separate offensives against the group from both sides of the border.

"We know where they are right now. ISIS wants to continue to put fighters and resources to rescue them, and we will continue striking them," Col. Dillon said.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170905ed9500011



World News: Mosul Emerges, One Business at a Time --- In Iraq'a second- largest city,  ISIS  is kicked out and commerce kicks in

By Asa Fitch in Mosul, Iraq, and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut 
869 words
5 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A5
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Now that security forces have driven Islamic State from Mosul, money changer Ayman Younis is back in business, helping traders buy imports from Turkey.

It is just one of the signs that the economy in Iraq's second-largest city is coming back to life after three years under the extremists, who stifled private business by controlling trade and restricting who could take part in it -- and were known to execute independent money changers.

Many challenges lie ahead, from demining to rebuilding, and the overarching sentiment in the northern Iraqi business community is far from positive. Many business owners are putting off investment decisions as they wait for the bulk of reconstruction to begin.

But Iraq's next big battle -- the resurrection of its cities -- is shifting into gear. Some residents are returning to Mosul, and businesses including grocers, furniture sellers and construction-material suppliers are welcoming the revived demand for their goods.

"They are trying to establish a foothold," said Mus'ab Mohammed, 30 years old, the manager of the Al Alamia supermarket, which reopened after Iraqi forces took control of the area early this year. Al Alamia is now fully stocked with food and household goods, many of which were banned or unavailable under Islamic State.

Iraqi security forces have driven the extremists from Mosul, and on Thursday Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi declared the nearby town of Tal Afar "fully liberated." The only significant areas of Iraq still under Islamic State control are Hawija, a rural area between Baghdad and Mosul, and the mostly desert region around the Qaim border crossing with Syria.

Around 834,000 residents of Mosul were displaced, out of a pre-ISIS two million, but as of Thursday around 30% had returned, according to the U.N.'s International Organization for Migration.

When the extremists occupied Mosul in 2014, Mr. Younis, who is 45, said he shut his currency exchange and focused on self-preservation, not wealth-generation.

For those years, there were "only some narrow-minded people controlling you," he said, seated at his desk in a white shirt, a calculator in front of him and a bill-counting machine to his left. "Now there is government and law. Hopefully things will be better."

The challenges are significant. Many neighborhoods were leveled by fighting. Business owners complain that security is still shaky, with the lingering threat of Islamic State mines and terrorist attacks. Consumers, particularly government employees whose salaries were cut off in 2015, have little to spend. Industrial areas where Islamic State manufactured weapons have been destroyed.

Amer Gargaja, a food wholesaler, said his warehouse in western Mosul was demolished. He said he won't rebuild until the government ensures security and gives compensation to those whose property was destroyed.

Qutaiba Shanshal, a clothing wholesaler, also said state support was necessary "to get the economic cycle running again." He said Islamic State's occupation had virtually destroyed Mosul's economy, which was already on uneven footing. "I'll try to resume my business, but not at the same size," he said.

Mr. Abadi's government estimates the reconstruction will cost more than $100 billion over the next 10 years. It has provided no breakdown of what is needed and where. While Iraq has significant oil reserves, a moderation in oil prices and the cost of the Islamic State fight have spread revenue thin.

Even before rebuilding begins, Iraqi leaders face the more pressing demands of how to finish off Islamic State and help the 3.26 million people who fled the conflict.

Several international efforts aim to aid reconstruction. The World Bank's International Finance Corporation is helping train members of Iraqi boards of directors on global best practices. Some Iraqi officials and executives promoted business opportunities at a July conference in London. Now, Iraqi officials and business leaders are looking to a donor conference set for January in Kuwait to provide a boost.

A big risk is unexploded ordnance. The militants used some factories as military facilities and laid explosives across many Iraqi cities and towns to prevent government forces and the U.S.-led military coalition from fully reclaiming territory. The thousands of explosives also prevent the return of displaced residents.

"It was almost like they thought 'OK, we can't own it, so you can't either,' " said David Johnson, a vice president at Janus Global, which is carrying out a countrywide demining program for the U.S. State Department. "It's like biblical times, salting the earth."

Recovery in Mosul will be difficult. A cement factory in the Hamam al Alil district of the city was once one of the biggest employers in Mosul and one of the largest cement producers in the country.

Janus finished demining the factory in July. But with Mosul still crawling out from under years of occupation and war, no investors have stepped up yet to restart the factory.

---

Ali A. Nabhan in Mosul contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170904ed950000s



World
Islamic State Fighters Trying to Aid Convoy Are Easy Targets; Buses transporting hundreds of Islamic State fighters have been stuck for nearly a week after U.S. airstrikes blocked them

By Margherita Stancati 
768 words
4 September 2017
21:57
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State said Monday a convoy of militants stranded in Syria has proved an unexpected boon, drawing other fighters from the extremist group seeking to reach the buses into the open and turning them into easy targets.

The buses, which were supposed to transport hundreds of Islamic State fighters and their families from the Lebanese border in southwestern Syria to a town in eastern Syria near the Iraqi border, have been stuck for nearly a week after U.S. airstrikes blocked them from reaching their destination. They were being evacuated under a controversial deal brokered by the Iran-backed Lebanese militant group Hezbollah that the U.S. opposed.

"It has been quite lucrative for the coalition because of all the assets that ISIS has put toward it," said the coalition spokesman, U.S. Army Col. Ryan Dillon. "They have exposed themselves as part of this event, and we were able to capitalize on it," he said. "It presented an opportunity for the coalition to strike and remove several ISIS fighters and resources from the battlefield."

The buses were en route to Deir Ezzour province in eastern Syria, one of last remaining strongholds of Islamic State.

U.S. airstrikes cratered a road and destroyed a bridge to prevent the convoy from advancing and have repeatedly targeted Islamic State fighters trying to reach the buses. Col. Dillon said so far, some 85 militants and more than 40 vehicles have been hit by airstrikes. The strikes also targeted artillery systems, pickup trucks mounted with weapons and a tank.

Over the weekend, the convoy split up, with six of the 17 buses that originally left the Lebanese border turning back into Syrian-government controlled territory outside Deir Ezzour province. They stopped near the Syrian village of al-Sukhnah, said the coalition, which continues to monitor the 11 stranded buses. The coalition has refused to strike the buses directly because there are women and children on board. About 300 Islamic State fighters and 300 of their relatives evacuated Syria's mountainous border area with Lebanon after the Lebanese army and Syrian government forces backed by Hezbollah launched simultaneous but separate offensives against the group from both sides of the border.

"We know where they are right now. ISIS wants to continue to put fighters and resources to rescue them, and we will continue striking them," said Col. Dillon.

The fighting stopped after Hezbollah reached a deal with Islamic State to allow safe passage to the militants and their families through Syria in exchange for information on the fate of eight Lebanese soldiers who had been kidnapped by the group in 2014. Their remains have been retrieved by Lebanese authorities.

As part of the agreement, Islamic State handed over the bodies of two Hezbollah fighters and of an Iranian military adviser, according to a Hezbollah official and Iranian state media. Islamic State still has a Hezbollah prisoner and the remains of two dead Hezbollah fighters that the Lebanese militant group will be able to retrieve only when and if the convoy reaches Deir Ezzour, the Hezbollah official said.

The saga of the convoy has unfolded as the U.S.-led coalition and forces loyal to the government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad are both converging on Deir Ezzour to try to oust Islamic State from one of its last remaining strongholds. Iran and Hezbollah are key allies propping up Mr. Assad's forces on the battlefield.

Rami Abdulrahman, the head of the U.K.-based opposition monitoring group Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, said reports from the ground indicate many of those on the convoy have quietly left the buses over the past two days.

Officials in Iraq's Anbar province, which borders eastern Syria, said Islamic State fighters accompanied by relatives recently reached the towns of Rawah and Aana.

"Around 100 militants reached the areas of Rawa and Annah from Deir Ezzour in Syria. It's not sure if they are the same from the convoy," said Qatari al-Samarmad, a tribal leader in Anbar who commands a group of tribal forces fighting Islamic State.

Col. Dillon said the coalition has no evidence indicating some passengers have fled, but is not ruling out the possibility.

Leena Saidi in Beirut, Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad and Nour Alakraa in Berlin contributed to this article.

Write to Margherita Stancati at margherita.stancati@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170904ed94003h1



Mobile
What's News: World-Wide

192 words
4 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

 North Korea said it conducted a sixth and significantly larger nuclear test, stepping up pressure on Trump. 

 A U.S. threat to withdraw from its trade pact with South Korea risks alienating an ally as fears intensify over North Korea's weapons program. 

 Finding housing for victims displaced by Harvey poses a major challenge for Houston. 

 U.S.-backed Syrian forces retook the old city of Raqqa, inching closer to fully capturing what was \b ISIS\b0 's de facto capital. 

 The Pentagon set a schedule of naval patrols in the South China Sea in an attempt to create a consistent posture to counter China's claims there. 

 A letter Trump drafted to Comey laying out why he didn't want the then-FBI chief to stay in the job has been turned over to Special Counsel Mueller. 

 A border standoff between China and India has magnified friction over trade and security days before their leaders meet. 

 Trump is set to announce Tuesday whether the Obama-era "Dreamers" immigrant program will be retained. 

 Cambodian authorities arrested the opposition leader, raising concerns of a worsening climate of political repression. 

Document WSJO000020170903ed94002bd



World-Wide
What's News
World-Wide

199 words
4 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

North Korea said it conducted a sixth and significantly larger nuclear test, stepping up pressure on Trump.

A U.S. threat to withdraw from its trade pact with South Korea risks alienating an ally as fears intensify over North Korea's weapons program.

---

Finding housing for victims displaced by Harvey poses a major challenge for Houston.

---

U.S.-backed Syrian forces retook the old city of Raqqa, inching closer to fully capturing what was ISIS's de facto capital.

---

The Pentagon set a schedule of naval patrols in the South China Sea in an attempt to create a consistent posture to counter China's claims there.

---

A letter Trump drafted to Comey laying out why he didn't want the then-FBI chief to stay in the job has been turned over to Special Counsel Mueller.

---

A border standoff between China and India has magnified friction over trade and security days before their leaders meet.

---

Trump is set to announce Tuesday whether the Obama-era "Dreamers" immigrant program will be retained.

---

Cambodian authorities arrested the opposition leader, raising concerns of a worsening climate of political repression.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170904ed940001r



World News:  ISIS  Loses Ground in Raqqa --- Old quarter of extremists' de facto capital in Syria falls; civilians suffer heavily

By Maria Abi-Habib and Nour Alakraa 
742 words
4 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

U.S.-backed Syrian forces retook the old city of Raqqa, U.S. officials said Sunday, inching closer to fully capturing what was once the extremist group's de facto capital used by militants to plan and stage attacks on the West.

With the advance into the old city, the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, backed by U.S. Special Forces, have taken about 60% of the city of Raqqa and are nearing some of the key infrastructure used by Islamic State that could provide important intelligence on the group.

The forces are now less than a mile from Islamic State's military barracks, religious courts and the main public square where the group declared its rule over Raqqa in 2014 and later conducted the public punishments that became the hallmark of its tyrannical rule.

"Another Milestone: #SDF in last 48 hrs complete liberation of #Raqqa's old city (longtime #ISIS stronghold) and evacuate 1000s of civilians," Brett McGurk, the U.S. president's special envoy in the battle against Islamic State, tweeted Sunday.

Despite the gains in Raqqa and across the border in Iraq in recent months, Islamic State still holds a significant amount of territory in Syria. The group moved its leaders and valued equipment to the eastern Syrian province of Deir Ezzour about a year ago.

The U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State and the Syrian regime's military are both slowly converging on Deir Ezzour to squeeze the extremists from the province, which borders Iraq and has some of Syria's largest oil fields.

In Iraq, the birthplace of the group, the militants have largely melted back into the population, U.S. and Iraqi officials say.

The Syrian Democratic Forces have led the battle for Raqqa as they have against Islamic State's other territories in Syria.

The mostly Kurdish force has some Arab fighters. But it has also been accused of numerous rights violations by human-rights groups and Arabs, such as forcing Arabs out of their homes to grab land for a semiautonomous state they aspire to build in northern Syria. The Kurds are an ethnic minority in Syria.

Some of the biggest losers in the fight against Islamic State have been civilians, with residents of Raqqa city reporting thousands wounded or killed by U.S.-led coalition airstrikes or caught in the crossfire ground fighting.

"The civilians are paying the highest price," said Uday, who is from Raqqa and is in touch with his family there but now lives in Turkey. He asked to be identified by his first name only as relatives still live under Islamic State rule.

The anti-Islamic State activist group Raqqa Is Being Slaughtered Silently said Raqqa's civilians are facing hunger with food shortages while the water for an estimated 10,000 civilians still stuck in the city has been contaminated.

Airwars, a monitoring agency that assess the impact of international airstrikes, said Thursday that a minimum of 860 civilians, including some 150 children, are "credibly reported" to have been killed in Raqqa since the U.S.-backed forces launched their assault on the city in June.

The U.S.-led coalition has played down the numbers of civilians killed in its operations against Islamic State.

Islamic State fighters were also under pressure in a separate standoff in the desert of eastern Syria. A convoy with some 300 militants and their families who were allowed to evacuate a region on the Lebanese border in southwestern Syria last week remain trapped in the central province of Homs, just south of Deir Ezzour province where they intended to go.

Hezbollah and the Syrian government had brokered a deal for the extremists to leave the border region and go to Deir Ezzour in exchange for information on the whereabouts of nine Lebanese soldiers who were kidnapped by the group in 2014.

The convoy of 17 buses left the Lebanese border region last Tuesday and has languished just south of Deir Ezzour as U.S. airstrikes have prevented Islamic State from sending its troops to meet the convoy. The Pentagon harshly criticized the deal but the U.S.-led coalition has said it won't strike the convoy because of the presence of women and children aboard.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170904ed940001n



World News -- Middle East Crossroads: Defeat of  ISIS  in Lebanon Gives Hezbollah New Sway

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
709 words
1 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT -- Lebanon's Hezbollah militia has branded the recent expulsion of Islamic State's militants from their main stronghold in the country as a "great victory" akin to forcing out Israel's occupation forces in 2000.

Now the question for Lebanon and the region is whether Hezbollah -- dedicated to the elimination of Israel and considered a terrorist organization by Washington -- translates this triumph of arms into lasting political gains.

On Saturday, parallel operations by Lebanon's army from inside Lebanon and by Hezbollah fighters advancing from Syria cleared out Islamic State's redoubt in the Qalamoun region straddling the border. Controversially, a deal struck by Hezbollah allowed hundreds of Islamic State militants to move to the extremist group's remaining territory in eastern Syria. The decision, criticized by Hezbollah's political opponents inside Lebanon, prompted the U.S. to launch two airstrikes in Syria on Wednesday aimed at stopping the convoy carrying the fighters and their families.

Iran-backed Hezbollah lost much of its luster in the wider Middle East once it sided with the Syrian regime after the revolution there erupted in 2011. But as the Syrian conflict flooded Lebanon with refugees -- and Sunni extremists -- the group has managed to position itself as the defender of the region's minorities, particularly Christians. That has generated domestic support well beyond Hezbollah's Shiite base.

Such an ability to build a broader consensus at home has provided Hezbollah, whose militia is one of the Middle East's most formidable fighting forces, with unparalleled political sway. After a two-year delay, the group's preferred candidate, Christian former army chief Michel Aoun, was elected Lebanon's president in October 2016.

Long-postponed elections for a parliament that would name a new government are slated for May 2018, and the giant victory rally Hezbollah held in the eastern town of Baalbek on Thursday is widely viewed as the kickoff of a campaign to broaden its power -- and its alliances.

Hezbollah's achievement in Qalamoun "will be regarded not only as the growth of its military might, but also of its political influence," said Imad Salamey, director of the Institute for Social Justice and Conflict Resolution at the Lebanese American University in Beirut.

Not everyone agrees. Many Lebanese were upset with how Hezbollah unilaterally negotiated with Islamic State -- an approach that seemed to undermine the authority of the Lebanese army and the Lebanese state.

Regardless of such resentment, nobody in Lebanon today appears in a position to resist Hezbollah's strategic choices, especially now that its status has been consolidated by the outcome of its Qalamoun campaign.

One added complication is Lebanon's relationship with Washington. President Donald Trump described Hezbollah as "a menace to the Lebanese state, the Lebanese people and the entire region" during his meeting with Prime Minister Saad Hariri in July, and U.S. officials are looking for ways to punish the group as part of a campaign to roll back Iranian influence.

Hezbollah's leader Hassan Nasrallah, meanwhile, recently praised Mr. Trump for his determination in fighting Islamic State, and for having described the group as a creation of the Obama administration.

As U.S. officials calculate how to deal with Hezbollah, they are careful not to act in a way that would blow up the Lebanese state and destroy the economy. Any increase in Hezbollah's formal role in Lebanon's government institutions, however, would make an argument against broader sanctions more difficult.

That is why the group is likely to be very careful in how it derives political gains from its victories against Islamic State.

Going forward, Hezbollah is likely to hew to its current strategy, preferring to exercise its authority indirectly and seeking collaboration from other parts of Lebanon's society, people familiar with the group predict.

"In Lebanon, it doesn't matter how strong you are, you have to govern by consensus," said Kamal Wazne, an expert on Hezbollah who heads a think tank in Beirut. "Otherwise you end up in a place where you don't want to be, and we already tried that during the civil war."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170901ed910000o



World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,213 words
31 August 2017
12:34
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Trail of Destruction

The devastation from Harvey, recently downgraded to a tropical depression, continues to mount. Industrial chemicals manufacturer Arkema said early Thursday it had been notified of two explosions and black smoke coming from its Crosby, Texas, plant—ocated some 25 miles northeast of Houston—hat are believed to be a result of the epic flooding. The effects of crippled Gulf Coast refineries, ports and pipelines are being felt across the U.S. and even globally, a result of a domestic energy boom that has made the world increasingly reliant on Texas. Harvey shut a third Gulf Coast refining center Wednesday, while port closings are compounding the refineries' woes. The death toll in Texas has risen to at least 29. Harvey could cause some $10 billion in damage to infrastructure in the Houston area and businesses might also lose as much as $10 billion in economic output. Texas Gov. Greg Abbott forecast federal funding needs "far in excess" of $125 billion, topping those related to Hurricane Katrina. We report that for Katrina evacuees who settled in Houston, enduring Harvey has been like reliving a nightmare—ringing to the surface a familiar terror, as well as hard-won experience.

Cadillac Dreams

Among the world's booming premium-car companies, the brand enjoying the biggest surge is one many U.S. consumers long passed by. Cadillac is selling at its fastest clip since the Reagan years—hanks to the Chinese who see it as an American status symbol. In China—he world's biggest auto market, where one of every four sales occur—Cadillac sold 69% more vehicles in the first seven months of 2017 than a year ago. It was the first time Cadillac sold more vehicles abroad than at home. One issue for parent General Motors has been that executives—rustrated by Cadillac's years of U.S. slippage and failure to gain traction in Europe—aven't invested in their luxury brand with the same gusto as rivals such as Daimler and BMW. The recent success in China is starting to change the equation.

Russia Intrigue

Former Trump campaign chairman Paul Manafort's overseas political work involved a notable patron: a Russian oligarch. Mr. Manafort's political-consulting firm was active for more than a decade doing work that often dovetailed with Russian political interests not only in Ukraine, but also in Georgia and Montenegro. These efforts often involved one principal figure, Oleg Deripaska, a politically connected international operator whose ventures have sometimes aligned with Russian President Vladimir Putin's foreign-policy objectives. The link helps explain why Mr. Manafort is of such interest to investigators probing alleged Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election. Mr. Deripaska has offered to give testimony to the House and Senate intelligence committees in exchange for immunity, but congressional officials have rejected the offer, not wanting to interfere with the FBI's own Russia inquiry.

High Times, Low Prices

After decades of dodging law enforcement and fighting for legalization, U.S. marijuana growers face a new challenge: depressed prices. From Washington state to Colorado, wholesale cannabis prices have tumbled as dozens of states legalized the drug for recreational and medicinal uses, seeding a boom in marijuana production. The market is still tiny compared with the U.S. tobacco industry's $119 billion in annual retail sales, but the nascent cannabis business has grown to more than $6 billion a year at retail. For marijuana smokers, the price drop is sweet news. But for growers—anging from high-tech warehouse operations to backcountry pot farmers gone legit—he price drop has been painful. In response, some producers are taking a page from the food industry, where farmers and food companies increasingly appeal to health- and environment-conscious consumers.

Today's Video

Storm for the Ages

Harvey's impact on Texas has been catastrophic, with Houston faring worse than some other cities struck by hurricanes or tropical storms. Here's the science of why Harvey has been especially devastating for the area.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

A Provocative Look at the Harm From Corporate Heft

Trump Urges Bipartisan Support for Corporate Tax Cut, Code Simplification

WORLD

U.S. Delivers Airstrike to Block Relocation of \b ISIS\b0  Fighters From Lebanese-Syrian Border

Japan to Beef Up Missile Defense After North Korea Test Launches

BUSINESS

Disney to Cut Staff at ABC Television Group

New Uber CEO Says Company Could Go Public in 18 Months

MARKETS

New Worry in 'Repo': Just One Bank for $3.5 Trillion Market

1MDB Pays Balance of Missed Debt Installment to Abu Dhabi Fund

Number of the Day

$475,000

The price of Novartis's first-of-its-kind cancer therapy, which was approved by the FDA on Wednesday. The treatment, named Kymriah, has been shown to increase the chances of survival for children and young people with an aggressive form of leukemia who don't respond to standard treatment.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on Mr. Manafort's link to a Russian oligarch? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on parents allowing their children to skip school for family travel, Richard Saloom of Alabama said: "I think missing school for truly educational events, that cannot be done outside of the school year, is fine. It should be done with the school's permission. To go on a family outing is not appropriate. The kids have to understand that attending school is a responsibility and not an option. School attendance to some degree is a training process for the workplace—ou can't miss days at a whim." Doris Russ of Pennsylvania shared: "As a teacher, I've been the recipient of that extra work imposed by students taking vacations during school time. It can be a nightmare. I have to give the student the same number of days to make up the work as he missed. I have to reschedule and correct every homework, quiz and test, find the time to tutor him outside of class, and meet his parents' expectations that he will miss nothing, all the while continuing with regular classes that have moved on. For multiple children missing different time periods." And Jim Pierce of Texas opined: "There is one word for it: selfish. Such travel puts the child at a disadvantage and greatly inconveniences America's greatest underappreciated asset, its teachers."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170831ed8v0012x



World News: U.S. Strikes in Syria to Halt  ISIS  Evacuees --- Actions aim to thwart deal made by Hezbollah to let fighters, families relocate to Iraqi border

By Nancy A. Youssef in Washington and Margherita Stancati in Beirut 
825 words
31 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S. military on Wednesday carried out two airstrikes aimed at stopping hundreds of Islamic State militants evacuated from the Lebanese-Syrian border from relocating to an extremist stronghold in Syria near the border with Iraq.

The first of the strikes came shortly after the U.S. criticized a deal brokered by the Lebanese militia Hezbollah that allowed hundreds of Islamic State militants and their families free passage out of an area straddling Syria's southwestern border with Lebanon near the Syrian town of Qarah. Their convoy left Monday and was headed to al-Bukamal, a town in eastern Syria's Deir Ezzour province very close to the Iraqi border.

"We created a crater. It was to block them so they could not continue on the road," a U.S. defense official said on Wednesday, adding the coalition didn't strike the buses because family members were present.

That airstrike, which also destroyed a bridge, took place after the convoy entered Deir Ezzour province, one of Islamic State's last strongholds in Syria, from territory controlled by the government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.

The U.S. Central Command said that within two hours of the first strike, it conducted a strike west of Deir Ezzour on a handful of logistical vehicles that were known to be affiliated with Islamic State. That strike may have killed Islamic State fighters, the U.S. military said.

"Irreconcilable #ISIS terrorists should be killed on the battlefield, not bused across #Syria to the Iraqi border without #Iraq's consent," Brett McGurk, U.S. President Donald Trump's special envoy for combating Islamic State, tweeted ahead of the airstrike. "Our @coalition will help ensure that these terrorists can never enter #Iraq or escape from what remains of their dwindling 'caliphate.' "

U.S. military officials said they would continue to closely watch those in the convoy, but wouldn't specify what action they would take. They could decide to gather intelligence on the group's movements and possibly take action against those confirmed to be Islamic State fighters. U.S. officials say they don't want the fighters to end up on the border of Iraq.

The direct military action to thwart a deal made by Hezbollah comes after the U.S. deliberately targeted the Syrian regime for the first time in April, when it launched nearly 60 Tomahawk missiles on a government air base in response to a chemical weapons attack that killed at least 85 people.

Since then U.S. fighter jets have downed an Iranian drone and a Syrian warplane over Syria. At the same time, however, Washington has signaled it won't stand in the way of the Assad regime taking back territory U.S.-backed forces have wrested from Islamic State around its former stronghold of Raqqa.

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, a U.S. ally, criticized the deal setting up the evacuation of Islamic State personnel.

"We consider it an insult to the Iraqi people. Moving this number of terrorists for such a long distance through Syria is unacceptable," Mr. Abadi told reporters on Tuesday night. "We are fighting terrorism in Iraq and we are killing them in Iraq. We don't send them to Syria."

U.S.-backed Iraqi forces are battling Islamic State, recently ousting the group from Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, and the strategic town of Tal Afar near the Syrian border. Syrian government officials in the past have accused the U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State of allowing some of the group's fighters to flee Mosul into Syria.

The Lebanese army this month launched a ground operation in the country's mountainous northeast to clear it of Islamic State militants who controlled the territory for about three years. Syrian government forces and Hezbollah pressed a simultaneous but separate offensive from the Syrian side of the border.

The fighting stopped on Sunday after Hezbollah negotiated the cease-fire and evacuation agreement with Islamic State in return for information on the fate of nine Lebanese soldiers who were kidnapped by the group in 2014. Eight bodies believed to belong to the soldiers have since been retrieved by Lebanese authorities.

Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah on Wednesday defended the agreement, saying it was necessary to establish what had happened to the missing soldiers.

"A comprehensive military solution was possible and easy, but we would have lost the cause [of trying to determine] the fate of the Lebanese soldiers," Mr. Nasrallah said in a statement. He also said the transfer of some 300 militants to Deir Ezzour wouldn't make a difference on the battlefield.

---

Nour Alakraa in Berlin contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170831ed8v0001d



World
Lebanon Kicks Out Islamic State, in Latest Setback for Militants; Middle East nation reclaims all the territory that the extremist group controlled in the country

By Margherita Stancati 
982 words
30 August 2017
07:35
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

RAS BAALBEK, Lebanon—ne of the lesser-known chapters of Islamic State's occupation of parts of the Middle East drew to a close on Tuesday, with Lebanon reclaiming all the territory that the extremist group controlled in the country for the past three years.

Lebanese forces said they had captured the last sliver of land held by Islamic State after they launched a ground operation this month to clear the militants from the roughly 120 square kilometers of rugged mountain terrain near the border with Syria where they were based.

"All the lands are now Lebanese and secure," Lebanese Army Brig. Gen. Fadi Daoud, who commanded troops during the ISIS offensive, said in an interview on Tuesday.

Lebanon is the latest in a string of military defeats for Islamic State. The extremist group has lost more than half of the territory it captured three years ago in a blitz across Iraq and Syria.

It recently lost its Iraqi stronghold of Mosul and was defeated this past weekend in the strategic town of Tal Afar near Iraq's border with Syria. The militants are also rapidly losing ground in Raqqa, their de facto capital in Syria.

The victory for the U.S.-trained and equipped Lebanese forces was an important milestone, removing a threat that had been hanging over Lebanon for years. It also helped boost the reputation of the army, which has struggled to demonstrate it can be the sole guarantor of the country's security.

"The Lebanese army has proved itself. It has shown it can take on Islamic State," said Fawaz Gerges, a Lebanese academic and author of "ISIS: A History." "This isn't just a battle. Islamic State has suffered a lasting defeat in Lebanon. It has lost its foothold."

Islamic State militants were allowed to evacuate Lebanese territory on Monday under terms of a controversial surrender deal brokered by the Iran-backed Lebanese militia Hezbollah. Hezbollah is the most powerful group in Lebanon, and it has played a vital role on the Syrian battlefield propping up the regime of Bashar al-Assad.

In the operation, Hezbollah and the Lebanese army both contributed to beating back the Sunni extremists of Islamic State from the country's borders. Syrian forces and Hezbollah pressed their own offensive against Islamic State from the Syrian side of the border at the same time as the Lebanese army fought on their side.

Hezbollah's deal with Islamic State drew criticism from many in the country, who saw this as a humiliation. The Lebanese military denies cooperating with Hezbollah.

Lebanon has suffered from spillover of the conflict in neighboring Syria that has been going on for more than six years. Islamic State established a foothold along the country's largely uninhabited northeast and briefly overran the border town of Arsal in 2014. Its fighters kidnapped 30 Lebanese soldiers and policemen, most of whom were later released in a prisoner swap.

But the fate of nine missing soldiers remained unknown. On Sunday as part of the surrender agreement with Hezbollah, Islamic State revealed the location of eight of their bodies in return for being allowed to evacuate with their family members.

Around 600 people on Monday departed on buses for the eastern Syrian province of Deir Ezzour, which is one of the terror group's last strongholds. Lebanese military officials say they believe the ninth soldier had joined Islamic State and was later killed in a battle in Syria.

The offensive was a test for the state's army to prove its ability to secure the country. But despite repeated assurances from government officials that the military would lead the battle to clear Islamic State from the border region, Hezbollah played an important role.

Hezbollah frequently points to the Lebanese military's weakness as a reason for its existence. But critics accuse the militia of undermining the military to preserve its leading role protecting the country.

"We would have won. The victory would have been complete and we would have captured senior leaders of Daesh [ISIS]. This didn't happen and the responsibility is of the Lebanese government," said Khalil Helou, a retired Lebanese Army general who informally advised military commanders during the operation. "Our army did a great job, but its success was overshadowed by this humiliating deal."

Many observers credited Lebanese security forces with a success in having largely contained the threat and appeal of Islamic State in the country over the past few years. While there have been exceptions, such as bombings in 2015 in the capital Beirut that killed 43 people, Lebanon has remained relatively untouched by the kind of violence the group has unleashed elsewhere.

Backed by airstrikes, Lebanese ground troops began advancing against Islamic State on Aug. 19, gradually capturing hilltop positions held by the group in the mountain area that straddles the Syrian border. Some 120 Islamic State fighters and seven Lebanese troops died in the fighting, the Lebanese military said.

During a visit on Monday to the newly liberated territory, what was left of a meal belonging to Islamic State fighters—reen pears and flatbread—as strewn around an extinguished campfire on a mountain known as "the Hill of Pigs," some 3 miles from the Syrian border. The militants abandoned the position in a hurry, leaving behind ground-to-air missile launchers and vast supplies of amphetamines.

"Part of me wanted to chase them because that is my job. Part of me wanted to protect the lives of my soldiers," said Brig. Gen. Daoud. "In the end, the mission was accomplished: We got the bodies and we liberated our land."

Leena Saidi in Beirut contributed to this article.

Write to Margherita Stancati at margherita.stancati@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170829ed8t004k0



World
Philippines Prepares 'Big Battle' to Liberate City Held by Islamic State-Linked Militants; But Manila faces mammoth rebuild and a risk of violence spreading across region

By Jake Maxwell Watts 
959 words
29 August 2017
14:13
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Nearly 100 days since Islamic State-linked militants occupied the southern Philippine city of Marawi, the army says it is planning a final assault to end a battle that took Manila and allied countries by surprise for its stubbornness and violence.

If successful, the operation will allow the tens of thousands of residents who fled to return home. But counterterrorism experts and humanitarian workers say the government faces a mammoth task of rebuilding a devastated city and risks further attacks elsewhere by newly-energized terrorists.

Military Chief of Staff Gen. Eduardo Ano told reporters Monday that the army is preparing "one big battle" to retake Marawi after clearing the city's Grand Mosque and municipal police station last week. He didn't give details.

On Tuesday, reflecting international concern about the spread of violence throughout the region, Australia offered to deploy special forces soldiers to the southern Philippines to provide training and tactical advice. The U.S. already maintains a similar detachment as part of its global counterterrorism operations.

Reclaiming the city of 200,000 has been an uphill battle for the ill-equipped Philippine military, which is unused to urban warfare. Its failure to end the conflict swiftly and the use of destructive airstrikes have alienated the population, many of whom as Muslims feel marginalized in the Roman Catholic-majority country.

Samira Gutoc— former negotiator for peace talks between the government and more-traditional rebel groups, who now serves as a humanitarian worker—aid the extent of the damage, with as much as 90% of the city destroyed, has led some youngsters to call the militants heroes. "We are creating another generation of angry, young, restless, jobless, alienated kids," Ms. Gutoc said.

A coalition of extremist Islamist groups, who for years existed as rival religious or criminal gangs, joined forces to occupy Marawi on May 23, riding on trucks and waving the black Islamic State flag. The military estimates about 40 remain in Marawi and that 600 have been killed. About 130 soldiers and 45 civilians, some of whom were beheaded, have also died.

The Philippine government said the coalition, under the leadership of brothers Abdullah and Omar Maute, sought to declare its intent to establish a caliphate, or Islamic state. The occupation shocked the government and martial law has been declared in the area until year-end. The assault began after a failed attempt by authorities to arrest an allied militant leader. The remaining fighters occupy an area about 500 square meters (5,382 square feet) in size, the military says.

While religious leaders have condemned the militancy, Philippine officials say a small number of residents in Marawi and surrounding areas allied with the militants during the battle, including a former city mayor. Scholars say the Maute family has entrenched itself in the long-restive region, leveraging on old family and tribal loyalties.

Even if the military succeeds in reclaiming Marawi, the aftermath is likely to be just as difficult, analysts say. An unknown number of militants have escaped the city, officials believe. Others have been arrested as they fled. The Maute brothers themselves are unaccounted for. Their father, Cayamora Maute, who backed his sons, died in custody Sunday of medical complications, officials said. They didn't specify a cause of death, but told local media he was suffering from diabetes, hypertension and hepatitis.

"I think what's going to happen is we're going to see some of the fighters disperse into other areas," said Sidney Jones, director of the Jakarta-based Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict. Ms. Jones said she expects to see attacks in other parts of the Philippines, along with the danger that surviving fighters could create a regional training center for aspiring jihadists.

There is also the risk of violence spreading to other parts of Southeast Asia, such as neighboring Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim-majority nation. Several killed in Marawi were foreigners, including Indonesians. The Maute-led group is believed by officials to be in contact with Islamic State leadership in the Middle East, and it appears to have received direct funding, according to the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict. Social media has helped the militants promote their cause across borders.

For most of Marawi, future prospects remain bleak. Save The Children, a charity, said this month more than half of the 60,000 children who fled the fighting haven't re-enrolled in school. The military says many residents are unable to return due to improvised explosive devices placed in the city by the militants.

The government has provided temporary accommodation, relief supplies, medical vaccinations and other services to those displaced. Local and national authorities have sought to bring Muslim leaders and law enforcement together to discuss post-battle security and President Rodrigo Duterte's government has sought to accelerate a long-stalled peace process with larger, older rebel groups in the south.

Ms. Gutoc said this week students at a university in Marawi, one of the few institutions to reopen, would fly kites to mark the 100th day since the conflict began. It will be a somber occasion.

"After three months [of conflict] it's really devastating," said Ms. Gutoc, whose own house has been damaged in the conflict. "The frustration is at its highest."

Write to Jake Maxwell Watts at jake.watts@wsj.com

Related

* Islamic State-Linked Militants Dump Bodies in Southern Philippines City (May 28, 2017)

* Philippines Struggles to Suppress \b ISIS\b0 -Linked Rebels as Foreign Fighters Found (June 1, 2017)

* Philippines Extends Martial Law in Mindanao (July 22, 2017)

Document WSJO000020170829ed8t001p7



World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,111 words
29 August 2017
12:58
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Asian Provocateur

Tensions in East Asia are rising sharply again after North Korea launched a ballistic missile over northern Japan, the latest in a string of direct provocations that have destabilized the region and triggered global alarm. While the missile was in the air early Tuesday morning local time, Japanese authorities sent an alert to areas near its path, advising people to "take refuge in a sturdy building or underground." The missile passed over the island of Hokkaido and landed in the Pacific Ocean about 14 minutes after launch, causing no damage. The action prompted a fiery response from Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who said it posed a "grave and serious threat" and called for an emergency meeting of the U.N. Security Council. Mr. Abe said that he spoke by phone with President Trump for 40 minutes and that the president gave a "strong commitment" to Japan's security. Global stocks fell while investors bought haven assets such as gold and government bonds, as the launch revived geopolitical fears in the markets.

A Hard Rain

After pummeling Texas for days, Tropical Storm Harvey slid offshore but it is on track to make another landfall east of Houston late Tuesday or Wednesday, lashing the state and neighboring Louisiana with torrential rain. Historic flooding has paralyzed the region, inundating homes and businesses while the city struggles to perform basic functions. Officials were forced to make the difficult decision to release water from reservoirs, adding to the flooding but heading off potentially worse damage. The city's health-care system is facing unprecedented strains as several hospitals in the area have been evacuated. Most of Houston's major employers, including its schools, airports and port, are shut and trucking fleets, railroads and shipping lines are rerouting cargo and setting up alternative supply lines. We report that the storm is likely to deal a significant blow to Houston's economy. A disaster economist estimated that $145 billion in property is at risk of being damaged by Harvey. For comparison, the devastation wreaked by Hurricane Katrina is estimated to have cost about $100 billion in property damage in 2005.

Apple Harvest Time

Apple has scheduled a product-announcement event for Sept. 12, reinforcing expectations that the technology giant will release new iPhones and a smartwatch well ahead of the holiday shopping season. We report the company is expected to unveil three iPhones, including a showcase device to mark the product's 10th anniversary. Analysts in recent months reported that production glitches on the newest iPhone could cause it to be delayed. If the announcement proceeds as scheduled, its timing would be roughly consistent with that of iPhone launches in previous years, reassuring investors and customers that the device is on track. Also, the event is set to take place a week after sales of rival Samsung's Galaxy Note 8 begin in the U.S.

Know Thyself

Most of us are not as self-aware as we think we are. Research shows that people who have a high level of self-awareness—ho see themselves, how they fit into the world and how others see them clearly—ake smarter decisions, raise more-mature children and are more successful in school and at work. They are less likely to lie, cheat and steal. And they have healthier relationships. But how can we truly know how others see us? Those who know us best often won't tell us the truth, especially if it is critical. Social media, with all its "likes" and "friends," can give us a false sense of self, too. Our Bonds columnist Elizabeth Bernstein provides tips for gaining awareness, such as picking the right person for feedback and observing people's reactions to you.

Today's Video

Flood Warning

Record flooding in the Houston area related to Tropical Storm Harvey is forcing some residents to evacuate and prompting many thousands of others to call for help. Here is what you need to know.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Are Trump's August Controversies Careless—r Calculated?

Cities and Schools Walk Free-Speech Tightrope in Wake of Charlottesville

WORLD

China and India Agree to End Border Standoff

Stabbings in Russia Claimed by \b ISIS\b0  Raise Terror Concerns

BUSINESS

New Uber CEO's First Job: Manage the Board

Ding-Dong! Best Buy and Amazon Bring Back the Traveling Salesman

MARKETS

In a Blast From a Financial-Crisis Past, Synthetic CDOs Are Back

Regulators, Auto Lenders Dig Into Customer-Refunds Process

Number of the Day

$11 billion

The approximate amount Gilead Sciences agreed to pay for Kite Pharma, an ambitious bet on a new type of cancer therapy that is on the brink of becoming commercially available in the U.S.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on the response to Tropical Storm Harvey? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on President Trump pardoning former Sheriff Joe Arpaio, Derick Ball of California said: "The pardon of Sheriff Arpaio was legal and appropriate. This is exactly what presidential pardons are intended for. He is surely no longer a danger to the public; rather a victim of his own principles that put him at odds with the federal government." Beth DeHaven of Colorado wrote: "President Trump's pardon of Sheriff Arpaio so soon after his Charlottesville gaffe and so early in his presidency should come as no surprise. Once again he is 'doubling down' on securing the approval of the base who elected him despite the extremely poor optics to the rest of the country." J.D. Rogers of North Carolina opined: "The pardon is a middle finger to the laws of our land." And Gary Lacher of Tennessee shared: "How do I feel about it? Two words: Hear, hear!"

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170829ed8t001b9



World
Stabbings in Russia Claimed by  ISIS  Raise Terror Concerns; Killing of police officer is latest incident trumpeted by Islamic State; investigators can be slow to label attacks

By Nathan Hodge 
1,421 words
28 August 2017
20:40
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSCOW— knife attack on police officers in the Russian republic of Dagestan left one officer dead, following a stabbing spree in Siberia this month, adding to worries here about the spread of improvised terrorist attacks like those that have been claimed by Islamic State in Europe.

On Monday, two unidentified attackers struck police officers with knives at a filling station in the city of Kaspiisk, the local branch of the federal Investigative Committee said. One officer was killed and the other was wounded before a third shot and killed the attackers.

Video footage from the scene showed a black jihadist banner said to have been found on the attackers, and Islamic State claimed responsibility, according to SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors extremist activity.

The Investigative Committee, a federal agency charged with probing high-profile crimes, didn't describe the incident as a terrorist attack, and said a criminal investigation was under way.

The incident came days after a man roamed the streets of the Siberian city of Surgut with a knife, slashing seven bystanders before he was killed by police. The attack was also claimed by Islamic State.

Russian authorities declined to label the Aug. 19 incident as terrorism, but said terrorism wasn't being ruled out by investigators. Authorities initially described the attacker as mentally ill.

Following the attack, Islamic State released a video describing the man as a holy warrior and showing a masked man identified by the nom de guerre "Masud of Surgut," seated next to a hatchet and an Islamic State flag, vowing to attack nonbelievers.

"Soon blood will flow like the sea," a voice chants in the video.

While Islamic State has declared itself to be behind numerous attacks that investigators also attributed to the group, ISIS has a record of falsely claiming responsibility, and it remains unclear if the group had any operational link to the latest incidents in Russia.

Russian President Vladimir Putin has responded with force to some past terrorist attacks. He came to power on a promise to wipe out militants in the north Caucasus region, and he launched a military campaign in Syria in 2015 that he described as an effort to defeat Islamic State.

But Russian officials have on occasion been cautious about playing up terrorism threats. When a passenger plane flying to St. Petersburg went down over Egypt's Sinai Peninsula in 2015, killing all 224 people on board, Russian officials initially dismissed an Islamic State claim and reports that a bomb brought down the plane.

It took Moscow over two weeks to say they had evidence it was a terrorist attack.

The response by authorities in playing down the possibility of terrorism in the Aug. 19 attack in Surgut indicated worries about public perception, said Alexey Malashenko, a Moscow-based researcher.

"If they admit it's a terrorist act, then you have to ask the question of what the authorities are doing" to combat it, he said. "It's convenient to describe it as a criminal act."

Mr. Malashenko said he believed the Surgut stabbing spree was terrorism. "It's a repeat of what's happened in Finland and Spain," he said, referring to a knife attack in the Finnish city of Turku that is being investigated as terrorism, and vehicle attacks in Barcelona and the Spanish town of Cambrils.

Over the past two decades, Russia has seen a number of terrorist attacks led by Islamist militants, from a siege in a Moscow theater in 2002 to a horrific hostage-taking in a school in the southern Russian town of Beslan.

More recently, Russian authorities identified a man from the Central Asian republic of Kyrgyzstan as the suicide bomber who caused a deadly subway-train blast in St. Petersburg, Russia's second-largest city.

The Caucasus Emirate, a militant group that pledged loyalty to Islamic State in 2015, continues to fight a low-level insurgency in the north Caucasus region. In a separate incident on Monday in Dagestan, a member of the security services was killed and two were wounded in a shootout with militants near the town of Khasavyurt, Russian news agencies reported.

Over 2000 miles away, Surgut, a city of 360,000 in Khanti-Mansy Autonomous Okrug and a major center for oil and gas production, has seen an influx of job-seeking migrants from Muslim-majority regions of Central Asia and the north Caucasus.

The arrival of migrant workers has raised tensions in cities in the region, according to a 2015 report by the Carnegie Moscow Center think tank.

Cities in the Khanti-Mansy region, the report added, "remain hotbeds of the Salafist movement," shorthand for an austere brand of Islam that experts say isn't traditional in the region. Russia has a substantial and diverse Muslim population, but authorities are wary of the rise of what they deem religious fundamentalism.

Arkady Dubnov, an expert on Central Asia, said local authorities needed to more responsive to possible terror incidents, making it clear to the public when they happen.

"You need to establish the diagnosis in order to prescribe the medicine," he said.

Write to Nathan Hodge at nathan.hodge@wsj.com

Related articles

* Bungled Attacks, Small Operations Signal New Phase in Terror

* Russia Spins Tale of Success in Syria

* Putin's Record Augurs Tough Response if Cause of Plane Crash Turns Out to Be Terror

Terrorism and Russia

Russia has seen numerous attacks in recent decades, including:

* July 1994: Terrorists seize a helicopter and take hostages in the southern city of Mineralnye Vody. During a rescue operation, 19 people are wounded and four are killed.

* June 1995: Separatists led by Chechen commander Shamil Basayev capture several buildings in the southern city of Budyonnovsk; 129 people are killed, 415 wounded.

* January 1996: A group of Chechen militants led by Salman Raduyev capture a hospital in Kizlyar, in the southern republic of Dagestan; hostages are taken to the village of Pervomayskoye. A total of 78 people are killed and several hundred are wounded in the hostage-taking and fighting.

* June-July 1996: Explosions on public transportation in Moscow kill and injure dozens.

* June 1997: An explosion on a train from Moscow to St. Petersburg kills five people.

* March 1999: An explosion at a market in Vladikavkaz, southern Russia, kills 64 people.

* September 1999: A series of apartment blocks are bombed in the cities of Moscow, Bunaiksk and Volgodonsk, killing around 300 people and setting off a national panic.

* August 2000: Explosion in the underpass at Moscow's Pushkin square kills 13 people and wounds dozens more.

* March 2001: A series of car bombings in southern Russia kills 21 people and wounds 140.

* October 2002: Around 800 spectators, actors and musicians are held hostage at a theater in Moscow. During the siege, all the terrorists are killed and 130 hostages die.

* December 2002: A government building in Grozny is hit by a suicide bomber, killing 71 people and wounding several hundred.

* May 2003: A truck bomb is set off in the village of Znamenskoye in Chechnya, killing 52.

* July 2003: Suicide bombers attack a music festival in Moscow, killing 16 people and wounding 59.

* February 2004: An explosion in the Moscow subway kills 40 people and wounds 134.

* June 2004: Chechen militants attack government buildings in Nazran, Ingushetia, killing 98 people.

* August 2004: Two female suicide bombers board domestic flights and blow themselves up in midair, killing 90 people.

* September 2004: Terrorists capture a school in Beslan, North Ossetiya. A total of around 330 people are killed.

* October 2005: An attack on Nalchik, Kabardino-Balkariya, kills 35 law enforcement officers and 12 civilians.

* March 2010: An explosion in Moscow metro stations kills 40 and wounds 90.

* January 2011: A suicide bombing at Moscow's Domodedovo airport kills 37 and wounds 172.

* May 2012: An attack involving a suicide car bomb in Makhachkala, Dagestan, kills 13 and wounds 100.

* October 2013: A female suicide bomber detonates on a bus, killing seven.

* December 2014: An attack by insurgents in the capital of Chechnya kills 14 policemen and 1 civilian. A total of 11 insurgents are killed.

* October 2015: A Russian passenger jet crashes in Egypt's Sinai Peninsula, killing 224. Islamic State affiliate claims responsibility for planting a bomb on board.

* April 2017: A suicide bomber detonates on a St. Petersburg subway train, killing at least 14.

Document WSJO000020170828ed8s003s5



World News: Iraq Forces Take Islamic State Stronghold --- Militants are cleared from Tal Afar, once a way station between Mosul and Raqqa

By Ali A. Nabhan in Erbil, Iraq and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut 
988 words
28 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq -- Iraqi forces have driven Islamic State from the town of Tal Afar, the Iraqi military said Sunday, clearing one of the extremist group's few remaining strongholds in the country.

Operations continued against the militants in a handful of surrounding villages, a military statement said. Army officials had said Saturday night they were nearly in full control of Tal Afar's historic center, moving toward the northern neighborhoods still held by Islamic State.

The surprisingly swift conclusion on Sunday came just one week into the battle for Tal Afar, which once served as a way station between the group's de facto capitals Mosul in Iraq and Raqqa in Syria.

As U.S.-backed Iraqi forces penetrated Tal Afar, it became clear Islamic State fighters either had abandoned the city ahead of the battle to seek refuge elsewhere, or had laid down their weapons to blend in with the local population, according to Iraqi military officials. While the militants fought back, their challenge was weaker than expected, the officials said.

"It looks like Iraq isn't [any longer] a priority [for Islamic State]," said Rasha al-Aqeedi, a researcher at Al Mesbar Studies and Research Center, a Dubai think tank focused on Islamic movements. "They're losing and have lost their veteran networks. The fighters probably won't stay in Iraq to defend their remaining networks, they're not strong enough to fight for. They'll opt to stay underground instead."

Al Qaeda in Iraq resurfaced in 2013, morphing into Islamic State. The Sunni Muslim militant group seized about one-third of Iraq's territory in a summer 2014 blitz, establishing its caliphate across Iraq and Syria. It since has carried out attacks across the Middle East and Europe.

Despite being uprooted from most of the territory it controlled over the past two years, Islamic State has been able to rely on a mix of operatives and supporters with no connection to the group, inspired to carry out attacks.

One of the last large, strategic Iraqi towns under Islamic State control is Hawijah, in the oil-rich province of Kirkuk. It is likely to be the next offensive for the Iraqi military and the U.S.-led coalition that is providing support, according to Iraqi military statements.

The group's remaining resources in Iraq are concentrated heavily along the border with Syria.

Military spokesman Brig. Gen. Yahya Rasool credited the experience of the battle-hardened Iraqi military in retaking Mosul -- a nine-month-long operation that ended in July -- for the victory in Tal Afar. The strategy of surrounding and cutting off Tal Afar for nearly a year also contributed to the swift victory by severing Islamic State supply routes while U.S.-led coalition airstrikes helped destroy important targets, he added. Some 200,000 people were living in Tal Afar as of June 2014.

Meanwhile, in Lebanon, a separate battle against the extremist group, also launched a week ago, was coming to a surprisingly quick conclusion as well, marking the likely end of the terror network's hold in that country. The army, which is fighting to expel Islamic State from its foothold there, on Sunday announced a cease-fire with the extremist group.

The military is using the cease-fire to negotiate an end to its fight against Islamic State by expelling the remaining militants to the eastern Syrian province of Deir Ezzour, which is still largely in control of Islamic State. Their removal was expected to come in exchange for the retrieval of the bodies of eight Lebanese soldiers kidnapped and killed by the extremists in 2014.

Deir Ezzour is quickly becoming Islamic State's last stronghold in its self-styled caliphate, as its fighters and leadership converge there from Iraq and other parts of Syria -- and now, Lebanon. The Syrian Democratic Forces, a U.S.-backed group led by Kurdish militants, on Friday announced they would begin an offensive on Deir Ezzour "very soon," according to local media reports.

---

For ISIS, a Trail

Of Lost Ground

---

The group has been driven

from its urban redoubts

over the past several years

A timeline of major urban victories against Islamic State in Iraq, including Sunday's in Tal Afar.

Mar. 31, 2015: Tikrit falls to Iraqi forces, Islamic State's first major loss in Iraq and biggest setback since seizing swaths of territory across Iraq and Syria in 2014. Fighting for the city, symbolic as the birthplace of former dictator Saddam Hussein, takes three months.

Nov. 13: Iraqi Kurdish fighters stream into Sinjar after announcing its retaking from the extremist group. The battle for the northern city is a then-rare victory against Islamic State in Iraq and involves some 7,500 Kurdish forces backed by the U.S.

Dec. 28: Iraqi forces declare victory in Ramadi, the capital of Anbar province. Fleeing residents describe near-starvation and use as human shields.

June 26, 2016: Fallujah is declared liberated by Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi. The city, once used as a staging ground by Islamic State, is widely seen as a test of the army's preparedness for a coming battle to retake the much larger city of Mosul.

July 11, 2017: Islamic State's Iraqi stronghold Mosul, the country's largest city, is declared liberated by Mr. Abadi. The more than nine-month battle triggers an epic humanitarian crisis, as hundreds of thousands of residents are displaced.

Aug. 27: Tal Afar, the militants' last key Iraqi redoubt and a former transit point between Mosul and Raqqa, falls after just one week of fighting. Iraqi military officials cite for the swift victory factors including Islamic State's depleted resources.

-- Karen Leigh

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170828ed8s0000p



Cornered in Raqqa: The Last Days of  ISIS  --- Militants loosen enforcement of religious edicts and scrounge for cash

By Raja Abdulrahim 
1,936 words
28 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

RAQQA, Syria -- Before launching the battle to capture Islamic State's de facto capital, the U.S.-led military coalition dropped leaflets calling on extremists to surrender. On the ground, militants were going door to door, demanding that residents pay their utility bills.

Islamic State, long bent on expanding its religious empire with shocking brutality in the form of public executions, crucifixions and whippings, is desperately focused on its own survival.

Raqqa has been a crucial part of the terror group's self-declared caliphate. Until a few months ago, public squares were lined with decomposing bodies of those who had run afoul of Islamic State's religious rules or bureaucracy.

Instead of ruthlessly enforcing no-smoking decrees and dress codes, though, militants now are doing whatever they can to hold on to areas still controlled by the group -- and revenue needed to help keep Islamic State afloat financially.

They are so preoccupied that some women in Raqqa dare to uncover their faces in public. A few men defiantly smoke in the streets and shave their beards, current and former residents say.

When the call to prayer sounds from mosques, some residents no longer bother to go. Islamic State used to force shops to close and people to pray.

Women accused of violating Islamic State's strict dress code were once whipped. In May, though, militants released two women unharmed after they were forced to buy new robes and all-covering face veils sold by Islamic State's religious police for 10,000 Syrian pounds each, or a total of about $40, says Dalaal Muhammad, a sister and aunt of the women.

Ms. Muhammad, 37 years old, says her sister had to beg a family member to borrow the $40 from friends.

"They didn't even have enough to buy bread," she said at a camp for displaced Syrians, wearing sandals held by twine. "They just wanted to get the money quickly because we were running out of time" to flee Raqqa.

An estimated 25,000 civilians remain trapped in Raqqa under Islamic State control, according to the United Nations, and more than 230,000 people have fled Raqqa and its suburbs since early April. On Thursday, the U.N. called for a pause in the assault so civilians can escape.

Fighters for the U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic Forces, leading the assault to oust Islamic State from Raqqa, say on some days they have helped dozens of civilians reach safety. Other days, no one makes it out. Militants execute smugglers helping civilians flee and those accused of collaborating with the coalition.

The Pentagon has estimated there are fewer than 2,500 Islamic State militants left in the city, down from 4,500.

Militants spent months girding for the long-anticipated assault before it began in June. They dug extensive tunnels beneath streets and homes, set up snipers' nests and planted improvised explosive devices everywhere to stop people from fleeing.

"They wanted us as human shields," says Obaida Matraan, 33 years old, a taxi driver who escaped with his family one night just before the battle began. They carried a piece of white fabric to wave as they approached the SDF.

Before the escape, he saw on public display the bodies of executed men with signs that said "smuggler" as "a warning to others," he recalls.

In early 2014, Raqqa was the first city in Syria or Iraq to fall under Islamic State's complete control. The group has lost about 60% of the territory it held in January 2015, including its former Iraqi stronghold of Mosul, according to analysts at IHS Markit Ltd.'s Conflict Monitor.

Even as the self-declared caliphate crumbles, Islamic State has continued to claim responsibility for deadly terror attacks around the world, including in Spain this month, in a bid to project power.

The SDF has encircled Raqqa and says it has seized more than half the area of the city. But militants are capable of striking behind the coalition's front lines and are scrambling to hoard the little food and water left in areas they control. Much of Raqqa remains a battlefield.

The ground advance by the SDF has been aided by coalition airstrikes. At least 465 civilians have likely been killed in those airstrikes, independent monitoring group Airwars reported. The U.S.-led coalition said it investigates civilian casualties. Monthly reports released by the coalition show far lower estimates of civilian casualties.

Syrian activist groups estimate that at least dozens more civilians were killed during the past week. Civilians in Raqqa say the airstrikes seem indiscriminate and kill more civilians than militants, who hide out in tunnels.

At the height of Islamic State's control, life in Raqqa and elsewhere in the group's territory was dictated by so many laws on everyday life that residents struggled to keep track of them.

Banned items ranged from men's skinny jeans (too Western and provocative) to canned mushrooms (made with preservatives) to bologna (because the group said it contained pork).

Enforcement slackened as the Syrian Democratic Forces advanced toward Raqqa through the Syrian countryside and eventually surrounded the city, according to residents who fled recently.

Checkpoints thinned out as Islamic State leaders and many militant fighters abandoned the city and headed to the eastern province of Deir Ezzour, residents said. The group still holds much territory in the oil-rich region and is expected to make its last stand there.

People who have left Raqqa say militants suddenly seemed to care much more about money than morals. Islamic State's revenue -- from oil production and smuggling, taxation and confiscation, and kidnapping ransoms -- is down 80% in the past two years, IHS Conflict Monitor estimates.

For months, Islamic State ordered businesses and residents to use only the caliphate's own currency of gold and silver coins, current and former residents said. The move forced people to trade in their U.S. dollars and Syrian pounds to Islamic State, which wanted those currencies as its territory shrinks.

Mr. Matraan, the taxi driver, says Islamic State made him pay $30 for water, electricity and a landline telephone bill weeks before his family fled.

"They would go to people's homes and demand payment," said Mr. Matraan, who wore a San Jose Sharks cap under the searing sun at a camp for displaced Syrians in Ain Issa, a city north of Raqqa. "In the end, their main concern was money."

Abdulmajeed Omar, 27, says militants began fining those caught violating Islamic State's smoking ban, rather than jailing or whipping them. Being caught with a pack of cigarettes brought a $25 fine. The fine for a carton of cigarettes was $150.

"They didn't bother with poor people," says Mr. Omar, who fled Raqqa before the battle and returned with the Kurdish YPG militia to fight Islamic State.

Before Ms. Muhammad fled the city, militants spent a month digging a tunnel underneath her home in the eastern neighborhood of al-Mashlab, she said. Like many of her neighbors, Ms. Muhammad was afraid to ask them what they were doing.

Inside one house in al-Mashlab, which has since been captured by SDF forces, a tunnel opening cut through the living-room floor. The fighters filled the hole with broken furniture because they weren't sure where the tunnel led.

"We are suffering from snipers and tunnels," said Dirghash, a Kurdish YPG commander on the city's eastern front line who wouldn't give his last name. "The tunnels are all in civilian homes, and we suddenly find [Islamic State militants] popping up behind us."

On the western side of Raqqa, a warning painted in silver on the metal shutters of a motorcycle shop simply read: "There are mines."

In captured neighborhoods, the walls already are covered with new graffiti by the YPG, the Syrian Kurdish militia that is the dominant group in the SDF. Every conquering force that has swept through Raqqa since the Syrian conflict began more than six years ago has left its mark with cans of paint.

A hot breeze ruffled bed sheets hanging from doorways. The sheets were in keeping with Islamic State's decree to provide an extra barrier to prevent outsiders from seeing women inside their homes.

Outnumbered and outgunned, militants have turned their brutality on to civilians in Raqqa trying at last to escape from Islamic State.

Earlier this month, a 12-year-old boy named Abdullah said his family had tried twice to flee but was caught.

The first time, a Chechen fighter for Islamic State said he would arrest them unless they returned home. The second time, they were told: "If you try to leave again, we'll slaughter all of you."

Abdullah said the death threat came from a Chinese militant. His younger brother, Abdulrahman, interrupted: "He was a Pakistani."

The two boys debated the various ethnicities of Islamic State fighters who had helped turn their hometown into a rubble-strewn battleground, its streets lined with charred vehicles and pancaked roofs.

Militants blocked the family from drinking out of a neighborhood well, claiming they hadn't paid their water bill.

When the front lines approached the family home in the Old City, Abdullah and eight relatives made another harrowing escape attempt. They spent a hungry, thirsty night dodging militants while coalition warplanes and mortar shells struck. By morning, they spotted a checkpoint for U.S.-backed forces.

As they neared safety, the smuggler helping the family flee stepped on a mine and was "ripped to shreds," recalled Abdullah.

He didn't know how many of his siblings were still alive. His wounded father was stuck near the front lines because an Islamic State sniper prevented SDF fighters from pulling him to safety.

When Abdullah arrived in the back of a pickup truck at a villa in al-Mashlab now used as an SDF-run field hospital, his shoes and shirt were gone. He clutched a handful of chocolate bars. He had lost the backpack that he said saved his life by shielding him from shrapnel in the explosion.

Abdullah's right eye was bruised and swollen shut, gauze wrapped around his head, and his injured leg was propped up near a full ashtray on a sticky coffee table in the hospital's lobby. Dried blood caked the two brothers' faces.

Later, a nurse brought them chunks of bologna. It was the first time they had eaten bologna in years.

As he narrated the escape, Abdullah's mature, emotionless demeanor broke only when a medic was about to clean his wounds, causing the boy to wince and cower in anticipation of the pain.

"Will it burn?" he asked.

Inside a room with a handwritten sign that said "Ambulance," Abdullah's mother laid on a stretcher on the floor, yelling deliriously. On a sheet of cardboard nearby was her 1-year-old son, Abdulmumin, who wore only a diaper and a new cast on his arm.

"Ayah, Ayah," the mother called out to her daughter, who held her hand. The mother asked about the fate of another son: "Where's Alawi?"

"Alawi is alive," Ayah said to her mother.

"Swear it," the mother demanded.

"I swear by God," said Ayah, but she didn't actually know. She gripped her mother's hand tighter and lowered her head. Tears streamed down her face.

"Did we make it?" the mother asked.

"Yes," Ayah assured. "We made it."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170828ed8s0001i



World News: World Watch

596 words
28 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

NORTH KOREA

Pyongyang Fires

More Missiles

North Korea fired three short-range ballistic missiles off its east coast early Saturday, as U.S. and South Korean forces were conducting joint exercises on the peninsula and just days after Secretary of State Rex Tillerson had praised Pyongyang for exercising restraint.

The latest North Korean provocation comes as a rebuke to policy makers in Seoul and Washington, who have been making diplomatic overtures to dissuade Pyongyang from its quest for advancing nuclear-weapon and missile technology.

The missiles were launched from a site near the city of Wonsan, on the east coast, traveling to the northeast, according to U.S. Pacific Command, which tracked the launches.

Pacific Command spokesman Cmdr. Dave Benham said the first and third missiles traveled 155 miles to the northeast. His comments retracted an initial assessment that those two missiles had failed in flight.

-- Kwanwoo Jun

---

PHILIPPINES

Teen's Burial Becomes

Anti-Duterte Protest

A Filipino teenager at the center of the latest outcry against the president's bloody crackdown against illegal drugs was buried, with mourners turning his funeral into a protest against thousands of drug killings.

Hundreds of mourners and left-wing activists on Saturday carried placards that read "Stop killing the poor" and "Justice for Kian" during a kilometers-long (miles-long) funeral march before Kian Loyd Delos Santos was interred at a public cemetery in the Manila metropolis.

The 17-year-old student, who wanted to become a police officer, was one of more than 80 drug and crime suspects killed in purported gunbattles with police over three days this month in the bloodiest few days of President Rodrigo Duterte's antidrug campaign. The killings sparked alarm and official investigations.

At a funeral Mass, Roman Catholic Bishop Pablo David urged authorities to "stop the killings and start the healing."

-- Associated Press

---

AFGHANISTAN

ISIS Attacks Mosque;

At Least 20 Killed

Suspected Islamic State fighters attacked a Shiite Muslim mosque in Kabul, triggering an hourslong gunbattle with government security forces that left at least 20 people dead and 40 wounded.

This attack came a day after the top U.S. commander in Afghanistan, Gen. John Nicholson, said Islamic State was being crushed in its eastern Afghan stronghold in Nangarhar province.

Friday's violence erupted when three gunmen opened fire on two police officers guarding the mosque, in northern Kabul, and fought their way inside, Interior Ministry spokesman Najib Danish said.

-- Ehsanullah Amiri

---

MYANMAR

Thousands Flee

Rohingya Clashes

Myanmar's government said it had evacuated at least 4,000 non-Muslim villagers amid ongoing clashes in northwestern Rakhine state, as thousands more Rohingya Muslims sought to flee across the border to Bangladesh on Sunday.

The death toll from the violence that erupted on Friday with coordinated attacks by Rohingya insurgents has climbed to 104, the vast majority militants, plus 12 members of security forces and several civilians, according to a Reuters tally based on official releases.

-- Reuters

---

TENNIS

Andy Murray Drops

Out of U.S. Open

The U.S. Open lost another star on Saturday, when Andy Murray said his hip wasn't well enough to compete.

Murray, the 30-year-old second seed, won the U.S. Open in 2012 and excels on hard courts. But this season has been a trying one for him in terms of injuries.

Murray said he had hoped that his time off this summer -- he hadn't played since Wimbledon -- would be enough rest, but he said the pain hadn't subsided.

-- Tom Perrotta

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170827ed8s0001b



World
Lost Ground:  ISIS  Driven From Urban Strongholds in Iraq; Tal Afar was the latest in a series of strongholds that Iraqi troops have recaptured from the militant group

By Karen Leigh 
328 words
27 August 2017
21:17
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The recapture of Tal Afar by Iraqi forces is the latest in a string of victories against Islamic State as the militant group loses territory in the country. Here is a rundown of the major cities that were retaken as they happened.

Mar. 31, 2015: Tikrit falls to Iraqi forces, Islamic State's first major loss in Iraq and biggest setback since seizing swaths of territory across Iraq and Syria in 2014. Fighting for the city, symbolic as the birthplace of former dictator Saddam Hussein, takes three months.

Nov. 13, 2015: Iraqi Kurdish fighters stream into Sinjar after announcing its retaking from the extremist group. The battle for the northern city is a then-rare victory against Islamic State in Iraq and involves some 7,500 Kurdish forces backed by the U.S.

Dec. 28, 2015: Iraqi forces declare victory in Ramadi, the capital of Anbar province. Fleeing residents describe near-starvation and use as human shields.

June 26, 2016: Fallujah is declared liberated by Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi. The city, once used as a staging ground by Islamic State, is widely seen as a test of the army's preparedness for a coming battle to retake the much larger city of Mosul.

July 11, 2017: Islamic State's Iraqi stronghold Mosul, the country's largest city, is declared liberated by Mr. Abadi. The more than nine-month battle triggers an epic humanitarian crisis, as hundreds of thousands of residents are displaced.

Aug. 27: Tal Afar, the militants' last key Iraqi redoubt and a former transit point between Mosul and Raqqa, falls after just one week of fighting. Iraqi military officials cite for the swift victory factors including Islamic State's depleted resources.

Karen Leigh

Write to Karen Leigh at karen.leigh@wsj,com

Document WSJO000020170827ed8r002gx



World
Saudis Open Iraqi Border and Forge Ties to Counter Iran; Backed by U.S., kingdom pursues influence as neighbor emerges from  ISIS  battle

By Margherita Stancati 
1,418 words
23 August 2017
16:43
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ARAR, at the Saudi Arabia-Iraq Border—audi Arabia, with U.S. assistance, is pushing aside years of rancor with its neighbor Iraq and mounting a broad effort to win Baghdad's allegiance and dilute Iran's influence over the pivotal U.S. ally.             

Saudi authorities are courting Iraq's Shiite leaders, expanding the kingdom's diplomatic presence, opening direct flights and reopening crossings closed for decades on the heavily fortified, 600-mile border.             

"We share historical, cultural and social links with Iraq," Thamer al-Sabhan, minister of state for Gulf affairs said after stopping at the newly reopened Arar border crossing. "If anything, I think we should be moving even faster."              

The shift provides a political and economic lift to the Iraqi government as it drives Islamic State from the country and moves to rebuild.               

For Washington, it is part of a push to align Iraq "a little more toward the Saudi Arabias and Turkeys of the world—nd to blunt a little bit the Iranian influence," said a U.S. official, who described Saudi-Iraqi friendship as a priority for the Trump administration. "It's never too late."                                        

The U.S.-led coalition against Islamic State, which includes Saudi forces, has fought on the same side as Iran against the Sunni extremist group. Success in largely vanquishing the group, also known as Daesh, creates an opportunity for the coalition allies to gain leverage in Iraq.              

"We have been focused over the last three years not only on defeating Daesh, but on what comes after Daesh," Brett McGurk, the U.S. envoy to the coalition fighting Islamic State, said at the border with Mr. Sabhan. "We will do everything we possibly can to support your effort," he told Iraqi and Saudi officials gathered there.             

Relations, and the Saudi-Iraqi border, were shut down in 1990 with Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait. The Saudi monarchy kept its back turned on its northern neighbor in the years of war and instability that followed Saddam's fall in 2003, leaving Iran to expand its sway through Iraq's government, the powerful militias and the economy.              

A new Saudi leadership is driving the shift, an example of the intensified efforts by King Salman and Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman to counter Iranian influence across the region, including a war against rebels in Yemen aligned with Iran.              

Iraq Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi has welcomed the counterweight to Iran. The Saudi outreach comes as he battles a political rival who is close to Tehran, former Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, ahead of parliamentary elections next year.                          

The first of around 140 flights connecting Baghdad, Riyadh and other cities each month are set to start in the coming weeks, Saudi and Iraqi officials said.             

The border crossing at Arar was reopened this month for trade and travelers, just in time for Iraqis to make the annual hajj pilgrimage to Mecca, now under way. Officials have agreed to open a second crossing next year.              

Saudi efforts to rebuild relations got off to a rocky start. Soon after Saudi Arabia reopened its embassy in Baghdad in late 2015, Mr. Sabhan, the ambassador at the time, was expelled for criticizing Iraq's Shiite militias and their ties to Iran.             

But when he showed up on the Iraqi side of this desert outpost last week, Iraqi pilgrims lined up for selfies.                          

"We are finally returning to the fold of our Arab brothers," said Abed al-Maliki, one of the thousands of mostly Shiite Iraqi pilgrims who have crossed the border at Arar recently. A billboard of King Salman and Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman greeted the pilgrims as they entered the kingdom.               

The U.S. has been a broker in the rapprochement. Soon after the start of his tenure in February, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson sought to persuade his Saudi counterpart, Adel al-Jubeir, that the kingdom should carve out a bigger role for itself in Iraq, a U.S. official said.             

Days later, on Feb. 25, Mr. Jubeir flew to Baghdad, the first by a Saudi foreign minister in decades. The trip marked a turning point. In June, Mr. Abadi traveled to the kingdom on an official visit, during which the two sides agreed to set up a joint council to upgrade ties in areas from security to trade.             

Then, at the end of July, Iraqi cleric and Shiite leader Moqtada al-Sadr met with Crown Prince Mohammed in Saudi Arabia.              

Until recently that encounter would have been unthinkable: The Iraqi cleric had repeatedly railed against the Sunni kingdom, and condemned its execution of prominent Saudi Shiite cleric Nimr al-Nimr in early 2016.                          

At the same time, Iran has deepened its influence in Iraq by supporting politicians such as Mr. Maliki and by funding and training Shiite militias now taking part in the battle against Islamic State.             

Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif, asked whether Saudi Arabia was trying to distance Iraqi officials from Iran through the recent visits, said he couldn't speculate on what the intention was, but that Tehran wasn't concerned, according to an interview published Wednesday by the semiofficial Iranian Students' News Agency.             

"What's important is that we are so self-confident about our role in the region and the type of relations we have with our neighbors that we are not worried about these moves," he was quoted as saying.              

Saudi Arabia is now seeking to expand its diplomatic presence across Iraq. The first new consulate, in Najaf, the spiritual and academic heartland of Shiite Islam, is likely to open in the next two months, Saudi and Iraqi officials said. More are set to open, in the southern city of Basra and in Mosul, the second-largest city in Iraq.             

But the Saudi push faces resistance. Many Iraqis blame Saudi Arabia for the rise of Sunni extremism in their country, saying the Saudis fueled its appeal through its strict interpretation of the faith.             

Some Iraqis equate Saudi Arabia with Islamic State, pointing to the thousands of Saudis who have joined the group.             

"The Saudis are fighting us only because we are Shiite, and now they want to be present in Najaf?" Ali Faza Mahdi, a 25-year-old member of a Shiite militia, said during a visit to Najaf's shrine to Imam Ali, the venerable Shiite figure. "If they open a consulate here, we will attack them, just like we fought them at the front" near Mosul.              

In Najaf, Shiite clerics aligned with Iran oppose rapprochement with Saudi Arabia, people close to the religious establishment said. Others—mong them Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the spiritual leader of Iraq's Shiites—avor it as way to offset Iranian influence and to defuse Sunni-Shiite tensions in the region.                          

"Those who say: 'We want nothing to do with Saudi Arabia' are wrong," said Dhiya al-Assadi, who is close to Mr. Sadr, the Iraqi cleric. "Iraq cannot ignore its surroundings."             

Saudi companies, including oil giant Aramco, are eyeing opportunities for investment in Iraq in areas including petrochemicals and agriculture. The Saudi dairy Almarai is considering producing animal feed in the impoverished border province of Muthanna, Saudi and Iraqi officials said.             

Muthanna stands to benefit significantly from improved ties. Before the province's Jumaima border crossing was closed 27 years ago, Muthanna thrived on trade between the two countries. Saudi Arabia exported goods ranging from cars to cigarettes to processed food to Iraq through the province, which in turn could sell dates and cement from its factory in the Saudi market. Shepherds and camel herders crossed the frontier freely.             

Local officials in Muthanna estimated it would cost some $50 million to repair the dilapidated border crossing and the road leading to it.              

"We lost all our prosperity when ties with Saudi were cut," said Reesan Mutasher al-Zayad, a sheikh whose tribe straddles the border. "People have high hopes," he said. "We look forward to having good relations with our Saudi brothers."             

Ali Nabhan, Ghassan Adnan and Asa Fitch contributed to this article.             

                 Write to Margherita Stancati at margherita.stancati@wsj.com



Related                                                       

* Middle East Crossroads: Iran's Stature Grows as Rivals Quarrel(July 13)



* Iraq Faces Tough Task of Rebuilding Mosul After \b ISIS\b0  Defeat(July 11)



* Trump Urges Muslims to Fight Extremism in Saudi Speech(May 21)

Document WSJO000020170823ed8n001gu



World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,041 words
23 August 2017
13:27
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Big Oil, Big Change

A dramatic shift is under way at big oil companies as they adapt to a prolonged period of lower prices brought about by the U.S. shale boom. While they once favored swashbuckling leaders who bet billions on megamergers and pricey projects in far-flung regions, many oil companies are now turning to executives adept at squeezing every last dollar from a barrel through refining, and shorter-term investments that turn a profit faster. In the latest leadership news, we report that Chevron Chief Executive John Watson is planning to step down. The transition is expected to be announced next month, although Mr. Watson's successor hasn't yet been finalized by the board. The leading candidate to succeed Mr. Watson, 60, is Michael Wirth, 56, a refining specialist who earlier this year was elevated to the position of vice chairman.

Pressure on Pakistan

The Trump administration on Tuesday outlined steps it is prepared to take to raise pressure on Pakistan to stop harboring extremist groups, including sanctions on government officials, ramping up U.S. drone strikes in the country, and further cutting aid. The effort—he latest in a series of start-and-stop U.S. campaigns to influence Pakistan dating to the Sept. 11 attacks—omes as a centerpiece of a new strategy encompassing Afghanistan and South Asia, including expanding the U.S. military presence in Afghanistan. But experts and former officials with experience in the region question whether it will be any more successful than its forerunners, and Pakistani officials already are chafing under new U.S. demands that come without the recognition they want of Islamabad's past efforts. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said Pakistan's status as a major non-NATO ally of the U.S. could be "put on the table."

The Long Game

After years of waiting for interest rates to rise, some banks are lending as if that day will never come, loading up on a record amount of loans and securities that carry low rates for long periods. The percentage of bank assets that won't mature or change rates for more than five years reached a new high in the second quarter, according to new FDIC data. Much of this lending for longer is in the booming area of commercial real estate, where borrowers finance offices and apartment buildings typically with loans that have fixed-rate periods from three to 10 years. By locking in longer terms for loans at lower rates, banks could face a profit squeeze if they have to raise deposit rates sharply in the future.

Second Impression

It's a moment few can avoid: You meet someone you want to impress but wind up starting with a glaring faux pas. That tone-deaf comment to a prospective boss or spilled coffee all over a customer can wreck everything. First impressions are rooted in biased thought patterns, including the primacy effect—he tendency for the first few things people notice about someone to influence how they interpret information later. It's possible to recover from a bad first take, but it takes time, effort and some nuanced skills. Offering lots of evidence to counter a bad start can help, as can spending a lot of facetime with someone to repair the relationship. A little self-deprecating humor can show you take your mistake seriously—nd that you're human.

Today's Video

Push Back

How disruptive are push notifications? Just watch Joanna Stern bring them into the real world. Fortunately, she also provides some tips for controlling the pesky on-screen pop-ups.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Companies Promote Corporate Tax Overhaul

From Ailing to Artisanal: The Transformation of a Cincinnati Neighborhood

WORLD

U.S. Treasury Sanctions Chinese, Russian Firms for Aiding North Korea

U.S. Weighs Restricting Trades in Venezuelan Debt to Punish Maduro

BUSINESS

WPP Shares Plunge on Lower Growth Forecast

'Serious Doubts' Over Bayer and Monsanto's $57 Billion Megadeal, Says EU

MARKETS

Blackstone Considers Initial Public Offering of Gates Corp.

Why the ECB Can't Catch a Break on the Euro

Number of the Day

15%

The percent that four mutual-fund companies have marked down their investments in Uber. The first of such price cuts suggest these investors are souring on the ride-hailing giant following a scandal-ridden year.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, have you ever had to overcome a bad first impression? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on President Trump's new Afghanistan strategy, Stephen Beekman of New Jersey said: "Have we forgotten that the British, then the Russians, tried and failed to make a difference? What we need is better coordination of security providers on the European, American (both), Australian and Asian continents!" Jim Pierce of Texas commented: "If nothing else, the president's speech reflects the fact that he has surrounded himself with sage advisers. The question is, how long will it take for him to contradict or refute himself through some inane tweet?" And Mark Koesters of Ohio wrote: "Pulling our troops from Iraq led to the rapid rise of ISIS; we can't allow that to happen in Afghanistan. U.S. troops have been in Japan, Germany, and South Korea for decades as an effective deterrent, and the same can be true in Afghanistan."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170823ed8n001up



World News: World Watch

788 words
23 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

SPAIN

Barcelona Suspects

Appear in Court

Four men accused of being members of an Islamist cell behind a van attack that killed 13 people in Barcelona last week appeared in court on Tuesday, a day after the alleged driver was shot dead by police.

The four, the only ones still alive among the 12 men thought to constitute the group, were brought from Barcelona to Marid and arrived at the High Court, which deals with terrorism cases, in a convoy of police vehicles with sirens wailing.

Police on Monday shot dead 22-year-old Younes Abouyaaqoub, whom they had identified as the driver of the van that careered along the packed Las Ramblas boulevard in Barcelona on Thursday, leaving a trail of 13 dead and 120 injured from 34 countries.

After the attack, Abouyaaqoub escaped on foot, stabbing to death a man who was parking his car and fleeing in the vehicle.

Spanish newspaper La Vanguardia said on Tuesday he walked some 40 kilometers from Sant Just Desvern, a town on the outskirts of Barcelona where he ditched the hijacked car, to Subirats, where he was shot dead.

Abouyaaqoub, who had changed clothes, walked by night and hid during the day, the paper said, citing sources involved in the investigation.

Carlos Mundo, the top justice official in the Catalan government, said police were investigating whether Abouyaaqoub had any support while on the run. "It is clear that he must have had some form of logistics," he told Catalonia Radio.

-- Reuters

---

BRAZIL

Prosecutors Charge

Ex-Corporate Chiefs

Prosecutors leading Brazil's largest-ever corruption probe on Tuesday filed criminal charges against the former chief executive of two of the country's largest state-run firms.

Aldemir Bendine, who was at the helm of state-run oil giant Petroleo Brasileiro SA. between 2015 and 2016, and at state-owned bank Banco do Brasil before then, has been charged with corruption, money laundering and obstruction of justice.

Prosecutors say that Mr. Bendine received bribes from construction giant Odebrecht SA. He has been under arrest since late July for his alleged role in the graft scheme.

Through his lawyer, Mr. Bendine has denied wrongdoing. The former CEO has said that he never solicited or received any bribes.

Marcelo Odebrecht, former CEO of Odebrecht, is also in prison after admitting to prosecutors that the firm paid hundreds of millions of dollars in bribes to government officials in many countries to secure contracts in Brazil and elsewhere.

-- Luciana Magalhaes

---

IRAQ

Mattis Says ISIS

Is 'On the Run'

U.S. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said Tuesday he is confident U.S.-backed Iraqi forces will finish off the Islamic State militants clinging to strongholds that are shrinking in size and number.

"ISIS is on the run," Mr. Mattis said after meeting with Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi and other Iraqi government leaders. "They have been shown to be unable to stand up to our team in combat."

Mr. Mattis spoke alongside Lt. Gen. Stephen Townsend, the top U.S. commander in Iraq, who is due to finish his tour of duty here in early September.

"The fighting is tough," Townsend said, "but the momentum is with our partners."

With Iraqi troops on Tuesday reaching the first urban areas of the IS-held northern town of Tal Afar on the third day of an operation, Mattis has refused to predict victory. He said generals and senior officials should "just go silent" when troops are entering battle.

-- Associated Press

---

ECONOMY

Mexico Reports

Strong Growth

Mexico chalked up its 16th consecutive quarter of economic growth in the April-to-June period as strong services output compensated for sluggish industrial production.

Gross domestic product, a measure of output in goods and services, expanded 0.6% seasonally adjusted from the first quarter and was up 1.8% from a year before, the National Statistics Institute said Tuesday.

Growth from the first quarter, which translates into an annualized rate of 2.3%, was in line with the preliminary estimate published last month, but marked a slowdown from the 2.7% annualized growth in the previous quarter.

Increased employment, despite the impact of rising inflation on wages, has supported services that led growth in the second quarter, while industrial production was flat.

Services growth has averaged about 3.4% since the beginning of 2015, and could hold around that rate in the foreseeable future given the recovery in the labor market, said Marco Oviedo, head of Latin American research at Barclays.

The weakness in industry is mainly related to the public sector, Mr. Oviedo said. "They have been delivering on fiscal goals, but at a cost to growth."

-- Anthony Harrup

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170822ed8n00019



Best of the Web
Opinion
From Charlottesville to Boston; Antifa protesters gather up north.

By James Freeman 
1,050 words
21 August 2017
21:18
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Struggling to find neo-Nazis to condemn in Boston on Saturday, some activists decided to attack the police instead. Or perhaps that was their objective all along. Meanwhile, a new report from Charlottesville offers some support for President Donald Trump's interpretation of the tragic events of August 12.

Thank goodness that in our nation of 323 million people, neo-Nazis are extremely rare. But this can make the task of confronting them rather challenging. Tens of thousands of protesters descended on Boston Common Saturday in search of white supremacists to condemn at an event called the Boston Free Speech Rally. But it was unclear how many supremacists could be found within the tiny group of free speakers.

The New York Timesreports that rally "participants appeared to number only in the dozens." Among the speakers in this small group was Shiva Ayyadurai, an immigrant from India and former technology entrepreneur who holds several degrees from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Mr. Ayyadurai, who is seeking the Republican nomination to challenge Bay State Democrat Sen. Elizabeth Warren, later tweeted, "FAKE NEWS scam saying Boston Free Speech Rally was NAZI event!"

RealClearPolitics has the video of Mr. Ayyadurai's appearance, in which he stands in front of supporters holding signs saying, "Black Lives Do Matter" and condemns racist comments made over the years by elected Democrats.

Boston Globe columnist Jeff Jacoby summed up the day's events with his own tweet:

The rally in a nutshell: "Excuse me," one man innocently asked a Globe reporter, "where are the white supremacists?"

The Journal, with a Saturday article and accompanying video, did manage to find a rally attendee who described himself as "somewhat" of a white nationalist:

Fred Peck, a 66-year-old retired landscaper from Lynn, Mass., said he identifies with white nationalism because he feels white men are being "left out."

"Affirmative action has gotten to include everyone on the planet who's not a straight white guy," he said.

Mr. Peck added that white nationalists "shouldn't go to the extremes where it hurts other people," a point of view which would seem to rule him out of the Nazi category.

For longtime readers of this column, all of this may seem like another installment in the "Life Imitates The Onion" series, and specifically evoke memories of the satirical report that 70% of the attendees at a Klan rally were undercover journalists.

But Saturday's events weren't funny. While thousands of very fine people may have gathered to condemn bigotry, at least some of them went to extremes that could hurt people. Fox News showed a protester assaulting a woman holding an American flag. Protesters also pelted police with rocks and bottles filled with urine. The Associated Press reports that 33 protesters taken into custody will be in court this week. "Arraignments are set for Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday in Boston Municipal Court," says the A.P.

It's unclear exactly how many of those present were very fine, but coverage of the event revealed significant numbers of "Antifa" activists wearing masks. CNNcalls this "a tactic known as 'black bloc' that aims to unify demonstrators' efforts and hide their identities." Journal reader Kathleen Schauer asks why this is necessary if people are showing up to promote a righteous cause.

In any case, Bostonians are certainly relieved that no deaths resulted from Saturday's events. Meanwhile, the local paper in Charlottesville, Virginia has new information about the events that culminated in an alleged white supremacist driving his car into a crowd of protesters and killing Heather Heyer on August 12.

This column was highly skeptical of the President's claim that there were very fine people on both sides in the Charlottesville demonstrations. Specifically, your humble correspondent deemed it unlikely that a non-racist who simply opposed the destruction of statues would stick around once it was clear that participating in the protest would mean demonstrating alongside neo-Nazis.

But is it possible some people stayed in an attempt to prevent violence? Now comes an interview in Charlottesville's Daily Progress newspaper with C.J. Ross, a member of a group called the "Three Percenters." According to the Daily Progress:

In fact, there were two groups of ideologically opposite and armed militia in Charlottesville for the rally. And, while the rally erupted into physical violence, no shots were fired.

Instead, members of the Three Percenters and the Redneck Revolt, a left-leaning militia, said they attempted to thwart fights and provide emergency medical care.

"Probably 80 percent of our members served in Afghanistan or Iraq, so [the violence] wasn't that big of a deal to them. They know how to handle situations," Ross said. "Most organizations like us [and the Revolt] train on a regular basis, so it's no surprise that no shots were fired. We disagree politically [with the Redneck Revolt], but they're good people."

The Daily Progress adds:

Ross said that although the rally didn't go as they expected, he believes the militia's presence helped to prevent escalating violence.

"I feel in some ways that, if we weren't there, things may have been worse. Many people appreciated it and many people didn't," Ross said. "We don't like Nazis. We don't like Antifa. But they both have the right to speak, and that's what we defend. We wanted to support the Constitution and help keep things peaceful.

Kudos to the Daily Progress for continuing to help readers try to understand the events of August 12 after most of the media pack has moved on.

***

Bottom Stories of the Day

Out on a Limb "ISIS 'Genocide' Seriously Threatens Religious Freedom," Daily Caller, August 15

And You Thought Trump's Polls Were Bad "28% Think Climate Scientists Really Understand Climate Change," Ballotpedia, August 21

Same Thing That Happens Every Night "What Happens to Solar Power in an Eclipse? We'll Find Out Monday," New York Times, August 18

***

Follow James Freeman on Twitter.

Subscribe to the Best of the Web email with one click.

To suggest items, please email best@wsj.com.

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web. Thanks to Mark Finkelstein and Raymond Hull.)

Document WSJO000020170821ed8l004bm



Opinion
Bannon Bows Out; A transcript of the weekend's program on FOX News channel.

7,322 words
21 August 2017
17:41
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

PAUL GIGOT : Welcome to the Journal Editorial Report. I'm Paul Gigot.

President Trump's chief strategist Steve Bannon is out just days after he gave an interview to a liberal magazine discussing plans to neutralize his rivals inside the administration and contradicting the president on North Korea. The embattled Bannon, who played a key role in 2016 victory, had feuded for months with other top aides. And on Friday, the White House released this statement, "White House Chief of Staff John Kelly and Steve Bannon have mutually agree today will be Steve's last day. We are grateful for his service and wish him the best."

Let's bring in Wall Street Journa" assistant editorial page editor, James Freeman; and editorial board member, Mary Kissel.

Mary, Steve Bannon, the legendary survivor didn't survive this week. What happened?

MARY KISSEL: I think, effectively, he was daring President Trump to fire him by giving that interview to "Prospect" magazine --

GIGOT: The American Prospect

KISSEL: "American Prospect." You can't go against the president as policies as big as North Korea, you can't proclaim to want to stoke the less racial politicking and other things that he said and expect not to be fired. Look, Paul, some of the president's top aides on both domestic front, Gary Cohn, and the foreign policy front, H.R. McMaster, vehemently disagreed. So I don't think the president had a choice.

GIGOT: Elaborate on that North Korea thing. How did he contradict the president's policy?

KISSEL: The president said, we are not going to allow North Korea to have a nuclear-tipped ICBM that can hit the United States. And Steve Bannon said in this interview, well, look, I can foresee a deal where we let China go into North Korea and promise that they are going to denuclearize in exchange for taking U.S. troops out of the Korean peninsula. Steve Bannon is characterized as a hawk, but that's --

KISSEL: That's actually on the far-left side of politics.

GIGOT: That would be a strategic victory for China. One of the goal is to push out of northeast Asia.

He also said that there's no military solution to North Korea. At the same time, the president and his chief defense secretary, Secretary Mattis, would say, look, if you get this nuclear weapon with missiles, we may have to—

KISSEL: Take military action. Exactly.

GIGOT: It's on the table. So he's undermining the message the president is trying to send to China of the seriousness of our purpose in North Korea.

OK, James, Bannon's legacy, what does this mean? Talk about did he accomplish good or ill?

JAMES FREEMAN: Well, I think in terms of accomplishments, I would put on the plus side, I think he was encouraging in getting the president to get out of the Paris climate deal. I think what—t's interesting, with Bannon, for a lot of conservatives, I think they might be liked his attitude more than all of his policies. The trade and immigration agenda is not exactly free market.

GIGOT: No. He was for increasing taxes.

KISSEL: He was.

FREEMAN: Look, I think it should give conservatives pause, who may have been attracted to the Bannon trade agenda that he was reaching out to left- winger, Bob Kuttner, to make common cause about it. But I think what Bannon did bring, and this may be a loss in the White House, is an instinct, a non-conformism, which, in washington, means you're generally pushing back to people who want to make government much bigger. The concern now and why you saw conservatives saying—xpressing disappointment with Bannon leaving is that Ivanka Trump and Gary Cohn together are not necessarily going to be consistently --

GIGOT: Hold on. Hold on.

KISSEL: Now you have cabinet chiefs, like, for instance, EPA Chief Scott Pruitt, who are pushing forward that deregulation agenda. So I don't know, James. Think about the Paris climate agreement. It wasn't just Steve Bannon pushing for President Trump to pull out of that. Scott Pruitt had a lot to say about it, too.

GIGOT: And I would argue, James, that you have on Gary Cohn's national economic council, you have some very conservative free-market policy wonks who are pushing—ou've got Mike Pence in the White House with his team. They have a conservative agenda. So I'm not—nd on the judicial side, you've got Leonard Leo, the Federal Society and others who are going through the list of judicial nominations. So, I mean, how much are you really going to miss here, I guess, would be my point, beyond the fact that he did like to talk too much with some of his racial politics.

FREEMAN: Everything you said in terms of Scott Pruitt and Kevin Hassett, some of the others that have joined the administration are absolutely very positive developments. But we'll see. I think of further concern is John Kelly is kind of a blank slate in terms of domestic policy. And kind of to be determined, but let's hope for the best.

GIGOT: Quickly, he's saying, I've been liberated, "Breitbart," I mean Bannon, and maybe go to "Breitbart." But could he do more harm to Trump outside than having been inside?

KISSEL: I don't know. What has Trump accomplished on the legislative agenda? I'm not sure that he's done much good on the inside. Can he do much worse on the inside? I don't know. I don't think so, Paul.

GIGOT: All right, thank you, both.

When we come back, amid the fallout from the violence in Charlottesville last weekend and the continuing protests and counter protests across the country, a renewed debate over the place Confederate monuments have in America.

GIGOT: President Trump coming under fire from both Democrats and Republicans this week after he doubled down Tuesday on claims that both sides were to blame for the violence that erupted at a rally held by white nationalists in Charlottesville last weekend.

PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP : I think there's blame on both sides. You look at both sides, I think there's blame on both sides. And I have no doubt about it you have some very bad people in the group. But you also had people that were very fine people on both sides.

GIGOT: And as protests and counter protests continue across the country, the president is also taking a stand on the removal on Confederate monuments in the United States. Tweeting on Thursday, quote, "Sad to see the history and culture of our great country being ripped apart with the removal of our beautiful statutes and monuments. You can't change history, but you can learn from it. Robert E. Lee, Stonewall Jackson. Who is next? Washington? Jefferson? So foolish."

Juan Williams is a FOX News political analyst and co-host of "The Five."

Juan, good to see you.

JUAN WILLIAMS: Thank you, Paul.

GIGOT: You're a student of America's racial history and the civil rights movement. I want to ask you, first, about this Confederate monuments issue, does Trump have a point?

WILLIAMS: Well, he has point. And I have a high regard for history and I think any kind of effort in the George Orwell sense of trying to rewrite history or propagandize history is a terrible mistake. You cannot erase the past. The issue is really about monuments. And I think monuments are for the living. We, with our monuments, give honor to our past. The question is, what past are we celebrating here. One, you have people about who are all about tearing apart the United States of America and denying our Constitution, in terms of so many of our principles. But secondly, I think you have the idea that this is an effort that is now inspiring people on the—hat they call the Alt-Right, people that are Neo-Nazis, white supremacist, they have made this cause celeb for themselves and it is now dividing the whole country.

GIGOT: So I agree with all of your points. Do you make some distinction, though, between—n the past between somebody like a Nathan Bedford Forrest --

WILLIAMS: Yes.

GIGOT:—nd Jefferson and Washington?

WILLIAMS: Absolutely. I noticed this week that people like Al Sharpton were saying, oh, he doesn't want to pay for a Jefferson Memorial. I thought, I don't doubt your sincerity but that's sounded wacky to me. In my mind, Jefferson is a founding father, somebody who put the nation together, not tore it apart. And, yet, he had some complicated flaws in in his personal life, Sally Hemmings and the like, I'm sure you're familiar with.

GIGOT: Sure.

WILLIAMS: But he's a man of his times. And I think that he spoke about the whole notion of liberty and equality for all as well.

GIGOT: If you were in the city council in Charlottesville, would you have voted to rename that park and take down a Lee statute?

WILLIAMS: Yes, I would have. Not only would I have done it, but I notice that his great, great, great grandson said it, that Lee was about uniting the United States—

GIGOT: Especially after the Civil War.

WILLIAMS: Right.

GIGOT: That's clear.

WILLIAMS: I don't think that Lee would be about, oh, no, no, let's keep this about the divisive monument up after the war --

GIGOT: Is it a smart thing for the country to be fighting about these things now? As you said, it's dividing us. It's giving the white supremacists a cause celeb, something to rally around. And then, it's polarizing on the other side as well. We don't need that right now.

WILLIAMS: I really don't think we— can't tell you—t sounds Pollyannaish to you, Paul. You're a very serious man, Paul.

But I think—

WILLIAMS: We have a moment here where we need some sense of healing and positivity and understanding that we are Americans.

GIGOT: Right.

WILLIAMS: That across these bounds, one of many, that's our slogan. I think this is very important. I thought, though, that given President Trump's actions, I think that I look back historically to someone like President Eisenhower, when Orville (ph) was in office in Arkansas, was trying to stop children from attending school after the 1950 Brown decision, Eisenhower didn't equivocate. He said very quickly, I'm sending the 101st Airborne to enforce the law of the Supreme Court of this land.

GIGOT: And the president of the United States has a special obligation to speak with moral clarity.

WILLIAMS: That's right.

GIGOT: You don't need to say equivocate. You don't need to say, well—ou have to speak clearly, and that's the mistake he made, in my view.

WILLIAMS: Yes.

GIGOT: You just have to speak—articularly a president, a Republican president has to speak clearly about extremist on the right --

WILLIAMS: Yes.

GIGOT:—n particular. Just like a Democratic president has to speak that way to extremists on the left.

WILLIAMS: I would agree completely. This is a moment where you have to say it goes beyond politics and stirring the base or anything of that. You come to moral moments in our country's life, you think of someone like President Bush after 9/11 standing there. That brings us together. We were talking about healing. That reminds you, hey, wait a second, I may have differences with Paul Gigot, but guess what, Paul is a fellow American, we are in this together. Our destiny, our prosperity relies on a sense of working together, cooperation. And I just think we've broken down some of that fabric. I'm particularly struck by the nation that he didn't respond to anti-Semitism, given his own family, that was evident throughout this event, where you had people unable to walk out the front door of a synagogue because you had white supremacists and Neo-Nazis with guns standing there.

GIGOT: After this week, if President Trump called you up and said, Juan, I have a mess here, what should I do, what would you advise him to do?

WILLIAMS: I think it's pretty clear at this point that he should stand up and speak very clearly to the American people, say maybe he made a mistake. I don't know that he's given to that.

GIGOT: He's not very good at that.

WILLIAMS: No. But I think it will be good. And I think that he could—gain, not only in terms of speaking but in terms of action. We talked about the monuments. Maybe say, you know, I have a different view, I have a better understanding of what has gone on, and I think that this is a moment where we can come together as Americans.

GIGOT: Make distinctions between some of the founding fathers and maybe understand that some of these monuments were put up in the Jim Crow era, for example, as symbols of white supremacy.

GIGOT: Not all of them.

WILLIAMS: Most of them were early 20th century, as you say, when the KKK was marching down Pennsylvania Avenue.

GIGOT: But is his speech enough for Trump at this stage?

WILLIAMS: I think you're going to have lots of people who will be doubters. You asked me what can he do, and I think this is a major step. And I think speaking to the monuments in a constructive way that might bring healing. And looking forward, down the road, what you have to see from Trump is an effort to say, you know what, this is a part of my political base, OK, I understand it, but you know what, we don't need that political base. You heard that from the chair of the GOP this week. You hear that from Mitch McConnell on Capitol Hill, we don't want it.

GIGOT: All right, Juan Williams, thank you for being here.

WILLIAMS: Thank you, Paul.

GIGOT: President Trump's ties with the business community showing signs of strain amid the Charlottesville fallout. Can a Republican president succeed without its support?

GIGOT: Amid the fallout this week from his Charlottesville comments, President Trump was forced to disband two advisory groups made up of business leaders and CEOs. The president said Wednesday afternoon that he would end both the manufacturing council and Strategic and Policy Forum he had convened to advisor him on economic policy. Eleven members had already resigned from the councils by the time of his announcement.

Let's bring in "Wall Street Journal" columnist and deputy editor, Dan Henninger; columnist, Kim Strassel; and assistant editorial page editor, James Freeman.

So, Kim, solve a mystery for me.

KIM STRASSEL: I'll try.

GIGOT: After the criticism of the president on the weekend, the president issued a statement on Monday that condemned in no uncertain terms the Neo- Nazis, white supremacists and so on. But his staff said, at the time, OK, some damage done but that issue is over. And then the president, on his own, opened that up, reopened the debate on Tuesday with his comments. Why? Why do that?

STRASSEL: Because this is Donald Trump. This is what he does. It's as if he cannot resist a moment to wade back in, double down. He doesn't like to have any criticism and when he is criticized, he decides to just go back at it even harder.

GIGOT: So you think it's a matter of—re you talking here, Kim --

STRASSEL:—ave some sense to it. There is violence on the left as well as the right. But that was not the time to do it. As you said, this had been finished. All he's done is reopened an entirely new news cycle, lost support of the business community, forced members of his own party in Congress to distance themselves from him. He could have put this behind him. He didn't.

GIGOT: James, I think it comes down to, in part, ego and pride. He doesn't like being criticized. He thinks he was right. And he doesn't like having people say, you need to read this. And I think he chaffed on reading it on Monday. And yet, by doing this again, he reopened old wounds. And I think made—im makes a fair point, but it's an inadequate statement by the president of the United States. You have to speak clearly on issues like this and with moral clarity. He didn't.

FREEMAN: Yes, and I think it's a shame. We're looking at a video from that tuesday press conference and, if he had stuck with the first six minutes, which was actually a wonderful description of the problem of not being able to build anything in this country because you cannot get projects permitted and get environmental impact statements done, etc. Really, it was a nice presentation. But I think --

GIGOT: Nobody noticed.

FREEMAN: Yes, that's right. And, again, probably bothered by the violence on one side if focused on news reporting. I get that. But he definitely errs, I think, in saying that there was very fine people on both sides. I think the very fine people who may support monuments for artistic or historical reasons did not show up to the Klan protest.

DAN HENNINGER: But you know what, his statement about violence people on both sides, it was a half thought. It was half developed. Let's think back to the 2008 presidential election. Barack Obama is running for president and he had a problem similar to this. That was Reverend Wright in Chicago.

GIGOT: Yes. Yes.

HENNINGER: And Reverend Write said very extreme things about white people, off the charts, and Obama was associated with him. After he got in trouble on that issue, he pulled back and said, I have to give a major speech on my position on race in America, and he delivered that speech. And it was a very strong speech. Whether it was believable or not, that's beyond the point. It got him back on track, politically. Possibly, Donald Trump needs to do that now. But the point is, if you are president, you cannot make thoughts off the top of your head about a subject as volatile and explosive as race in America. It's a no-win situation.

FREEMAN: Well, that's where it—ust to note for the record, where it differed from President Obama, because it was an off-the-head remark, whereas, Mr. Obama had gone to Reverend Wright's church for years. But in terms of the business community, the initial point here—his is not Donald Trump's base. His base doesn't like the government, doesn't like big business. But if he wants to build a governing coalition, if he wants to get more done, obviously, there are some natural allies.

A lot of these business folks were always uncomfortable on this panel. They were kind of smiling awkwardly, didn't like the trade and immigration agenda, but liked the tax reform and deregulation.

GIGOT: But the fact that they were there --

FREEMAN: Yes.

GIGOT:—nd willing to participate gets to governing. You need to broaden your coalition. You were elected with 44 percent approval, and the goal is to get to 50 percent, not 34 percent.

You need the business community, right Kim? I think this is damaging to Trump. Some people say, oh, down with big business, it's not part of his base, we don't need them. The truth is you may not need the Fortune 500 CEOs, but you need a broader coalition than the 25 percent of the people that love you to death.

STRASSEL: And by the way, if your top agenda, priority in the coming fall is tax reform, you do need those Fortune 500 CEOs and the rest of the business community. One of the problems here—ecause this is what you saw happen this week. Once Merck resigned, it was inevitable that the other CEOs would follow because of the pressure of the media and Trump critics. President Trump has given them a club to put on the pressure not just on those CEOs but Republicans in Congress to say, how do you justify going along with his agenda, his priorities. They cannot afford that right now at a time when Republicans need to be unified because they don't have a lot of extra votes in Congress to get any of this done.

GIGOT: All right, still ahead, with pressure mounting on Republicans to make progress on their agenda, leaders in Congress are setting their sights on tax reform when they return from August break. Could a bill reach President Trump's desk by year's end? We'll ask Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady, next.

GIGOT: Conservative groups are turning up the heat on Republicans in Congress, urging them to get to work on tax reform when they return from August break. Take a look at this ad that hit the airways in two dozen Republican House districts last week.

[CAMPAIGN AD]: I was proud of my work. I was middle class and I made a better life for my daughter. But with more foreign competition, I got laid off. America's tax code is so complicated it can't be as competitive. Thousands of jobs like mine are lost to places like China. So when I see Congress working to cut taxes for working families and brings jobs back, I know how that matters. Congress, pass tax reform that brings the middle class back.

GIGOT: Earlier, I spoke with House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Kevin Brady about the prospects for tax reform.

GIGOT: Welcome, Mr. Chairman.

REP. KEVIN BRADY: Thank you.

GIGOT: Good to have you back.

So, I guess the question a lot I hear from a lot of people, why is tax reform going to be any different than the failure of health reform?

BRADY: Fair question. The answer is everything is different on this. Here's why. One, the White House, House, Senate, have made a deliberate effort to work together towards a unified, single tax program plan. It's bold. It's balanced.

GIGOT: You will come out on this together?

BRADY: Together.

GIGOT: And it will have details?

BRADY: Yes. We'll lay the framework. The White House, House and Senate will lay out the framework. House Ways and Means Committee is responsible for beginning our process with a detailed tax plan. But really these— don't want to— can't overemphasize how important and unusual it is to have the White House, House, Senate working together on tax reform. Even in the Reagan process, it didn't happen. Secondly, there are Americans who defend Obamacare and the Affordable Care Act. There are not many Americans that defend this tax code. So you start with a different base there. The other thing is—

GIGOT: You just saw a lot people, Mr. Chairman, that defend their particular tax breaks.

BRADY: That's exactly right.

GIGOT: And you already had the border adjustment tax that you guys put in the draft. That was worth $1 trillion worth of revenue over 10 years. You had to throw that out because of hostility from the retailers and others. Where will you get that $1 trillion back?

BRADY: One final point. What you didn't see in health care was a national effort to make the case for reform. You are seeing it now in a major way.

GIGOT: OK.

BRADY: Not just lawmakers out there. My thinking is, big changes require a big discussion in America. So having August and September to do this, is critical.

To your point, so how do we continue to lower the rates? The answer is, in the 31 years since President Reagan successfully reformed this, he would not recognize the code today. Since then, it's littered with special provisions, because our rates are so high. And so our work right now and the working group with the president and the Senate tax writers is to scrub all those provisions, to make the tradeoffs with lower rates and really unleashing business investment and put a missing ingredient in productivity in America, to make sure that we can lower the rates and do the expensing that we can.

GIGOT: So you are saying that this will be a reform that does take away tax loopholes and benefits for some people? It won't just devolve into a mere tax cut?

BRADY: It has to.

GIGOT: It has to be reformed?

BRADY: It has to. Here's why. A tax cut will help temporarily. It's a little like putting super-charged fuel in an old clunker of a car. Yes, it will go faster for some period of time, but it cannot keep up with new models on the road. Right now, worldwide, we're being left in the dust. So that's why a redesign—nd those provisions are there because our rates are so high. Competitive industries have sought special provisions to try to make them competitive. We lower the rates and do the investment right, they don't have the punch. They're not needed.

GIGOT: Big part of it is corporate tax reform. Top rate, 35 percent. How low do you think that has to go? You have Ireland at 12.5 percent. Britain, 17. To make sure that that money from overseas, $2.5 trillion or so, comes back here, how low does it have to go?

BRADY: You need to be at least medium or lower to be competitive.

GIGOT: 25 percent, 23 percent?

BRADY: Around the 23 percent, 22 percent range. I don't want to—e're still working to lower it as far as you can go.

GIGOT: If you have 12.5 percent in Ireland, and you are not doing to 20, I'm not sure you are getting enough bang for your buck for what you need for an Apple or some of these other companies, Pfizer, to move their operations and cash back here.

BRADY: It's critical that we do that. Tying the lowest rates with the greatest amount of expensing, it's a zero tax rate in new investment, buildings, equipment, software, technology, incredibly pro-growth as well. Keeping things that reward innovation and allow these companies to bring their profits back to the U.S. All of it gets us back—s we talked about often, we want to leapfrog into the top-three most-competitive places on the planet for that next new job. All the elements are critical to us.

GIGOT: Let's talk about small business, something many—ub chapters, personal rate. The top rate is 39.6 percent, not including deductions.

BRADY: Yes. Yes.

GIGOT: How low does that have to go? A lot of small business lobbys are saying, it has to be parity with the corporate rate. Does it have to be, in your view, parity?

BRADY: I don't believe so. But I think we need to deliver an equal tax cut for our local businesses. Regardless of how you are structured, whether you are a mom and pop or a corporation or worldwide, we need to lower the taxes equally for all those job creators because so many jobs, so much of our growth is included in both sides of that ledger. Drive those rates down as low as you can, regardless of the type of business you are structured as.

GIGOT: And if it's 25 percent and corporate is at 20 percent, you could live with that?

BRADY: I could. That is an equal 43 percent tax cut for both. But it's really important for our non-C Corporations, who have so much growth, in the past, they've been left behind, in my view. We're not going to do that this time.

GIGOT: All right. One very quick question. State and local tax deduction, it's on the table?

BRADY: It is.

GIGOT: Will it stay there?

BRADY: I'm hopeful. And here's why. Under the current tax code, Washington taxes, everyone at a high rate. So some can use that deduction. We're proposing lower rates for everybody, so everyone gets help, whether it's for state and local taxes, getting your kids in college, putting your mom in a nursing home. Give people the ability to do what they need to do.

GIGOT: When we come back, terror in Spain. What this week's attacks tell us about the nature of the current threat.

VICE PRESIDENT MIKE PENCE: ISIS has taken credit for this barbaric attack. But whoever is responsible should know that the United States of America, together with our allies, will find and punish those responsible and drive the evil of radical Islamic terror from the face of the earth.

GIGOT: Vice President Mike Pence reacting to the terror attacks in Spain on Thursday. Islamic State is claiming responsibility for the attack in Barcelona, which occurred in the heart of Spain's second-largest city, in a scene that is all too familiar in Europe. A van plowed into a crowded in a busy tourist district killing more than a dozen people and injuring scores of others.

"Wall Street Journal" editorial board member, Mary Kissel, joins us with more.

So, Mary, we had similar attacks in France, the U.K., Germany, and now Spain. What does this tell us about how this threat is evolving in Europe?

KISSEL: I think what it says is when we take back territory in Iraq and Syria, it's doing nothing to eradicate the threat from Islamic jihadist groups. The threat is migrating to other places, namely to Northern Africa. There was a Morocco connection, not only here in Barcelona. Also in Paris, in Brussels. There was a Libyan connection to the attack in Manchester.

It also shows how difficult it is to harden targets. This was another attack on a soft target, a tourist area. Very difficult to stop, Paul.

GIGOT: OK. But you are not saying that we should stop in Iraq and Syria, because one of the things that ISIS does to inspire people is be able to say, look, we can hold this territory, this caliphate. We're the future. So one of the arguments for taking back that territory in those parts of the world is to say, look, no, you are losing.

KISSEL: I think it's wrong to talk about ISIS. I think it's wrong to separate these terror groups. You cannot say we have a threat from ISIS here and a threat from al-Qaeda here and a theta from Boko Haram there. These groups learn from each other. And that's the other big point here --

GIGOT: They do learn from each other. I take that point. But what about the problem of letting them say, in Syria and Iraq, OK, we control this territory. That makes them more able to inspire these people and radicalize people --

KISSEL: Of course. It would be a silly argument to say let's leave them in Syria and Iraq. I'm not arguing that. But what I'm saying is I think we're not focusing on how the threat has migrated. When was the last time you heard the White House or the Pentagon come out and give a long statement or speech on the threat from the Maghrib. I haven't heard one. What is our strategy in Libya?

GIGOT: And that's in North Africa.

KISSEL: Absolutely. I think it's an evolving problem.

HENNINGER: Paul, earlier this week, the former head of MI-5, the united kingdom's domestic security service, Lord Evans, gave an interview on this. He said, we are facing what he thinks is a generational threat, another 20, 30 years, mainly because Islamic State, radical jihadists are in their 20s and 30s, and like all of these—pain went through it with the Basque separatists for 30, 40 years. And eventually, the generations pass on. For now, we'll deal with lone wolves. It's looks like another lone-wolf attack of someone assembling bomb material. They didn't even have a permit for a big enough truck they were going to try to use. Ended up with a smaller truck. It will be difficult to guard against that sort of thing. But make no mistake, these people are getting their directive from I.S., from their technicians, the philosophical stuff they put on the Internet.

Spain puts people in jail for putting violent acts and threats on the Internet. They put a rapper in prison for a year for threatening to blow up the king with a cake bomb. So it's not like they're not focusing on these things. But it will be difficult to protect on this sort of an attack in an open area like Las Ramblas.

GIGOT: This could have been a lot worse. We saw terrorists some of them seemed to have blown themselves up before in the attack trying to assemble a bomb.

KISSEL: That's true. Sometimes the stupidity of the terrorists is the only thing that saves us from higher casualty events. Recall the bomb in Chelsea in the middle of Manhattan last year. The terrorists put the bomb in a trash container and it absorbed a large part of the blast.

I think Dan has a very important point about generational threat. We talk a lot about stopping dangerous immigration into places like Germany or here in the United States, where Trump has made that such a big issue. But a lot of these attackers are second-generation citizens—

GIGOT: Radicalized.

KISSELL :—adicalized.

GIGOT: Over the Internet.

KISSEL: That's right. And it makes it even more difficult for the security forces to keep track of them, where they've been, who they're talking to. In something like a truck attack, you can go out and rent a truck. It's not like you have to build a bomb and maybe the neighbors might see you bringing it into your home, like they did in San Bernardino, California. Again, these are ersatz attacks. The terrorist groups, they analyze these attacks, they give hints. "Inspire" magazine came out after the Nice attack and said that was very well done. Good that you had guns in the car, too. Maybe next time. Here's some more ways you can kill more people. Very, very dangerous, Paul. And I think Dan is right. This is a generational issue.

HENNINGER: Well, they're using data. The airports in Europe are making everyone that goes through check against the database. They have extraordinarily long lines. So they're trying to do this sort of thing, but they probably need better data about people doing things like buying bomb material. It's a struggle to be fought over a long period of time.

GIGOT: Data has got to be a crucial tool here.

When we come back, after an all-out assault by the Obama administration, is coal making a comeback in the United States?

PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: My administration is putting an end to the war on coal.

TRUMP: That's is why we're also going to eliminate job-killing regulations. And lift the restrictions on the production of American energy, including shale, oil, natural gas and beautiful, clean coal. We're going to put our miners back to work. Our miners are going back to work, folks

GIGOT: Don't look now, but President Trump is delivering on at least one campaign promise. After the Obama administration's all-out assault on fossil fuels, Candidate Trump promised to end the assault on coal. Almost seven months into his presidency, the numbers are surprising, with weekly coal production up almost 15 percent nationwide and coal exports up a whopping 58 percent in the first quarter from a year ago.

"Wall Street Journal" editorial board member, Allysia Finley, joins us with more.

So, Allysia, this is a fascinating story. We've been poking around the numbers. What is behind the coal boomlet?

ALLYSIA FINLEY: Right. So I think one aspect is the deregulation. I don't think we even realized how suppressed the industry was until a lot of the rules, including ash, were stayed by --

GIGOT: Rules put in place by the Obama administration.

FINLEY: Right, that were intended to force the shutdown of coal plants and prevent building new coal plants.

GIGOT: So there was two stages. The first Obama rules went after new coal plants—

FINLEY: Yes.

GIGOT:—o try to make them uneconomic. Then the Clean Power Plan said, we're going to try to put existing plants out --

FINLEY: Out of business. And then they went after the exports, basically, by freezing leases on federal lands, which is where a lot of the coal, which is very economic and competitive, where that was coming from and exported abroad.

GIGOT: So these rules now have been starting to roll back, some repealed altogether. And the Clean Coal Plan was stayed by the courts.

FINLEY: The Supreme Court last in March.

GIGOT: And that's when we started to see this come back?

FINLEY: Right. And that's where, last summer, you started to see West Virginia, Kentucky, New Mexico, a resurgence in coal production. It didn't really start in Montana and Wyoming, which is where a lot of federal lands was until early this year when some of the regulations were stayed.

GIGOT: OK. One of the most intriguing sides of this, Allysia, is the exports are going to Europe.

FINLEY: Europe. It's not just China. It's Europe.

GIGOT: And that's interesting because, of course, Europe claims to be—

FINLEY: A green virtue, right?

GIGOT:—gainst climate change. They dislike fossil fuels. They've subsidized heavily solar, wind and bio mass. They tried to shut down in Germany and elsewhere nuclear power. So why are they importing coal?

FINLEY: The renewables. They need something to back up the renewable energy. When they have a cold snap or their nuclear power plants go down, they need coal. So we've seen a more than 200 percent increase in coal exports to France, for example.

GIGOT: To France, for example, and Germany is up, I think—hat was it—

FINLEY: 98 percent.

GIGOT: Something like 84 percent. But, a lot. The point is, you need to the base-load power to be able to keep the lights on when you want to get the lights on. And people and businesses, consumers, kind of like the lights to go on when you flip the switch.

FINLEY: What a luxury, you know.

GIGOT: So, Kim, what do you make of this as a political matter? Is this — guess this—f you were the administration, you would say, look, we're fulfilling a promise.

KIM STRASSEL: Yes. Hopefully, what it means is all the shellacking that the president has received from the environmental community and his critics about pulling out of Paris and staying a lot of these rules, this is the defense. This is the positive way he goes back at that and says, look, my vow was to create jobs, and this is tangible proof that I'm doing so.

And this is also, I would note from a political point of view, states like West Virginia and others, these are important in elections. And Ohio and Pennsylvania, where you've seen some of this return of jobs. So this is people, voters in states that matter to Republicans, that are seeing an economy get back on track because of Republican leadership.

GIGOT: Dan, it doesn't mean that coal will go back to being as dominant as it once was. And natural gas is competing with coal for prices at a certain price point for electric power generation. But it does suggest that coal can at least have some kind of a bigger role than President Obama wanted it to take in the economy.

HENNINGER: To say the least. There's a philosophical divide here. Liberals accuse conservatives of being anti-government. They say you hate government. We don't hate government. What we hate is government literally strangling the private sector and, as Allysia described, creating rules that forbad economic activity to take place. Coal is now being allowed to compete in the marketplace with some of these alternative sources of energy, and it is producing jobs for American people.

GIGOT: If coal can't compete, so be it.

HENNINGER: Yes.

GIGOT: If it can, also—

HENNINGER: Let it.

GIGOT:—et it.

We have to take one more break. When we come back, "Hits & Misses" of the week.

GIGOT: Time now for "Hits & Misses" of the week.

Kim, start us off.

STRASSEL: Paul, it isn't easy to always come up with something nice to say about the United States Postal Service. But this is a huge hit for its new stamp, the Total Eclipse of the Sun stamp. This is a stamp that's celebrating the upcoming eclipse. It's got a black disc. It responds to the heat of your finger. When you put your finger on the disc, it disappears to reveal the moon. These things are just flying off the shelves. They're a huge hit. Maybe the answer to the postal office's financial woes are just to have a little bit more fun.

GIGOT: OK.

All right, Mary?

KISSEL: I'm giving a big miss to Hong Kong, which this week jailed three student leaders of the so-called Umbrella Revolution. The territory used to be a beacon of freedom in China. Now that is past tense here because, with political prisoners now in Hong Kong, combined with legislators getting thrown out and people being spirited over the border to China, I think, unfortunately, this territory is just becoming another oppressed city in China. It's sad.

GIGOT: It's terribly sad.

Allysia?

FINLEY: This is a miss to California, which, last November, legalized marijuana. And the plaintiff's attorney also see it as a business opportunity here. So they are suing mom-and-pop pot shops for violating the state's chemical law, because they're not providing notice that the pot was grown with pesticides. And—

GIGOT: So is this way, if you really want to ban marijuana, you legalize it and take them to trial?

FINLEY: Yes, basically.

GIGOT: Dan?

HENNINGER: Absolutely.

Well, I'm giving my hit to America's young people. The kids are all right. Youth unemployment in the summer is down to the lowest level this summer since 1969. That is fantastic. The downside is that the participation rates is still 17 points below where it was in 1989. So while some want to spend the summer still chilling, a lot of young people are going to work before they go to college.

GIGOT: Thank you, Dan.

And, remember, if you have your own hit or miss, be sure to tweet it to us, @JERonFNC.

That's it for this week's show. Thanks to my panel. Thanks to you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. Hope to see you right here next week.

Document WSJO000020170821ed8l002xl



Page One
What's News: World-Wide

188 words
21 August 2017
06:11
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

 An imam in northeastern Spain has emerged as a prime suspect in the Barcelona terror attack, as authorities investigate whether he radicalized a group of young men. 

 Police in Finland continued trying to reconstruct the sequence of events around a stabbing spree that has been deemed a terror attack. 

 Separate offensives against \b ISIS\b0  have solidified a de facto alliance between Iran and the U.S. to drive the group from its redoubts. 

 Ten American sailors were missing and five were injured after the destroyer USS John S. McCain collided with a merchant vessel. 

 The Korean Peninsula looks set for a new cycle of escalation this week as the U.S. and South Korea kick off annual military exercises. 

 A fast-approaching deadline for insurers to commit to selling health plans next year under the ACA is pressuring GOP lawmakers. 

 Trump returned to the White House Sunday, looking to revive his stalled agenda after a working vacation. 

 Died: Jerry Lewis, 91, comedian who rose to the pinnacle of 20th-century stardom. 

 Died: Dick Gregory, 84, barrier-breaking comic and civil-rights activist. 

Document WSJO000020170821ed8l000m9



World-Wide
What's News
World-Wide

193 words
21 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

An imam in northeastern Spain has emerged as a prime suspect in the Barcelona terror attack, as authorities investigate whether he radicalized a group of young men.

---

Police in Finland continued trying to reconstruct the sequence of events around a stabbing spree that has been deemed a terror attack.

---

Separate offensives against ISIS have solidified a de facto alliance between Iran and the U.S. to drive the group from its redoubts.

---

Ten American sailors were missing and five were injured after the destroyer USS John S. McCain collided with a merchant vessel.

---

The Korean Peninsula looks set for a new cycle of escalation this week as the U.S. and South Korea kick off annual military exercises.

---

A fast-approaching deadline for insurers to commit to selling health plans next year under the ACA is pressuring GOP lawmakers.

---

Trump returned to the White House Sunday, looking to revive his stalled agenda after a working vacation.

---

Died: Jerry Lewis, 91, comedian who rose to the pinnacle of 20th-century stardom. . . . Dick Gregory, 84, barrier-breaking comic and civil-rights activist.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170821ed8l0001w



World News:  ISIS  Holdouts Are Hit in Iraq, Lebanon --- Campaign to eradicate Sunni extremists reflects incongruous battlefield alliances

By Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut and Ali Nabhan and Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad 
855 words
21 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A disparate collection of forces have launched two separate offensives against Islamic State, solidifying a de facto alliance between longtime opponents Iran and the U.S. to drive the group from the last remaining territory it holds.

Iraqi forces early Sunday started a military operation in Tal Afar, one of Islamic State's last important strongholds in the country. The offensive unites U.S.-backed Iraqi forces with Iran-supported Shiite militias, which have for months surrounded Tal Afar waiting to move on the city.

A similar dynamic is playing out in Lebanon, where the U.S.-supported Lebanese military attacked Islamic State's last foothold in the country. Hezbollah, a Lebanese militia fighting in Syria alongside Iranian forces, hit Islamic State from the other side of Lebanon's border.

Eliminating the Sunni extremist group -- whose claim of responsibility for last week's attacks in Spain suggested its continued capacity to strike abroad -- is a prime objective of both the U.S. and Iran, even though Tehran and Washington are also working to undermine each other in the region.

The competing priorities, for the U.S. in particular, have become a difficult balance.

"This is where the contradiction comes in, in U.S. foreign policy, fighting both ISIS and Iran," said Aymenn Jawad Al-Tamimi, a research fellow at the Middle East Forum, using an acronym for Islamic State. "The U.S. can support the armies of the region, but it won't be able to counter Iran's work with the militias of the region, both of which are important to the battle against ISIS."

Parts of these incongruous alliances are sometimes turning on each other.

In Iraq, Shiite militias have helped Baghdad's military -- backed by U.S. forces on the ground -- clear towns and cities of Islamic State. Yet across the border in Syria, these Iraqi militias have clashed with U.S. Special Forces and their Syrian allies, turning Syria into one of the hottest flash points for American-Iranian confrontation in the region. Iran, Hezbollah and many of Iraq's major Shiite militias support the Damascus government.

Tal Afar has been a showcase for this tense tangle of friends and foes.

The U.S. has pushed for Iraq's military to lead the Tal Afar assault and sideline the Iraqi Shiite militias that have encircled the town for months, but Iran has pressured Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi to include them in the battle.

Iraq's elite counterterrorism forces -- which are largely trained and equipped by the U.S. -- are depleted after a grueling battle to recapture Iraq's second-largest city, Mosul. That nine-month fight wrapped up in July, but the withered ranks of Iraq's elite troops may force Baghdad to rely more on the Shiite militias in Tal Afar.

When Mr. Abadi announced the start of the battle in the early morning hours, he was vague on what role the Shiite militias would play.

"I tell all our fighters and the Iraqi people: You're on the victorious side and the world supports you and awaits your victory," Mr. Abadi said. "The international coalition will support you."

It wasn't clear how many Islamic State fighters remain in Tal Afar, but Iraq's Defense Ministry estimates there are as many as 1,500.

Iraqi forces are bombing the militants' defensive lines as they advance toward Tal Afar, while ground fighting is taking place in areas and villages around it, Iraqi military officials said. A small area outside the town called Al Abra Al Sageera was taken by the federal police and Shiite militias Sunday morning, they added.

In Lebanon, the latest offensive is a test for the army to prove it is able to clear Islamic State from the border region with Syria. While the army is leading the assault in the country's al-Qaa and Ras Baalbek areas, Hezbollah remains an important force in pressuring the group from the Syrian side of the border -- despite repeated assurances from government officials that the military would lead the battle.

The Lebanese military denies cooperating with Hezbollah. Hezbollah frequently points to the military's weakness as a reason for its existence. Its critics accuse the militia of undermining the military.

"Hezbollah is taking the lead in everything, the government is powerless, even the state institutions are not able to do anything," said Samy Gemayel, a parliamentarian and head of the Kataeb party, a Christian party opposed to Hezbollah.

The U.S. has tried to strengthen the Lebanese and Iraqi militaries through equipment and training, but the governments of both countries are forced to compete with Iran's donations to their irregular forces.

With Islamic State a diminished force, U.S. officials now worry Tehran will try to establish a route from the Iranian capital through Iraq, Syria and onto Lebanon to provide military aid to proxies and allies.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170821ed8l0000m



REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
This Time, Terror Hits Spain

318 words
18 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A14
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Recent terror attacks in Europe have been concentrated in the north, but Thursday's assault in Barcelona shows that the danger continues elsewhere. One or more attackers drove a van into a crowd, and officials say at least 12 people were killed and dozens injured. Islamic State claimed responsibility.

The attack occurred on Las Ramblas, a pedestrian boulevard popular with tourists in the height of Europe's vacation season. Terrorists have learned that vehicles can be effective weapons. Trucks killed 86 in Nice, France, and 12 in Berlin in 2016, and cars and vans were used in deadly sprees in London and Paris. ISIS offers a how-to manual online for this type of attack.

Spain last suffered a major attack in 2004, when al Qaeda killed 191 on commuter trains in Madrid. Al Qaeda was trying to punish Spain for joining America's coalition in the Iraq war and to sway an election. But Spain remains an Islamist target no matter its foreign policy. The Iberian peninsula was under Islamic rule for centuries, and extremists want to reconquer it.

They lack the military means to do so, but an internet connection is the only tool ISIS needs to radicalize individuals or small groups. Defeating ISIS in Syria and Iraq will diminish the group's claim to success and thus its power to inspire. But authorities warn that it could take a generation or more for extremism to burn itself out in the West. Governments in Europe will have to accelerate their crackdown on funding for extremist preaching and increase support for deradicalization.

Europe has also come late to the use of big data, tighter border checks and other counterterror techniques. The dangers are continental, not national, and authorities across Europe have to better coordinate their efforts to protect their public squares from mass murder.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170818ed8i00019



REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
This Time, Terror Hits Spain

365 words
18 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Terror attacks in Europe have been concentrated in the north in recent years, but Thursday's attack in Barcelona shows that the danger continues elsewhere. The incident, in which one or more attackers drove a van into a crowd, bears the hallmarks of the terrorism afflicting Britain, France, Belgium and Germany. Islamic State (ISIS) claimed responsibility.

Officials say at least 13 people have died and dozens have been injured. The attack occurred on Las Ramblas, a wide pedestrian boulevard popular with tourists in the height of Europe's summer vacation season. Terrorists have discovered that vehicles can be effective weapons. Trucks killed 86 in Nice, France, and 12 in Berlin in 2016, and cars and vans featured in a spate of deadly sprees in London and Paris. ISIS offers a how-to manual online for this type of attack.

Spain last suffered a major attack in 2004, when al Qaeda killed 191 on commuter trains in Madrid. That group was trying to punish Spain for joining America's coalition against the Taliban in Afghanistan and to sway an election. But Spain remains an Islamist target no matter its foreign policy. The Iberian peninsula was under Islamic rule for centuries, and extremists aspire to reconquer it.

They lack the military means to do so, but an internet connection is the only tool groups such as ISIS need to radicalize individuals or small groups. Such cells can act quickly and with little of the planning and coordination that might call them to the attention of police.

Defeating ISIS in Syria and Iraq will diminish the group's power to inspire. But authorities warn that it could take a generation or more for extremism to burn itself out in the West. Governments in Europe in particular will have to accelerate their crackdown on funding for extremist preaching and ramp up support for deradicalization.

Europe has also come late to the use of big data, tighter border checks and other counterterror techniques. The dangers are continental, not national, and authorities across Europe have to better coordinate their efforts to protect their public squares from mass murder.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170818ed8i0000z



U.S. News: Guilty Plea in Terror Case --- American is said to have accepted Islamic State funds to help pay for a U.S. attack

By Christopher S. Stewart and Mark Maremont 
756 words
17 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

An American man accused of accepting funds from Islamic State for a possible terrorist attack in the U.S. pleaded guilty to multiple terrorism-related charges.

Mohamed Elshinawy, who was living in Maryland when he was arrested in late 2015, pleaded guilty in Baltimore federal court Tuesday to four counts, including conspiring to provide material support to Islamic State.

The Elshinawy case was critical in uncovering a global financial network centered on a British technology company used by Islamic State to clandestinely move money around the world and pay for weaponized-drone technology used by the terrorist group in Syria, the U.S. says.

Mr. Elshinawy, 32, faces as many as 20 years in prison for each of the three most serious terrorism offenses. Both Mr. Elshinawy and the government have the ability to appeal the sentence, according to the plea-bargain agreement.

A lawyer for Mr. Elshinawy couldn't be reached.

His is the first and only publicly known case in which Islamic State money flowed into the U.S. for a potential terrorist attack in America, according to Seamus Hughes, deputy director of George Washington University's Program on Extremism.

The plot appeared to be "more sophisticated than other ISIS cases in America," Mr. Hughes said.

Federal investigators initially were tipped off to Mr. Elshinawy through a $1,000 Western Union money transfer to him from Egypt in June 2015, sent by an Islamic State operative whom authorities haven't publicly identified, according to a Federal Bureau of Investigation affidavit and a person familiar with the situation.

FBI agents spent months tailing Mr. Elshinawy and combing through his transactions, eventually finding at least $8,700 he allegedly had received from Islamic State operatives.

To hide some of the money transfers, Mr. Elshinawy pretended to sell computer printers on eBay, then received funds from the British company through the online payment service PayPal, according to an FBI affidavit.

A spokesman for eBay Inc. said the company worked closely with law enforcement to bring Mr. Elshinawy to justice. "We have zero tolerance for criminal activity on eBay and have robust systems in place to identify and prevent it," he said, adding that "nothing indicated that these were anything but legitimate transactions."

A spokeswoman for PayPal Holdings Inc. said it "invests significant time and resources in working to prevent terrorist activity on our platform."

Mr. Elshinawy told FBI agents he was instructed to use the money for "operational purposes," which he understood to mean a terrorist attack.

He told agents he had no intention of carrying out such an attack and instead was taking money from "thieves," an FBI affidavit indicated.

Though several major U.S. attacks have been inspired by Islamic State, none are known to have been directly financed by the group, unlike attacks in Europe and elsewhere.

U.S. prosecutors have charged 131 people in terrorism cases connected to Islamic State, according to the George Washington University Extremism Program. Most are U.S. citizens or permanent residents; 77 have been convicted or pleaded guilty, including Mr. Elshinawy.

When Mr. Elshinawy hit the radar of federal investigators, he was living with a woman in a one-bedroom apartment in a bungalow complex outside Baltimore.

Born in Pittsburgh, Mr. Elshinawy mostly grew up in Egypt in a family of academics. By 2007, he was living in the U.S., according to his resume, which is posted online. He delivered newspapers, worked at a convenience store and at a company that sold firearm accessories and other outdoor supplies through eBay, the resume says.

Mr. Elshinawy returned to Egypt at least twice, where his parents still lived, according to former landlords and his resume. It was during a more-recent such trip that Mr. Elshinawy turned to Islamic State, federal investigators say.

He reunited there with a childhood friend who introduced him to a member of the terrorist group, which was looking for operatives in the U.S., a person familiar with the case said. They needed a "gofer," this person said, someone to support or carry out an attack.

In February 2015, Mr. Elshinawy pledged allegiance to Islamic State on social media and later said he planned to die a martyr, according to an FBI affidavit.

What he planned to attack in the U.S. is unclear.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170816ed8h00009



US
American Pleads Guilty to Accepting Islamic State Money to Fund Terrorism; American received the funds online for a possible terrorist attack in U.S., prosectors say

By Christopher S. Stewart and Mark Maremont 
1,104 words
15 August 2017
23:23
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

An American man accused of accepting funds from Islamic State for a possible terror attack in the U.S. pleaded guilty Tuesday to multiple terrorism-related charges.

Mohamed Elshinawy, who was living in Maryland when he was arrested in late 2015, pleaded guilty in Baltimore federal court to four counts, including conspiring to provide material support to Islamic State.

The Elshinawy case was critical in uncovering a global financial network centered on a British technology company used by Islamic State to clandestinely move money around the world and pay for weaponized drone technology used by the terror group in Syria, the U.S. says.

Mr. Elshinawy, 32, faces up to 20 years in prison for each of the three most serious terrorism offenses. Both Mr. Elshinawy and the government have the ability to appeal the sentence, according to the plea-bargain agreement.

A lawyer for Mr. Elshinawy couldn't immediately be reached.

His is the first and only publicly known case in which Islamic State money flowed into the U.S. for a potential terror attack in America, according to Seamus Hughes, deputy director of George Washington University's Program on Extremism.

The plot appeared to be "more sophisticated than other ISIS cases in America," Mr. Hughes says.

Federal investigators initially were tipped off to Mr. Elshinawy through a $1,000 Western Union money transfer to him from Egypt in June 2015, sent by an Islamic State operative whom authorities haven't publicly identified, according to a Federal Bureau of Investigation affidavit and a person familiar with the situation.

FBI agents spent months tailing Mr. Elshinawy and combing through his transactions, eventually finding at least $8,700 he allegedly had received from Islamic State operatives.

To hide some of the money transfers, Mr. Elshinawy pretended to sell computer printers on eBay, then received funds from the British company through the online payment service PayPal, according to an FBI affidavit.

A spokesman for eBay said the company worked closely with law enforcement to bring Mr. Elshinawy to justice. "We have zero tolerance for criminal activity on eBay and have robust systems in place to identify and prevent it," he said, adding that "nothing indicated that these were anything but legitimate transactions."

A spokeswoman for PayPal Holdings Inc. said it "invests significant time and resources in working to prevent terrorist activity on our platform."

Mr. Elshinawy told FBI agents he was instructed to use the money for "operational purposes," which he understood to mean a terror attack.

He told agents he had no intention of carrying out such an attack, and instead was taking money from "thieves," an FBI affidavit indicated.

Though several major U.S. attacks have been inspired by Islamic State, none are known to have been directly financed by the terror group, unlike attacks in Europe and elsewhere.

U.S. prosecutors have charged 131 people in terror cases connected to Islamic State, according to the George Washington University Extremism Program. Most are U.S. citizens or permanent residents; 77 have been convicted or pleaded guilty, including Mr. Elshinawy.

When Mr. Elshinawy hit the radar of federal investigators, he was living with a woman in a one-bedroom apartment in a bungalow complex outside Baltimore.

Born in Pittsburgh, Mr. Elshinawy mostly grew up in Egypt in a family of academics. By 2007, he was living in the U.S., according to his réumé which is posted online. He delivered newspapers, worked at a convenience store and at a company that sold firearm accessories and other outdoor supplies through eBay, the réuméays.

Mr. Elshinawy, known as "Mo," at one point drove a station wagon with a passenger window that didn't work and a glove compartment stuffed with unpaid speeding tickets, people who knew him said.

He returned to Egypt at least twice, where his parents still lived, according to former landlords and his réumé It was during a more-recent such trip that Mr. Elshinawy turned to Islamic State, federal investigators say.

He reunited there with a childhood friend who introduced him to a member of the terror group, which was looking for operatives in the U.S., a person familiar with the case said. They needed a "gofer," this person said, someone to support or carry out an attack.

In February 2015, Mr. Elshinawy pledged allegiance to Islamic State on social media and later said he planned to die a martyr, according to an FBI affidavit. He took steps to conceal his online and cellphone communications, the affidavit says, including the use of encrypted technologies and throwaway phones, which he registered to fake names like "Black Eyes."

What he planned to attack in the U.S. is unclear. He told his childhood friend over social media he had "many targets" and the two discussed an explosive device that Mr. Elshinawy said he planned to make, according to an FBI affidavit.

When the FBI first interviewed Mr. Elshinawy in July 2015 about suspicious money coming from Egypt, he told them it was a present from his mother, according to court documents. He later admitted it came from an ISIS operative.

As they dug into his online history, investigators found a tangle of financial transactions stretching back through that spring.

The hub of the financial network operated through the British technology company founded by the now-dead computer hacker for Islamic State, Siful Sujan, according to the an affidavit.

The company and affiliates bought military-grade surveillance equipment, antennas and anti-bugging devices from companies in the U.S., Canada and Britain, the FBI alleged.

At one point, investigators received an alert that Mr. Elshinawy had been arrested after a speeding violation. They made sure local police didn't do anything to compromise the investigation, according to the person.

Authorities around the globe, including in Britain and Bangladesh, arrested alleged members of the Islamic State financing network in a coordinated sweep in December 2015. Mr. Sujan, the alleged mastermind, was killed in a drone strike in Syria at the same time.

Hours after the strike, several dark vehicles pulled in front of Mr. Elshinawy's single-story bungalow complex, neighbors said. One car drove over the grass to the back entrance. Agents used a battering ram to break down the front door of the apartment, and hauled away Mr. Elshinawy.

Write to Christopher S. Stewart at christopher.stewart@wsj.com and Mark Maremont at mark.maremont@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170815ed8f00461



US
Tillerson Critiques Friends, Foes in Annual Religious Freedom Report; The first such assessment during the Trump administration criticizes  ISIS  genocide as well as key U.S. allies Saudi Arabia and Turkey

By Felicia Schwartz 
722 words
15 August 2017
23:46
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—ecretary of State Rex Tillerson criticized key allies Saudi Arabia and Turkey and said Islamic State is carrying out genocide during the release of an annual report on religious freedom on Tuesday, the first such presentation under the Trump administration.

The nation's chief diplomat said the Trump administration is committed to "advancing religious freedom around the world," and cited several "troubling examples" of abuses, including the persecution of religious minorities in Iran, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, China, Pakistan, Bahrain and Sudan.

"No one should have to live in fear, worship in secret, or face discrimination because of his or her beliefs," Mr. Tillerson said, speaking to reporters in a diplomatic reception room at the State Department.

The report, which is mandated by Congress, covers the year 2016 and makes no mention of President Donald Trump's push to ban immigration from six Muslim-majority countries and halt the refugee resettlement program, a move that he says is for security reasons.

During the 2016 campaign, Mr. Trump called for a "complete and total shutdown" of Muslims entering the United States. Lawyers have used these statements in challenges of Mr. Trump's executive order on the travel ban, which the U.S. Supreme Court will fully review on Oct. 10.

A report from a Muslim American civil rights organization released earlier this year found that hate crimes against Muslims in the U.S. increased by 44% in 2016.

Their assessment also calls the refugee resettlement program "a vital tool" for helping persecuted religious minorities, and hailed the U.S. as a world leader in refugee resettlement. Mr. Trump proposed cutting the number of refugees resettled from 85,000 in 2016 to 50,000 in 2017.

The U.S. has so far resettled roughly 50,900 refugees in fiscal year 2017, which began in October, according to State Department data.

"In the areas liberated from ISIS, the preferred option is to allow people to return to their traditional villages and areas," said Michael Kozak, a senior official in the State Department's bureau of democracy, human rights and labor. "We don't want to uproot communities that have been there for thousands of years and take them elsewhere if we can help provide them with the security and other means that they need to be able to resume their traditional role as valued members of their own societies."

In July, the Supreme Court allowed a partial version of Mr. Trump's refugee and immigration ban to go ahead, including denying entry to refugees who have no family ties to the U.S.

The report includes no assessment of religious freedom conditions in the United States.

"We do not grade ourselves," Mr. Kozak said.

Mr. Tillerson said Islamic State is "clearly responsible for genocide against Yazidis, Christians, and Shia Muslims in areas it controls or has controlled." He also faulted the terrorist group, which seized large swaths of territory in Iraq and Syria in 2014, for carrying out crimes against humanity and "ethnic cleansing."

He faulted Turkey for limiting human rights of some religious minority groups and called on them to release Andrew Brunson, an American pastor who Mr. Tillerson described as "wrongfully imprisoned."

On Saudi Arabia, a close U.S. ally that Mr. Trump visited in May and said the U.S. did not aim to "to tell other people how to live, what to do, who to be, or how to worship," Mr. Tillerson urged that Riyadh allow greater degrees of religious freedom for all citizens.

"The government does not recognize the right of non-Muslims to practice their religion in public," Mr. Tillerson said, citing harsh punishments for doing so. "Of particular concern are attacks targeting Shia Muslims, and the continued pattern of social prejudice and discrimination against them."

The Trump administration recently nominated Gov. Sam Brownback (R., Kansas) to be head the State Department's religious freedom office. Mr. Tillerson noted he would be the highest ranking person to serve in the role.

Mr. Tillerson faced criticism earlier this year for skipping a presentation of an annual human rights assessment, also performed by the State Department.

Document WSJO000020170815ed8f006sh



Markets
Pullback on Wall Street Rules | Investors Take On Mortgage Risk From Taxpayers | Fiduciary Rule Casualty | Ackerman's Take: Dilemma Over Fannie, Freddie Finances; The Wall Street Journal's financial regulation newsletter for Monday, August 14, 2017.

7,958 words
14 August 2017
13:39
WSJ Pro Financial Regulation
RSTPROFR
English
Copyright ©017, Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

Ackerman's Take: Dilemma Over Fannie, Freddie Finances

Trump Chips Away at Postcrisis Wall Street Rules

Investors Take On Mortgage Risk From Taxpayers

Fiduciary Rule Casualty: Brokers' Mutual-Fund Offerings

Search Is On for Top Audit Regulator

Dilemma Over Fannie, Freddie Finances

Federal Housing Finance Agency chief Mel Watt has warned for months that he might order Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to build up cash buffers to insulate themselves against future losses. He recently indicated he's still looking for political cover to follow through with his plan.

Mr. Watt is facing a "damned if you do, damned if you don't" situation that has no easy answers.

At issue are the mortgage-finance giants' ultra-thin capital levels, which will drop to zero in January under the terms of their federal bailouts. As a result, should the companies suffer an operating loss, they would have no capital to absorb it and would be forced to draw on their $258 billion government backstop. That would be interpreted as yet another bailout for the companies and, according to Mr. Watt, could trigger "adverse" market consequences.

To avoid that scenario, Mr. Watt has said he might order the companies to retain earnings rather than to continue sending them to the Treasury Department (as they currently do under the terms of their bailouts). But so far he's received no political support from the Trump administration or key congressional Republicans to make such a change.

(Meanwhile, the companies signaled earlier this month that they might not make their quarterly dividend payment to Treasury at the end of September— move that could divert about $5 billion from federal coffers just as the government's debt ceiling needs to be raised.)

Mr. Watt seems now to acknowledge he's stuck: He wants to order the companies to begin to build up their capital buffers, but there are significant political pitfalls for doing do.

"I have publicly expressed my concerns that the declining capital buffers leave the enterprises with little or no ability to absorb losses," he wrote the National Association of Realtors last week. "However, I am sensitive to the prospect that whatever steps FHFA could take might be misperceived as either an effort to promote recapitalization and release of the enterprises [from government control] or as interference with Congress's important work to advance housing finance reform."

To be sure, Mr. Watt didn't rule out eventually requiring the companies to retain their profits, but his letter suggests he is eager to see some political momentum to back such a move, saying he will "continue to look for ways to ensure that the concerns I have expressed are addressed constructively."

Mr. Watt is an Obama-administration appointee whose term expires in January 2019.

A spokeswoman for Mr. Watt declined to comment on the letter, which came in response to a Realtor-backed plan to allow the mortgage-finance firms to begin retaining some of their profits while Congress deliberates on how to refashion them. The National Association of Realtors says allowing the companies to retain some of their earnings would create a buffer between any losses and taxpayers, who would be on the hook should the companies need to draw on their Treasury backstop.

William Brown, the group's president, said in a written statement that his members "appreciate" Mr. Watt's attention to the issue.

Key Developments in Washington, on Wall Street, and Beyond

Trump Chips Away at Postcrisis Wall Street Rules

By Ryan Tracy and Dave Michaels

Efforts toward financial deregulation are beginning to take concrete shape on rules governing trading desks, bank boardrooms, corporations' financial disclosures and more. Nearly seven months into the Trump administration, regulators are setting the stage for a wave of eased rules.

Several agencies are reviewing the Volcker rule, a part of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act that limits banks' trading. Some regulators also recently dropped a plan to restrict bonuses on Wall Street that had been opposed by banks and brokerage firms. And the Labor Department on Wednesday disclosed an 18-month delay in the so-called fiduciary rule that requires brokers to act in retirement savers' best interests rather than their own.

The moves show that while President Donald Trump is struggling to advance his legislative agenda in Congress, his administration has begun laying the groundwork to change some of the myriad rules that Wall Street has sought for years to overturn or water down.

"On most topics, we are still awaiting the approval of appointees, but it is encouraging that there are some issues, some of which are technical but incredibly important to running a bank, where some progress is being made," said Greg Baer, president of the Clearing House Association of large banks.

"It is a time to…etermine where the pendulum has gone too far," Craig Phillips, counselor to U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, told a government-advisory committee July 20 at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Mr. Phillips, a former investment banker and senior executive at BlackRock Inc., has been leading the administration's effort to identify changes to financial rules. He was a principal author of a Treasury Department report released in June that recommended 97 policies in the lending sector for Congress and regulators to re-examine. More reports are coming, covering other sectors.

So far, the rule book for Wall Street hasn't been rewritten in major ways, in part because nominees for some key posts haven't been named or are awaiting Senate confirmation. But officials who are in place are laying the groundwork.

Those efforts are triggering pushback about whether they would undermine protections adopted after the 2008 bank bailouts. Ohio Sen. Sherrod Brown, the top Democrat on the Senate Banking Committee, has said many of the proposals amount to "weakening or eliminating important safeguards."

"Big banks are making record profits, yet they claim they're besieged by their watchdogs," he said last month.

Mr. Baer calls the changes under consideration "an effort to rethink things in a cogent way."

Partisan tensions on Capitol Hill will make it difficult to make changes through legislation, meaning some items on the industry's wish list, such as full repeal of the Volcker rule, are unlikely. But that inertia doesn't restrict agency officials, who typically have broad discretion on how to implement rules that stem from legislation Congress has passed.

The current regulatory agenda of the Securities and Exchange Commission, published in July, removed more than a dozen proposals related to Dodd-Frank, including the plan to restrict bonuses.

The commission's Trump-nominated chairman, Jay Clayton, has said he wants to lighten the regulatory burden on public companies, which are required to make public filings to keep shareholders informed about financial performance, business trends and potential risks.

He hasn't taken action to scale back those rules yet, but his predecessor Michael Piwowar, a Republican SEC commissioner tapped by Mr. Trump to serve as acting chairman until Mr. Clayton was confirmed, started work toward changing two rules. One requires disclosure of the pay gap between chief executives and workers, and another requires companies to investigate whether their products include minerals from African countries where mining can benefit armed groups. Any significant changes to the rules would require an opportunity for public comment and a commission vote.

Mr. Clayton, in remarks last month to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, also questioned whether small shareholders are abusing an election process that allows them to seek changes to corporate bylaws.

A more radical SEC step under study is how to revise the rules for who can invest in private companies. U.S. law allows companies to issue stock with little regulatory oversight as long as all investors qualify as wealthy or sophisticated enough to understand the risk or withstand potential losses. But Mr. Piwowar has questioned the restriction, saying it walls off sought-after investments for the rich.

The SEC and the four other federal agencies that wrote the Volcker rule agreed in recent weeks to give banks leeway on aspects of the regulation while beginning private discussions about how to rewrite it.

The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the chief agency that regulates federally chartered banks and which is temporarily led by a Trump appointee, took the first tangible step toward potentially rewriting the rule when it reopened it for comments from the public.

In early August, the Senate confirmed three of Mr. Trump's nominees to the U.S. derivatives regulator, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, including Chairman J. Christopher Giancarlo. That representation will strengthen the commission's ability to carry out Mr. Giancarlo's desired revamp of postcrisis rules governing the swaps market.

Mr. Trump in July announced his pick for the vacant job of Federal Reserve vice chairman in charge of bank oversight. The nominee, financier and former Treasury Department official Randal Quarles, has said he would support reviews of the Volcker rule as well as the central bank's annual stress tests of large banks.

Staffers at the Fed already are taking a fresh look at a bank-capital rule known as the leverage ratio, a move long sought by the largest U.S. banks, according to people familiar with the matter.

And the Fed in August proposed scaling back requirements it places on banks' boards of directors, after determining it was overloading boards with too many specific requirements.

Not all the action is deregulatory. The new CFTC commissioners recently vowed to finish a position-limits rule to limit speculation in commodity markets, a regulation mandated by Dodd-Frank.

The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, still led by an Obama appointee, in early July restricted mandatory arbitration in financial contracts, making it easier for consumers to sue financial companies. That rule won't last if enough Republicans in the Senate vote to repeal it in the coming weeks.

—abriel T. Rubin contributed to this article.

Investors Take On Mortgage Risk From Taxpayers

By Sam Goldfarb

Investors are snapping up a new type of security sold by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, increasingly assuming the risks of mortgage defaults from taxpayers and powering a quiet transformation of the housing giants after almost a decade of government control.

Fannie and Freddie have sold roughly $48 billion of the securities since 2013 to a broadening group of buyers including asset managers and insurance companies. Sales are expected to reach a fresh high of $15 billion this year, up from the previous record $13 billion last year, according to J.P. Morgan Securities.

The sales mark an early step toward reducing the government's role in the $14.4 trillion U.S. mortgage market. The amount of mortgage debt funneled through Fannie and Freddie and other taxpayer-backed entities roughly doubled after the financial crisis, to around 70%.

The progress has come despite a long-running stalemate in Congress, which has stumbled in its effort to design a replacement for the decades-old housing-finance system that centers on Fannie and Freddie.

It may not be happening as people anticipated, but "the government's footprint in the mortgage market is receding quickly and significantly," said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody's Analytics.

The market for the so-called credit-risk transfers has boomed even as the one for privately issued mortgage-backed securities has remained mostly dormant, a sign that investors have greater comfort in the standards and transparency of these deals than in those issued by Wall Street banks that performed so poorly after the housing bust.

Fannie and Freddie don't make loans. They buy them from lenders and bundle them into securities. Those bonds typically carry a guarantee that Fannie and Freddie will pay investors if underlying mortgages default, leaving investors only with the risk that the bonds will lose value if interest rates rise.

The credit-risk transfers don't carry that guarantee. Nevertheless, they have proved popular with investors, who have concluded that the yields they offer are worth the added risk. As the market has developed, banks have also been willing to trade them, easing concerns that they would need to offer premium yields because they would be difficult for buyers to offload.

Reflecting the strong interest, the average yield that investors have demanded to hold one version of the instrument has fallen by more than half in just two years, to roughly 1.5 percentage points on top of a benchmark floating interest rate, according to J.P. Morgan Securities.

The pool of investors buying the securities is also widening to what many consider more stable sources of capital, a sign of their changing status. While hedge funds made up the largest group of early investors, that distinction now belongs to more traditional money managers, according to J.P. Morgan Securities. Though still small players in the market, insurance companies and real-estate investment trusts have also increased their buying in some recent deals.

Gene Tannuzzo, senior portfolio manager at Columbia Threadneedle, said he bought both Fannie and Freddie risk-transfers for the firm's Strategic Income Fund and then sold them as the market rallied.

"Liquidity has definitely improved as more securities have been issued," he said.

The mortgage giants are transferring risk on the loans most likely to default—hose of more than 20 years where homeowners have made less than a 40% down payment. Last year such mortgages accounted for 60% of all single-family mortgages they acquired, according to the Federal Housing Finance Agency, which oversees the firms.

How much risk Fannie and Freddie have shed depends in part on the severity of defaults. In a normal economic expansion, investors would likely shoulder around 20% of the losses in the mortgages underlying the securities, according to a new report by Moody's Analytics.

But that number would jump to around 60% to 70% if there was another severe recession comparable to the last one—nough, if the firms were private, to possibly avoid a federal bailout, according to the Moody's report, which was written by analysts including Mr. Zandi.

The variability is a result of the securities' structure. Each comprises several tranches, linked to a pool of mortgages, with losses from defaults hitting the bottom tranche first and the top tranche last.

On almost all securities, Fannie and Freddie still own the riskiest and the safest tranches, seeing it as uneconomical to sell them to investors. That means they are exposed to mild losses, largely shielded from moderate to severe losses, but vulnerable again once defaults reach a catastrophic level.

The securities are one part of a larger government effort to revamp the housing giants. Since being placed under conservatorship in 2008—hen then-Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson said the government had a responsibility to address their systemic risk—he firms have adopted a more stable business model by shrinking their once massive investment portfolios and raising the fees they charge lenders to guarantee mortgages. They have also joined forces to build a common system for securitizing home loans that could ultimately be used by other firms.

The securities aren't without controversy. Some observers have expressed concerns that Fannie and Freddie are paying investors too much for the risk they're shedding. Investors could also demand sharply higher yields in a market downturn, forcing Fannie and Freddie to either stop selling the securities, increasing their exposure to future defaults, or raise fees they charge lenders, potentially making home loans more expensive.

The securities have been also been drawn into a larger debate about what the government should do with Fannie and Freddie, which stand in limbo between the public and private sectors—ending nearly all of their profits to the U.S. Treasury despite reporting quarterly earnings and having outstanding shares.

Some of the securities' strongest advocates include those who want the companies to be dismantled, replaced with a larger number of private firms or a single, government-run utility, which they say would disperse risk and avoid another taxpayer-funded bailout.

Many shareholders, however, want to preserve the companies in near their current form while releasing them from conservatorship. One group has funded a proposal that would provide incentives for the institutions to issue risk transfers without mandating them.

Risk-transfers are a useful tool, said Landon Parsons, a senior adviser at Moelis & Company, which created the plan, but they "may not be available during a business cycle downturn at a reasonable cost."

Fiduciary Rule Casualty: Brokers' Mutual-Fund Offerings

By Daisy Maxey

Is less more when it comes to investor choice? That's the question facing brokerage firms and investment advisers as they look to comply with a landmark retirement-savings rule.

Large brokerage firms typically offer thousands of mutual funds to clients. But compliance demands of the fiduciary rule, which began to take effect in June and requires stewards of tax-advantaged retirement savings to act in clients' best interests rather than their own, are causing some firms to review their offerings.

Conducting the due diligence and documentation required on so many investments can be onerous, and under the rule, some firms may face increased litigation risks. As a result, brokerages may remove some funds—ncluding those with higher fees or those that present perceived risks—rom their sales platforms.

"If you have more than 5,000 mutual funds on your platform, that oversight is a lot of work," said Alma Piscitello, executive vice president of Northern Lights Distributors, which provides underwriting services and counsels investment managers on fund distribution.

Some brokerage and advisory firms have already told Northern Lights of funds being pulled from brokerage platforms because of the fiduciary rule, generally because of size or expense, Ms. Piscitello said.

Under the Obama-era regulation, which aims to eliminate conflicted advice that can arise based on incentives to sell financial products, those offering financial advice to retirement savers may earn commissions and compensation that might give them an incentive to recommend one product over another, but must do so under an exemption. For advisers who use the exemption, any fees must be level with similar investment products or services. That has put mutual funds, with their varying share classes and costs, under the spotlight.

Advocates of the rule say weeding out high-cost or risky funds would benefit investors. But some managers fear the fund review will cause sales of their products to suffer and that fund expenses may be used as the key metric in the process, while financial advisers worry that funds they've used in clients' portfolios for years will be discontinued.

USA Financial hasn't cut any funds from its brokerage platform, but the Michigan-based financial-services firm has vetted its investment offerings with the fiduciary rule in mind, said Matt McGrew, the firm's chief operations officer.

If nothing changes and the rule takes full effect in January as planned, USA Financial anticipates cutting its more than 350 sales agreements across mutual funds, variable annuities, alternative investment and asset managers to "well less than 150," Mr. McGrew said.

But the rule remains in flux, with the Labor Department on Wednesday proposing to delay the compliance deadline by 18 months, which experts say suggests the rule still may undergo significant revisions.

Mark Travis, president and chief executive of Intrepid Capital Management in Jacksonville Beach, Fla., said some advisers who have sold his funds for years told him recently their firms plan to stop. Clients who already have money invested in Intrepid's funds will be able to stay invested, the advisers said, but no new money will be allowed on some brokerage platforms after the rule takes full effect.

Mr. Travis said one adviser is pushing back, telling his home office that he wants to continue offering Intrepid's funds as portfolio protection for clients. But, Mr. Travis said, the adviser has been told to have "a plan B" ready.

Investor shares of Intrepid's flagship $421.9 million Intrepid Capital Fund have an expense ratio of 1.4% compared with 0.91% for the median fund in its category, according to Morningstar Inc.

"That's a significant fee hurdle," said Jason Kephart, a senior analyst at Morningstar. Still, the fund's long-term performance has been solid, he added. The fund, which focuses on protecting investors' capital, lost just 16.7% in 2008 during the financial crisis as its average peer shed 28%.

Among bigger brokerages cutting fund offerings, some cite the fiduciary rule as impetus while others say it's simply part of regular due diligence.

LPL Financial said it plans to launch a new mutual-fund platform early next year to standardize advisers' compensation to comply with the rule. The platform will offer fewer fund families than its existing platform and limit upfront commissions and trailing fees, or annual commissions.

Bank of America Corp.'s Merrill Lynch unit last year trimmed its mutual-fund offerings to 2,200 from 3,500, and expects to cut that number to 1,800 by year's end. The move is part of an enhanced due-diligence process and regular evaluation of its lineup, and not related to the fiduciary rule, a spokeswoman said.

Advisers who are using funds that have been cut from fee-based accounts can keep their existing positions, the spokeswoman said, but must do so within commission-based accounts and won't be permitted to add new assets.

To comply with the fiduciary rule, Merrill has shifted to fee-based retirement accounts with some limited exceptions.

Advocates of the rule had hoped it would lead to a re-evaluation of investment offerings. The Obama administration said its goal in pursuing the rule was to protect unwitting individual investors from conflicted advice, which it said costs American families billions of dollars a year and pushes down annual returns on their retirement savings.

"It was always a feature of this rule that it was going to force investment products to compete under a best-interest standard instead of competing to be sold by paying the broker more generously," said Barbara Roper, director of investor protection at the Consumer Federation of America. "Forcing investment products to compete based on cost and quality will be best for investors, even if every decision made in narrowing these fund menus doesn't optimize the outcome."

Search Is On for Top Audit Regulator

By Dave Michaels

WASHINGTON—ne of the highest-paying jobs in regulating Wall Street is about to be open—nd the boss is taking applications.

U.S. officials are looking to hire a new chairman of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, a little-known body that oversees the country's largest accounting firms and their audits of public companies and broker-dealers, according to a statement issued Friday. The role, created by the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley law, pays more than $670,000 a year.

The PCAOB, as it is known, is a nonprofit regulator that is overseen by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The SEC's commissioners also pick the audit regulator's chairman and other members of its board. The term of the current chairman, James Doty, expired in October 2015, but he stayed in the role because SEC commissioners didn't act to replace him.

The SEC's announcement said it is seeking a successor to Mr. Doty, indicating he won't be reappointed. Mr. Doty has led the body since 2011 and sometimes clashed with the biggest audit firms over proposals that sought to shine more light on the behind-the-scenes work of auditors. In June, for instance, the accounting board approved a rule that requires auditors to disclose more about any "critical audit matters"—reas of their audit that were especially challenging or complex or forced them to make tough decisions in evaluating a company's books.

Congress set relatively lofty salaries for the audit regulator's board members to attract qualified candidates from the legal and accounting fields. Board members at the agency make about $546,000 a year.

Seats on the audit regulator are especially attractive to lawyers and accountants in Washington, D.C., who have toiled at government agencies where they earn far less.

Mr. Doty had a mixed record as chairman. Business groups sometimes complained his inspectors were too tough on audit firms. He was also forced several years ago to retreat from an idea to make companies rotate their auditors after several years.

The SEC briefly considered replacing Mr. Doty in September 2015, just before his term expired. At the time, the candidates for the job included William Duhnke, a top Republican staff member on the Senate Banking Committee. Mr. Duhnke is now staff director of the Senate Rules and Administration Committee, according to LegiStorm, a Congress-focused research firm. He couldn't immediately be reached for comment.

The SEC said it is accepting applications for two other board seats on the PCAOB because a current member's term has expired and another's will end in October. Candidates interested in any of the roles should apply by Sept. 1, the SEC said.

China's State Firms Make Room for the Communist Party on Their Boards

By Gregor Stuart Hunter and Steven Russolillo

A push to establish the Communist Party in Chinese state enterprises is rolling through Hong Kong, raising corporate-governance concerns in one of the year's best-performing stock markets.

Since 2016, at least 32 Chinese state-owned companies or units listed in Hong Kong have proposed changes to their corporate structures to install Communist Party committees that advise their boards of directors. The moves, most coming in recent months, are prompting questions from market participants about who holds power at these companies, and whether they will be run for the benefit of investors.

The changes follow directives from Beijing, which has been pushing to establish the Communist Party's role in corporate charters on the mainland. They make explicit what many had already assumed: that China's ruling party—he country's sole governing authority despite the existence of several other political parties—eeps a tight grip on the country's state-owned firms. Those firms now make up the bulk of Hong Kong's market.

For the past two decades, Beijing has listed the stocks and bonds of its state-owned enterprises in Hong Kong—he offshore finance center with a separate business-friendly legal system—s a means of raising capital from global investors to fuel China's economic expansion.

The companies now placing their boards under Party guidance include some of the biggest listed in Hong Kong, with a combined market capitalization of 9.7 trillion Hong Kong dollars—lmost a third of the total value of stocks listed on the city's exchange.

They include China's biggest bank, Industrial & Commercial Bank of China, its largest brokerage, Citic Securities, and oil-and-gas giant China Petroleum & Chemical Corp., better known as Sinopec.

Many of the companies have passed amendments to their corporate structures and others are being put to shareholder vote in the next few weeks.

"When making decisions on significant matters, the Board shall seek advice from the Party committee of the Company," reads the amended article of association of Beijing-based engineering contractor China Machinery Engineering Corp.

Not all big state-owned enterprises have changed their charters. PetroChina Co., the listed unit of China's biggest oil company, whose shares trade in Shanghai, Hong Kong and New York, hasn't done so. PetroChina declined to comment.

So far, the Hong Kong stock market has largely ignored the moves, with the benchmark Hang Seng Index up 22% this year and hovering near a two-year high.

The stocks and bonds those companies issue comprise a major chunk of some benchmarks widely used by global investors, such as the MSCI Emerging Markets Index. The development is making some fund managers uneasy.

These latest disclosures provide "more questions than answers," said Jamie Grant, head of Asia fixed income at First State Investments. Mr. Grant said his firm has been assessing whether the changes affect the value of some of their stock and bond portfolios, since they noticed the amendments quietly being implemented this summer.

If the changes reflect an advance in Chinese President Xi Jinping's corruption crackdown, they may ultimately benefit investors, Mr. Grant said. Alternatively, they could be part of an attempt by the Communist Party to curb high debt levels, he added.

Outspoken private investor and former Hong Kong stock exchange director David Webb is more critical.

Making the Communist Party's role official provides companies "with cover to follow party instructions and reduces the chance that they will prioritize shareholder value," Mr. Webb wrote in an email. "It underlines the falsity of [Chinese] leaders' claims to be ‘etting market forces play a greater role' and ‘eepening reforms.'"

None of the Chinese companies that disclosed these changes responded to requests for comment. The Chinese body that oversees state enterprises, State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission, or SASAC, wasn't available to comment.

The amendments underscore the growing dominance of mainland companies and capital in Hong Kong. Mainland investors have flooded into Hong Kong's property market and are buying up an increasing proportion of the stock market via new trading links with Shanghai and Shenzhen.

Chinese government agencies have also blocked accountancy firms in Hong Kong from producing mainland-company documents that have been requested by regulators in other countries, citing national secrecy concerns.

President Xi Jinping is pushing the Communist Party to take a more visible leadership role in society, with state-owned enterprises at the forefront. Two years ago, the government called for "strengthened Party leadership and improved corporate governance" and to enshrine the Party's role in corporate charters.

SASAC ordered state firms under central government control to make the changes by June end, while local governments are giving companies they control until the end of the year to comply.

The push has accelerated since April, Hong Kong and Shanghai exchange filings indicate. Several of the Hong Kong-listed companies that have mandated the creation of Communist Party committees said their boards would take into account the opinions of those committees "before making decisions on major matters." Some stated that the chairman of the board and the secretary of the Party committee should be the same person. Many of the companies also established disciplinary committees to police corruption.

China Aluminum International Engineering Corp. stated in its amended articles of association that its Communist Party committee would help create "an effective system under which no one dares to, or can be corrupted, or thinks of committing corruption."

One portfolio manager at a global investment firm expressed concern about the involvement of Party members in the corporate decision-making process, particularly since they might not have the best interests of the company or its shareholders in mind. Valuations could suffer as a result, he said.

As a group, the 32 companies that have allowed the Communist party greater influence currently are valued roughly 24% cheaper than the Hang Seng Index.

But shareholders of state companies who object to the increased Communist Party influence can't do much about it. Most state-owned enterprises are majority-owned by Beijing, which has enough voting rights to force through the changes.

Hong Kong's market regulator, the Securities and Futures Commission, declined to comment on the trend.

A spokeswoman for Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing, the city's stock market operator, said the Chinese state firms were following listing rules, though it had noted some "minor variations" in their articles of association.

—anfan Wang and Yifan Xie contributed to this article.

Ex-Trader Seeks Redemption for ‘ntellectual Grift'

By Matt Wirz

"God it smells like dead animal in here," says Chris Arnade, a former bond trader, as he opens the doors of his battered minivan in an attempt to clear the baked-in stink.

It's 105 degrees in the parking lot of a Bakersfield, Calif., McDonald's on a recent Saturday. Homeless men and women pass by on their way to get breakfast, free ice or to sit in the air conditioning.

Mr. Arnade walked away from Wall Street after 20 years to photograph and write about America's disaffected poor. His work, especially on how economic inequality contributed to Donald Trump's political ascent, has garnered a large following of fans—nd detractors—cross the political spectrum.

Mr. Arnade's unusual bipartisan appeal—oth Arkansas Republican Sen. Tom Cotton and billionaire Democratic fundraiser Chris Sacca invited him to lunch this spring—eflects the contradictions of a life spent straddling social and economic divides.

He grew up lower middle class in the rural south, where his family stuck out for its civil rights activism. He made millions on Wall Street from what he calls "intellectual grift," while spending his days arguing for liberal economic changes with conservative co-workers.

The 52-year-old Mr. Arnade says the new career is a conscious attempt to reconcile his multiple identities, and perhaps atone for his time in finance.

"This is more comfortable to me," he says, waving his hand at the foot traffic around the Bakersfield McDonald's. "This is what I grew up with."

Tall and unshaven with shoulder-length graying hair, Mr. Arnade has swapped his trader's khakis and button-down shirts for jeans and T-shirts, usually worn several days in a row. He radiates frenetic energy, walking everywhere at a rapid clip and conversing in a hopscotch that jumps from one topic to another.

Most nights on the road he sleeps in the van or at cut-rate motels. He woke to yelling on a recent night at a Bakersfield Days Inn and found police officers investigating a murder across the hall.

"I peeked into the room and there was a lot of blood," Mr. Arnade says. "Then I went back to bed."

The journey from bond trader to the Bakersfield parking lot began in a ramshackle house in San Antonio, Fla. Mr. Arnade's father, a Jewish university professor who escaped Nazi Germany, and mother, a socialist activist, raised him and six siblings in the conservative, Catholic town.

There he played high-school football and baseball and learned to shoot guns. But he was also teased for his bookishness and called a "n—over," he says. His parents skimped on new clothes and car repairs so they could take the family on far-flung academic research trips and all of the children went to college, a rarity in San Antonio at the time, he says.

"Being caught in the middle you end up something of a watcher," says Mr. Arnade. "You never fit in entirely."

He also felt like an outsider on Wall Street, where he landed in 1993 after receiving a doctorate in particle physics from Johns Hopkins University, borrowing money to buy the suit he needed for his interview with Salomon Smith Barney.

"He was very rural Florida and different from anyone else we were working with, these lacrosse players who grew up well off in the suburbs," says Jeff Lox, a former colleague of Mr. Arnade.

Financial analysis came easy to him, Mr. Arnade says, and he enjoyed the problem-solving aspects of his job trading emerging-market bonds, a then-nascent industry. He traveled to countries such as Brazil and Argentina and enjoyed perks like getting a table at sushi restaurant Nobu without reservations.

"When you talk about grey matter, Chris clearly had that," says Stephen Dizard, Mr. Arnade's boss during his early years trading emerging-market bonds.

As he climbed the ranks, Mr. Arnade frequently argued politics with other traders, most of who leaned toward the "libertarian wing of the Republican party," says Peter Besold, a former co-worker who now trades for hedge fund Millennium Management.

He moved in 2006 to Citigroup Inc.'s proprietary trading desk, where he wagered as much as $100 million on single trades in government bonds and currencies. The move boosted his stress. "I used to wake up some mornings and have to vomit," he says.

Mr. Arnade lost money in the 2008 financial crisis—is only down year in two decades—ut that wasn't what turned him off trading.

"The thing that got to him was hearing [traders] who had lost millions and gotten bailed out complaining that Obamacare raised their taxes," Mr. Lox says.

While Mr. Arnade grew angry at co-workers, he also wondered what they might accomplish if they quit finance to tackle economic and political issues. "One thing about banking, the people are smart and good at solving problems," he says. "It's such a waste."

Mr. Arnade says he stayed on Wall Street so long because he and his family grew accustomed to their affluent lifestyle in Brooklyn, including private schools and luxury vacations. "I stuck it out as much by inertia as anything else," he says. To escape, he took half-day walks through New York photographing immigrant and poor communities.

A turning point came in 2012 when Citigroup shut down Mr. Arnade's proprietary trading desk because of new bank regulation. Around the same time, his mother died of pancreatic cancer.

"Let's just say I don't think my mom ever approved of my career," he says.

He decided to quit finance and focus on photo essays, starting with addicts and prostitutes he had befriended on walks in the Bronx.

The move caused anxiety at home. "I'm not the clingy type but there's a panic about ‘here's the money going to come from?'" said Valerie Arnade, Mr. Arnade's wife. The family cut expenses by relocating to a house in New Paltz, a college town in the Hudson Valley.

Mr. Arnade declined to disclose specifically how much money he made on Wall Street but says he saved enough to put his three children through college and maintain his family's new lifestyle.

He spent several years working on the streets, in squats and in rehabs getting to know his subjects for the series, which has been viewed about 1.5 million times on Flickr. Mrs. Arnade became his editor, catching mistakes and offering feedback on his writing, a partnership that continues today.

Some attacked his work on social media, calling it exploitative, and Mr. Arnade grew nostalgic for the arguments he used to have on Wall Street. "Everybody I ever dealt with on the trading floor would acknowledge when they were wrong," he says. "That doesn't happen on Twitter."

He began reporting for newspapers and magazines and in late 2014 started traveling to towns across the country with high rates of poverty and drug addiction. He met residents on the street, in churches and mosques, community colleges and McDonald's franchises. Many felt abandoned economically and angry enough about Wall Street bailouts to support Mr. Trump.

He began to question the quantitative approach to problems he developed as a physicist and trader. "I've come to understand the value of thinking emotionally," Mr. Arnade says. "Thinking about things rationally through numbers is very confining."

Driving through Bakersfield's dilapidated downtown, Mr. Arnade pulls over to speak to Ruth Tate, an 87-year-old African-American woman sweeping her sidewalk in the heat. She tells him about her move from Mississippi 50 years ago, her late husband's passing, her disappointment in how the U.S. is "going down the drain."

He listens, then asks, "I don't mean to make you uncomfortable but, is the racism bad here? Who did you vote for in the election?" She avoids the first question, then reluctantly says she voted for Mr. Trump.

WSJ Pro: Market Talk: Daily Analysis Roundup

Kashkari: Wells Fargo Needs to Hold People Accountable

Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis President Neel Kashkari, pointing to press reports about a shake-up at Wells Fargo's (WFC) board of directors, says the San Francisco-based bank needs to hold people in the bank accountable for its scandals. "What we all saw happening at Wells Fargo is totally unacceptable," Kashkari says, in response to a question at a town hall event about the scandals involving the bank's sales practices. "We need to hold people accountable for their actions," he says. (shayndi.raice@wsj.com)

Annual Executive Pay Votes Get Investor Backing

Shareholders will get a more frequent say on executive pay issues at 146 companies in the Russell 3000, an investor group says. Public-companies generally hold an advisory vote on executive pay structures every one to three years, with shareholders getting a say in the frequency. The investor group—ncluding New York state's comptroller, the AFL-CIO's investment arm and consultant Segal Marco Advisors—dentified 319 companies with triennial votes; 273 this year considered switching to an annual vote and just 127 stuck with the longer interval. At 37 firms, a shareholder majority favored annual votes despite management's opposition. (theo.francis@wsj.com; @theofrancis)

Cost Cuts Still Crucial for Clientis's Credit

Swiss regional banking service firm Clientis may be expanding its services for third-party banks, which is positive, but the most important factor in terms of credit quality is still tight cost control, Vontobel analyst Gerhard von Stockum says in a note. The bank has an A- shadow rating on Clientis, which reported resilient 1H numbers in a "still very challenging" interest rate environment. Clientis has two Swiss franc bonds outstanding that mature in 2018 and 2022, based on Factset data. (tasos.vossos@wsj.com, @tasosvos)

Chinese Lenders Seen Delivering Consensus Beating 1H

The tide might be turning for Chinese banking stocks, which have been underperforming the broader market for long. Credit Suisse expects Chinese lenders' 1H earnings to beat market consensus on higher credit growth and improving loan portfolio. Net interest margins of Chinese lenders continue to expand and their lending growth remains high as the nation's economy stays robust in 1H, it says. Big H-share banks are a bargain as their valuation is the cheapest among all sectors, it adds, and that the A/H premium is back to the level of early 2016, making them a southbound investors' darling. (joanne.chiu@wsj.com; @joannechiuhk)

Last Excuse for Thin Spreads on U.S. Junk Bonds Gone

The last indicator supporting extraordinarily thin spreads in U.S. speculative-grade bonds—he ultra-low CBOE Volatility index—s no more. And unless the VIX drops below the latest readings of 16 points, junk bond spreads will soon surpass 400 basis points, says John Lonski, chief economist at Moody's Capital Markets Research. Spreads currently trade at around 390 bps. Models, based only on the expected default frequency, point to spreads between 443 bps and 517 bps, while the VIX is in line with spreads of 452 bps, Mr. Lonski adds. (tasos.vossos@wsj.com, @tasosvos)

FEATURED GRAPHIC

Six Financial-Regulation Issues and Where They Stand

The Trump administration and the Republican-led Congress have argued for rolling back postcrisis financial regulations, a move they say would help spur economic growth. So far, many rules remain in place, but officials are beginning the work of undoing them. Here's a look at the state of play on six big issues in financial regulation nearly seven months into the Trump administration.

Bitcoin Soars Past $4,000 in Weekend Trading

The price of the digital currency bitcoin crossed over the $4,000 mark for the first time in its nine-year history, despite a widespread selloff in other major digital currencies.

Bitcoin was trading Sunday morning near $4,033, according to the news and research site CoinDesk, up 3.1% on the day, and up more than 25% in August. The price, which rose as high as $4,200 Sunday morning, has more than quadrupled so far this year.

Unlike stocks and other traditional assets that trade on exchanges with set hours, bitcoin trades electronically 24-hours a day and during weekends. The gains Saturday and Sunday seemed to be coming at the expense of other digital currencies, many of which have been issued just this year in a developing trend called "initial coin offerings."

Latest Hot Digital Coin Offering: $187 Million in One Hour for Filecoin

Delaying Fiduciary Rule Costs Savers Billions

The Labor Department's proposed 18-month delay of the compliance date for the fiduciary rule "would be enormously expensive to retirement savers," according to an analysis by the Economic Policy Institute. The left-leaning Washington think tank estimates the delay will cost retirement savers $10.9 billion over the next 30 years. "We look over a 30 year horizon because if there is a delay, losses to retirement investors persist and compound long after the delay ends," the institute writes.

A Link Between Gambling and Financial Misreporting

Companies based in areas where residents hold gambling-friendly attitudes are more likely to intentionally misreport financial information, researchers found. Intentional financial-misreporting rates were 50% higher in areas where gambling is more accepted by the majority of residents, according to Dane Christensen, a University of Oregon professor and one of three co-authors of the research which has been accepted for publication in the journal Contemporary Accounting Research. "We wanted to know what attitudes are involved when people decide to misreport financial data," Dr. Christensen says. "One of the attitudes involved is an acceptance to take gambles."

Fed Honed, Didn't Lower, Requirements for Bank Boards

The Federal Reserve's revised requirements for banks' boards of directors don't lower supervisory standards but aim expectations "more squarely toward senior management," William Lang writes for American Banker. Though the proposal has been viewed as a narrowing of the central bank's criteria for boards, it still requires "some substantial legwork" from banks to address weaknesses in oversight, says Mr. Lang, a former head of supervision at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. "They face significant regulatory risk if they only concentrate on the narrowing of Fed demands for boards and fail to properly address the new expectations," he writes.

U.S. investigators uncovered a global financial network run by a senior Islamic State official that funneled money to an alleged \b ISIS\b0  operative in the U.S. through fake eBay transactions, according to a recently unsealed FBI affidavit.

Credit Suisse Group AG will prohibit trading of certain Venezuelan bonds, citing the country's political climate, according to an internal bank memo.

A former employee of online lender Social Finance Inc. accused the company in a lawsuit of wrongfully terminating him after he reported some managers had concealed errors made in processing loan applications and that another had harassed female employees by making sexual or inappropriate comments.

Stericycle, a Lake Forest, Ill.-based firm that handles medical waste, said it received an SEC subpoena relating to its compliance with U.S. foreign-bribery law regarding its operations in Latin America.

Canadian alternative lender Callidus Capital, accused by whistleblowers of fraud, swung to a second-quarter loss.

Send us your tips, suggestions and feedback. Write to:

Andrew Ackerman, Mark H. Anderson, Katy Burne, Sarah Chacko, Chao Deng, Danny Dougherty, Yuka Hayashi, Dave Michaels, Gabriel T. Rubin, Ryan Tracy, Julia-Ambra Verlaine, Aruna Viswanatha, Rachel Witkowski, Jana Zabkova.

Follow us on Twitter:

@amacker, @AndersonMH, @KatyBurne, @sarahheartsnews, @chao_deng, @DannyDougherty, @TokyoWoods, @DavidAMichaels, @Rubinations, @ryanjtracy, @JAVerlaine, @aviswanatha, @RachelWitkowski, @zabkova

Document RSTPROFR20170814ed8e000b5



Markets
Pullback on Wall Street Rules | Investors Take On Mortgage Risk From Taxpayers | Fiduciary Rule Casualty | Ackerman's Take: Dilemma Over Fannie, Freddie Finances; The Wall Street Journal's financial regulation newsletter for Monday, August 14, 2017.

2,197 words
14 August 2017
12:45
WSJ Pro Financial Regulation
RSTPROFR
English
Copyright ©017, Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

Ackerman's Take: Dilemma Over Fannie, Freddie Finances

Trump Chips Away at Postcrisis Wall Street Rules

Investors Take On Mortgage Risk From Taxpayers

Fiduciary Rule Casualty: Brokers' Mutual-Fund Offerings

Search Is On for Top Audit Regulator

Dilemma Over Fannie, Freddie Finances

Federal Housing Finance Agency chief Mel Watt has warned for months that he might order Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to build up cash buffers to insulate themselves against future losses. He recently indicated he's still looking for political cover to follow through with his plan.

Mr. Watt is facing a "damned if you do, damned if you don't" situation that has no easy answers.

At issue are the mortgage-finance giants' ultra-thin capital levels, which will drop to zero in January under the terms of their federal bailouts. As a result, should the companies suffer an operating loss, they would have no capital to absorb it and would be forced to draw on their $258 billion government backstop. That would be interpreted as yet another bailout for the companies and, according to Mr. Watt, could trigger "adverse" market consequences.

To avoid that scenario, Mr. Watt has said he might order the companies to retain earnings rather than to continue sending them to the Treasury Department (as they currently do under the terms of their bailouts). But so far he's received no political support from the Trump administration or key congressional Republicans to make such a change.

(Meanwhile, the companies signaled earlier this month that they might not make their quarterly dividend payment to Treasury at the end of September— move that could divert about $5 billion from federal coffers just as the government's debt ceiling needs to be raised.)

Mr. Watt seems now to acknowledge he's stuck: He wants to order the companies to begin to build up their capital buffers, but there are significant political pitfalls for doing do.

"I have publicly expressed my concerns that the declining capital buffers leave the enterprises with little or no ability to absorb losses," he wrote the National Association of Realtors last week. "However, I am sensitive to the prospect that whatever steps FHFA could take might be misperceived as either an effort to promote recapitalization and release of the enterprises [from government control] or as interference with Congress's important work to advance housing finance reform."

To be sure, Mr. Watt didn't rule out eventually requiring the companies to retain their profits, but his letter suggests he is eager to see some political momentum to back such a move, saying he will "continue to look for ways to ensure that the concerns I have expressed are addressed constructively."

Mr. Watt is an Obama-administration appointee whose term expires in January 2019.

A spokeswoman for Mr. Watt declined to comment on the letter, which came in response to a Realtor-backed plan to allow the mortgage-finance firms to begin retaining some of their profits while Congress deliberates on how to refashion them. The National Association of Realtors says allowing the companies to retain some of their earnings would create a buffer between any losses and taxpayers, who would be on the hook should the companies need to draw on their Treasury backstop.

William Brown, the group's president, said in a written statement that his members "appreciate" Mr. Watt's attention to the issue.

Key Developments in Washington, on Wall Street, and Beyond

Trump Chips Away at Postcrisis Wall Street Rules

Efforts toward financial deregulation are beginning to take concrete shape on rules governing trading desks, bank boardrooms, corporations' financial disclosures and more. Nearly seven months into the Trump administration, regulators are setting the stage for a wave of eased rules.

Several agencies are reviewing the Volcker rule, a part of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act that limits banks' trading. Some regulators also recently dropped a plan to restrict bonuses on Wall Street that had been opposed by banks and brokerage firms. And the Labor Department on Wednesday disclosed an 18-month delay in the so-called fiduciary rule that requires brokers to act in clients' best interests when they handle retirement accounts.

The moves show that while President Donald Trump is struggling to advance his legislative agenda in Congress, his administration has begun laying the groundwork to change some of the myriad rules that Wall Street has sought for years to overturn or water down.

Investors Take On Mortgage Risk From Taxpayers

Investors are snapping up a new type of security sold by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, increasingly assuming the risks of mortgage defaults from taxpayers and powering a quiet transformation of the housing giants after almost a decade of government control.

Fannie and Freddie have sold roughly $48 billion of the securities since 2013 to a broadening group of buyers including asset managers and insurance companies. Sales are expected to reach a fresh high of $15 billion this year, up from the previous record $13 billion last year, according to J.P. Morgan Securities.

The sales mark an early step toward reducing the government's role in the $14.4 trillion U.S. mortgage market. The amount of mortgage debt funneled through Fannie and Freddie and other taxpayer-backed entities roughly doubled after the financial crisis, to around 70%. The progress has come despite a long-running stalemate in Congress, which has stumbled in its effort to design a replacement for the decades-old housing-finance system that centers on Fannie and Freddie.

Fiduciary Rule Casualty: Brokers' Mutual-Fund Offerings

Is less more when it comes to investor choice? That's the question facing brokerage firms and investment advisers as they look to comply with a landmark retirement-savings rule.

Large brokerage firms typically offer thousands of mutual funds to clients. But compliance demands of the fiduciary rule, which began to take effect in June and requires stewards of tax-advantaged retirement savings to act in clients' best interests rather than their own, are causing some firms to review their offerings.

Conducting the due diligence and documentation required on so many investments can be onerous, and under the rule, some firms may face increased litigation risks. As a result, brokerages may remove some funds—ncluding those with higher fees or those that present perceived risks—rom their sales platforms.

Search Is On for Top Audit Regulator

One of the highest-paying jobs in regulating Wall Street is about to be open—nd the boss is taking applications.

U.S. officials are looking to hire a new chairman of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, a little-known body that oversees the country's largest accounting firms and their audits of public companies and broker-dealers, according to a statement issued Friday. The role, created by the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley law, pays more than $670,000 a year.

China's State Firms Make Room for the Communist Party on Their Boards

A push to establish the Communist Party in Chinese state enterprises is rolling through Hong Kong, raising corporate-governance concerns in one of the year's best-performing stock markets.

Since 2016, at least 32 Chinese state-owned companies or units listed in Hong Kong have proposed changes to their corporate structures to install Communist Party committees that advise their boards of directors. The moves, most coming in recent months, are prompting questions from market participants about who holds power at these companies, and whether they will be run for the benefit of investors.

Ex-Trader Seeks Redemption for ‘ntellectual Grift'

Chris Arnade, a former bond trader, walked away from Wall Street after 20 years to photograph and write about America's disaffected poor. His work, especially on how economic inequality contributed to Donald Trump's political ascent, has garnered a large following of fans—nd detractors—cross the political spectrum.

Mr. Arnade's unusual bipartisan appeal—oth Arkansas Republican Sen. Tom Cotton and billionaire Democratic fundraiser Chris Sacca invited him to lunch this spring—eflects the contradictions of a life spent straddling social and economic divides.

WSJ Pro: Market Talk: Daily Analysis Roundup

Read our compilation of concise, timely analysis by Wall Street Journal reporters. Kashkari: Wells Fargo Needs to Hold People Accountable; Annual Executive Pay Votes Get Investor Backing; Cost Cuts Still Crucial for Clientis's Credit; Chinese Lenders Seen Delivering Consensus Beating 1H; Last Excuse for Thin Spreads on U.S. Junk Bonds Gone

FEATURED GRAPHIC

Six Financial-Regulation Issues and Where They Stand

The Trump administration and the Republican-led Congress have argued for rolling back postcrisis financial regulations, a move they say would help spur economic growth. So far, many rules remain in place, but officials are beginning the work of undoing them. Here's a look at the state of play on six big issues in financial regulation nearly seven months into the Trump administration.

Bitcoin Soars Past $4,000 in Weekend Trading

The price of the digital currency bitcoin crossed over the $4,000 mark for the first time in its nine-year history, despite a widespread selloff in other major digital currencies.

Bitcoin was trading Sunday morning near $4,033, according to the news and research site CoinDesk, up 3.1% on the day, and up more than 25% in August. The price, which rose as high as $4,200 Sunday morning, has more than quadrupled so far this year.

Unlike stocks and other traditional assets that trade on exchanges with set hours, bitcoin trades electronically 24-hours a day and during weekends. The gains Saturday and Sunday seemed to be coming at the expense of other digital currencies, many of which have been issued just this year in a developing trend called "initial coin offerings."

Latest Hot Digital Coin Offering: $187 Million in One Hour for Filecoin

Delaying Fiduciary Rule Costs Savers Billions

The Labor Department's proposed 18-month delay of the compliance date for the fiduciary rule "would be enormously expensive to retirement savers," according to an analysis by the Economic Policy Institute. The left-leaning Washington think tank estimates the delay will cost retirement savers $10.9 billion over the next 30 years. "We look over a 30 year horizon because if there is a delay, losses to retirement investors persist and compound long after the delay ends," the institute writes.

A Link Between Gambling and Financial Misreporting

Companies based in areas where residents hold gambling-friendly attitudes are more likely to intentionally misreport financial information, researchers found. Intentional financial-misreporting rates were 50% higher in areas where gambling is more accepted by the majority of residents, according to Dane Christensen, a University of Oregon professor and one of three co-authors of the research which has been accepted for publication in the journal Contemporary Accounting Research. "We wanted to know what attitudes are involved when people decide to misreport financial data," Dr. Christensen says. "One of the attitudes involved is an acceptance to take gambles."

Fed Honed, Didn't Lower, Requirements for Bank Boards

The Federal Reserve's revised requirements for banks' boards of directors don't lower supervisory standards but aim expectations "more squarely toward senior management," William Lang writes for American Banker. Though the proposal has been viewed as a narrowing of the central bank's criteria for boards, it still requires "some substantial legwork" from banks to address weaknesses in oversight, says Mr. Lang, a former head of supervision at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. "They face significant regulatory risk if they only concentrate on the narrowing of Fed demands for boards and fail to properly address the new expectations," he writes.

U.S. investigators uncovered a global financial network run by a senior Islamic State official that funneled money to an alleged \b ISIS\b0  operative in the U.S. through fake eBay transactions, according to a recently unsealed FBI affidavit.

Credit Suisse Group AG will prohibit trading of certain Venezuelan bonds, citing the country's political climate, according to an internal bank memo.

A former employee of online lender Social Finance Inc. accused the company in a lawsuit of wrongfully terminating him after he reported some managers had concealed errors made in processing loan applications and that another had harassed female employees by making sexual or inappropriate comments.

Stericycle, a Lake Forest, Ill.-based firm that handles medical waste, said it received an SEC subpoena relating to its compliance with U.S. foreign-bribery law regarding its operations in Latin America.

Canadian alternative lender Callidus Capital, accused by whistleblowers of fraud, swung to a second-quarter loss.

Send us your tips, suggestions and feedback. Write to:

Andrew Ackerman, Mark H. Anderson, Katy Burne, Sarah Chacko, Chao Deng, Danny Dougherty, Yuka Hayashi, Dave Michaels, Gabriel T. Rubin, Ryan Tracy, Julia-Ambra Verlaine, Aruna Viswanatha, Rachel Witkowski, Jana Zabkova.

Follow us on Twitter:

@amacker, @AndersonMH, @KatyBurne, @sarahheartsnews, @chao_deng, @DannyDougherty, @TokyoWoods, @DavidAMichaels, @Rubinations, @ryanjtracy, @JAVerlaine, @aviswanatha, @RachelWitkowski, @zabkova

Document RSTPROFR20170814ed8e00001



World News: World Watch

393 words
14 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ZAMBIA

Prosecutors Plan

To Ease Political Crisis

Zambian prosecutors plan to drop treason charges against jailed opposition leader Hakainde Hichilema, two officials familiar with the decision said, a step that would ease the political crisis that has been roiling one of Africa's most stable democracies.

Mr. Hichilema, who had been charged with allegedly trying to overthrow the government, was set to go on trial on Monday. But two officials said prosecutors had decided to drop the charges to facilitate talks between Mr. Hichilema and President Edgar Lungu.

Mr. Hichilemawas arrested in April, after a convoy of his supporters allegedly disrupted Mr. Lungu's motorcade. Police said at the time the incident posed a risk to the president's life.

Martha Mushipe, a lawyer for Mr. Hichilema, said his legal team hadn't been informed of any decision to drop the charges. A government spokesman declined to comment.

Mr. Hichilema narrowly lost last year's presidential election to Mr. Lungu and has insisted the vote was rigged.

-- Nicholas Bariyo and Gabriele Steinhauser

---

INDIA

Children's Deaths at

Hospital Spark Probe

The deaths of 64 children at a state hospital in Gorakhpurin the northern state of Uttar Pradesh last week have triggered outrage and a debate about the condition of the stretched health-care system.

The state government said that there were issues with procuring oxygen at the hospital, Baba Raghav Das Medical College, last week, but that it didn't cause the deaths. Parents told local media they were asked to use hand air pumps to help their children breathe amid a shortage of ventilators, staff and oxygen.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath visited the hospital Sunday and said a committee of health officials from the state and central governments would investigate the deaths.

-- Corinne Abrams

---

IRAQ

ISIS Says It Attacked

Troops Near Karbala

Islamic State claimed responsibility for an attack on Iraqi troops outside Karbala that left one dead, according to a statement from the group.

The claimed suicide car bomb attack late Saturday struck a checkpoint outside Karbala and injured two others, said Iraqi Brig. Gen. Yahya Rasool, spokesman for the Joint Military Command.

Karbala, some 55 miles south of Baghdad, is home to the Imam Hussein Shrine, one of the holiest sites in Shiite Islam.

-- Associated Press

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170814ed8e00029



Qatar Will Not Be Intimidated

By Mutlaq Al-Gahtani 
537 words
14 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A15
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

As the Gulf crisis enters its third month, it is clear the blockade against Qatar has not succeeded.

If Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates -- the countries driving the confrontation, despite the appearance of a unified bloc -- hoped to bring Qatar to its knees, they have failed. If they hoped to damage Qatar's reputation and improve their own, they have failed. If they hoped to enhance their relationship with the U.S. at Qatar's expense, again, they have failed.

Instead, the anti-Qatar smear campaign has put a spotlight on the shameful history and unsavory practices of the Saudis and Emiratis themselves. Saudi Arabia justifies the blockade by alleging that Qatari authorities "support extremists and terrorist organizations." But the accusation only reminds observers that the Saudis have consistently failed to prevent the radicalization of their citizens.

Fifteen of the 19 hijackers in the 9/11 attacks were Saudis. Thousands of Saudi citizens have taken up arms to join Islamic State and other radical groups. Saudi textbooks are used in ISIS schools. Many of the five dozen groups that the U.S. State Department designates as terror organizations are funded by Saudi nationals.

The Emirates have taken a similarly hypocritical stance. While the U.A.E. falsely portrays itself as America's best ally in the region, its track record is no better than Saudi Arabia's. Two Emiratis participated in the Sept. 11 hijackings, and the staff report to the 9/11 Commission revealed that much of the funding for the attacks flowed through the U.A.E., which was a world hub for money laundering.

The U.A.E. has fared no better with regard to freedom of speech and press. In 2014 authorities arrested a man for plotting a terrorist attack on a Formula One racetrack in Abu Dhabi. But the Emirates prohibited international media outlets from reporting on the trial. The U.A.E.'s recent clampdown on free speech has been widely condemned, especially after the country's Justice Ministry said in June that supporting Qatar on social media could be punishable by fines and even prison time.

Meanwhile, leaked emails show that Emirati officials were conspiring with a variety of interest groups and lobbyists on a campaign to slander Qatar long before the blockade was imposed. Now intelligence experts and Qatar's cybersecurity services have identified the U.A.E. as the perpetrator of the hacking of Qatar News Agency, which set the entire Gulf crisis in motion.

Surely this kind of publicity can't be what the Saudis and Emiratis hoped for when they instigated this crisis. Yet the longer the blockade goes on, the more damaging information the world will learn about them -- and the more difficult it will be to resolve their differences with Qatar.

It's time to abandon the public-relations campaigns, the blockade, the ultimatums and the pressure tactics and meet at the negotiating table, so we can broker a fair and just resolution to the Gulf crisis.

---

Mr. Al-Gahtani is special envoy for Qatar's foreign minister for counterterrorism and mediation of conflict resolution.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170814ed8e0000p



US
FBI Says  ISIS  Used eBay to Send Terror Cash to U.S. Affidavit alleges American citizen Mohamed Elshinawy was part of a global network stretching from Britain to Bangladesh

By Mark Maremont and Christopher S. Stewart 
904 words
11 August 2017
02:21
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. investigators uncovered a global financial network run by a senior Islamic State official that funneled money to an alleged ISIS operative in the U.S. through fake eBay transactions, according to a recently unsealed FBI affidavit.

The alleged recipient of the funds was an American citizen in his early 30s who had been arrested more than a year ago in Maryland after a lengthy Federal Bureau of Investigation surveillance operation that found the first clues to the suspected network.

The government had alleged in a 2016 indictment that the American suspect, Mohamed Elshinawy, pledged allegiance to Islamic State and had pretended to sell computer printers on eBay as a cover to receive payments through PayPal, potentially to fund terror attacks.

The recently unsealed FBI affidavit, filed in federal court in Baltimore, alleges that Mr. Elshinawy was part of a global network stretching from Britain to Bangladesh that used similar schemes to fund Islamic State and was directed by a now-dead senior ISIS figure in Syria, Siful Sujan.

The U.S. has said Mr. Elshinawy told investigators he was instructed to use the money for "operational purposes" in the U.S., such as a possible terror attack. He has pleaded not guilty to supporting the terror group, and currently is in federal custody awaiting trial. His lawyer declined to comment.

The case suggests how Islamic State is trying to exploit holes in the vast online financial world to finance terror outside its borders.

The U.S. and other countries for years since 9/11 have focused on the formal international banking systems that terror networks might use to transfer money to would-be terrorists.

But some alleged perpetrators inspired by Islamic State have gotten small sums through low-level fraud such as check scams, or through financial channels where regulators have been paying less attention.

Those include social-media fundraising, student-loan withdrawals and online lending fraud, according to the Financial Action Task Force, an intergovernmental body that makes counterterror recommendations.

That is making it more challenging for law enforcement to spot and stop terror attacks and terrorism recruits. A former Treasury official equated policing terror funding in the burgeoning financial marketplace to "looking for a needle in a massive haystack."

A spokesman for eBay Inc. said the company "has zero tolerance for criminal activities taking place on our marketplace" and said that they are working with law enforcement on the case.

A spokeswoman for PayPal Holdings Inc. said that it "invests significant time and resources in working to prevent terrorist activity on our platform…We proactively report suspicious activities and respond quickly to lawful requests to support law enforcement agencies in their investigations."

The affidavit indicates that several other alleged operatives of the network had been arrested in Britain and Bangladesh, making it one of the most significant suspected Islamic State financial networks yet uncovered.

The operation pulled in investigators across the U.S. intelligence empire and involved coordination with several other countries, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Some of the key players in the alleged network, also used to buy military supplies, were arrested or killed in a coordinated global sweep in December 2015, according to the FBI affidavit. Mr. Sujan was killed in a drone strike on Dec. 10, 2015, according to a person familiar with the matter. At the time, Mr. Sujan was Islamic State's director of computer operations, according to the affidavit.

The financial network, according to the FBI affidavit, operated through a British technology company founded by Mr. Sujan. His company had offices in Bangladesh, and Mr. Sujan also was setting up a branch in Turkey, according to the affidavit. It is unclear when Mr. Sujan left to join Islamic State in Syria.

The FBI affidavit was filed under seal in January in support of search warrants requested by federal prosecutors for information from U.S. technology firms on social-media and email accounts established by Mr. Elshinawy and other suspects.

The unsealing of the affidavit was brought to public attention Thursday by a researcher with George Washington University's program on extremism.

Mr. Sujan's company, which built websites and "obtained and configured printers," spent $18,000 to buy, from a Canadian company, military-grade surveillance equipment that could be used for aerial targeting, according to the affidavit. It also ordered electronic bug-sweeping equipment from a U.S. company to be sent to Turkey, the affidavit said.

Mr. Elshinawy received a total of $8,700 from individuals associated with Islamic State, according to the affidavit, including five payments through PayPal from Mr. Sujan's company.

He used the money for a laptop, a cellphone and a VPN communications network, all of which the FBI claims he used to communicate with the Islamic State network, according to the affidavit.

Mr. Elshinawy told the FBI he knew the money was meant to conduct a terrorist attack in the U.S., according the affidavit. But he said he never planned to carry out any attack. Instead, the affidavit indicated, he said he was taking the money from "thieves."

Write to Mark Maremont at mark.maremont@wsj.com and Christopher S. Stewart at christopher.stewart@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170811ed8b0005l



World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Executive Editor Matt Murray.

By Matt Murray 
1,149 words
11 August 2017
12:24
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Gerard Baker is away. Today's 10-Point is by Executive Editor Matt Murray. Follow him on Twitter@MurrayMatt.

Good morning,

Tech Turmoil

Benchmark Capital, one of Uber's largest shareholders, sued the ride-sharing company's former chief executive, Travis Kalanick, alleging he defrauded directors into giving him more control over the board. The suit centers on a June 2016 decision by Mr. Kalanick to expand the board to 11 seats from eight, effectively giving him power over the designation of those seats, the venture-capital firm said. Benchmark said it never would have authorized that move had it known about the company's "gross mismanagement and other misconduct at Uber." Mr. Kalanick's spokesman said the lawsuit is without merit. Elsewhere, Googlecanceled a companywide meeting about diversity just before it was set to begin, saying right-wing websites published the names of employees who had proposed questions, raising security concerns. And Snap said its quarterly loss nearly quadrupled on slowing revenue and user growth, sapped by intensifying competition from larger rival Facebook.

Funding Terror

U.S. investigators uncovered a global financial network run by a senior Islamic State official that funneled money to an alleged \b ISIS\b0  operative in the U.S. through fake eBay transactions, according to a recently unsealed FBI affidavit. The alleged recipient of the funds was a U.S. citizen who had been arrested more than a year ago after an FBI surveillance operation. The government alleged in a 2016 indictment that the suspect, Mohamed Elshinawy, pledged allegiance to Islamic State and had pretended to sell computer printers on eBay as a cover to channel payments for Islamic State through PayPal, potentially to fund terror attacks. Mr. Elshinawy has pleaded not guilty to supporting the terror group, and currently is in federal custody awaiting trial. But the case suggests how Islamic State is trying to exploit holes in the vast online financial world to finance terror outside its borders.

Summer Jobs

Jamaicans and other foreign workers have long powered the summer economy in the upscale tourist haven of Martha's Vineyard, Mass. This year, a scarcity of the H-2B visas used to bring foreign seasonal workers to the U.S. has affected many resorts and other businesses that depend on such workers, including Alaskan fisheries. As President Donald Trump presses to restrict immigration, Martha's Vineyard serves as a small-scale experiment in what can happen when labor markets that depend on foreign workers no longer have access to as many of them. This summer, businesses on the island managed to muddle through. Some employers recruited foreign workers through other means. Others say the crunch has pushed them to try harder to hire Americans—omething opponents of the H-2B visa program favor. However, employers and other residents say filling temporary jobs with local workers is hard because people who live on the island full time want year-round employment.

Shore to Door

The shore is an appealing destination for many people, though less so when the return trip involves climbing hundreds of steps. Homeowners with waterfront properties on the bluffs of Malibu and the dunes of Lake Michigan are tackling this problem by installing incline elevators to whisk visitors from dockside to deck. The elevators are expensive, ranging from $50,000 to $250,000, not counting local permit costs that can reach as high as $20,000. However, manufacturers and installers are benefiting from the surging values of waterfront homes and the aging population of homeowners. The president of one such company, Hill Hikers, says residential sales have roughly doubled compared with five years ago, primarily thanks to baby boomers looking for ways to get around more easily as they age.

Today's Video

Taxing Subject

U.S. companies are holding more than $2.6 trillion in profits across the globe and they haven't paid U.S. taxes on it. Why is so much money offshore, and how could the tax code be changed to bring it back? Our tax reporter Richard Rubin dives in.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Trump Hotel in Washington Saw Strong Early 2017 Profit

In Kansas, a Very Fresh Face Is Running for Governor

WORLD

Italy Sees Signs of Migrant Tide Turning

In China, Surveillance Feeds Become Reality TV

BUSINESS

Amazon and Whole Foods: What's Next?

Counterfeiters Cast a Shadow on Booming Sales of Eclipse Glasses

MARKETS

Why Goldman Sachs Seized a Client's 217-Foot Yacht

Embattled Wells Fargo Board Plans Shake-Up

Number of the Day

82,000

The approximate number of rental homes that will be owned by Invitation Homes and Starwood Waypoint Homes after a proposed merger that would create the largest private owner of single-family homes in the U.S.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on how the scarcity of H-2B visas is affecting towns and industries that rely on foreign seasonal workers? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Hillary Canada

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question about technology titans such as Facebookcopying smaller rivals, Dave Miller of Michigan said: "There should be an opportunity here for copyright and patent law to protect the intellectual achievements of the tech startups. Without that, there is nothing to stop the deep-pocketed tech titans from copying anything they see as potentially lucrative." Oscar Girola of Argentina weighed in: "Every company has the right to act freely as long as it does not infringe any law or regulation." Joey Delaney of Minnesota wrote: "As a sophomore entrepreneurship major, seeing industry titans destroy little startups is a frightening thing. It is imperative that the government creates a good balance of limiting the big companies, while freeing up the little ones to instill proper competition in every industry." And Austin Delsi of New York commented: "I understand the rationale as to why the large-scale technology companies are imitating their rivals as opposed to acquiring them, but that doesn't mean it's a healthy norm for the startup landscape."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170811ed8b001gu



Business
Today's Top Supply Chain and Logistics News From WSJ; Delivering up-to-the minute news, analysis, interviews and explanatory journalism on logistics, supply-chain management, e-commerce and more

By Paul Page 
1,410 words
11 August 2017
12:34
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Sign up: With one click, get this newsletter delivered to your inbox.

Amazon.com Inc. is facing major questions over its acquisition of Whole Foods Market Inc., and the answers may help determine how both companies look in the future. Beyond basic cross-selling opportunities, the WSJ's Laura Stevens reports Amazon will consider how deeply it will integrate its new subsidiary after the $13.7 billion deal closes later this year. The level of integration carries big stakes for both operations, and Amazon's track record provides clues on how it looks at its acquisitions. Amazon left online shoe seller Zappos largely autonomous after its $1.2 billion acquisition in 2009, but fine-tuned its supply chain efficiency and cut costs—omething likely to happen at Whole Foods. But Amazon folded warehouse-robot maker Kiva fully under its corporate umbrella after its 2012 purchase. That helped Amazon's operations while keeping the technology away from rivals. Amazon may look at Whole Foods that way if it views the grocer, with its network of exclusive suppliers and real estate, as a strategic asset touching more of Amazon's larger business.

Glencore PLC is riding a commodities turnaround now, but the Swiss mining and trading giant sees electric cars helping drive its future earnings. The company is deepening its investments in some raw materials, the WSJ's Scott Patterson reports, after it reported a $2.5 billion net profit in the first half of 2017 following a loss a year ago. The results follow similar strong reports from mining companies including Rio Tinto PLC and Anglo American PLC, and the financial strength in the commodities world is brightening prospects in the beleaguered dry bulk shipping sector. Glencore's first-half revenue rose 44% to $100 billion, and the company is brimming with confidence over its essential role in developing technology supply chains. Glencore is the world's biggest producer of cobalt, a key commodity in the lithium-ion batteries that power electric vehicles and mobile phones. It said cobalt prices have more than doubled in the past year, one reason the mining business is enthralled with new technology.

Blue Apron is having a hard time putting together the recipe for both getting customers and delivering the goods. In its first earnings update since a June initial public offering, Blue Apron said its costs soared 86% to $65.7 million, the WSJ's Heather Haddon reports, as the New York-based company hired more employees and struggled with the opening of a new fulfillment center. That Linden, N.J., site is eventually supposed to handle more than half of Blue Apron's meal kits. But the operation has run into delays, and that's hurting the company's ability to roll out new products and, more critically, hold onto customers. It's a familiar case where a business plan founders on logistics execution, but it's magnified at Blue Apron because distribution is central to the company's bid to carve out a new market. Blue Apron boasts roughly a million customers but will need to get more meal kits delivered on time and intact to keep its business moving.

TECHNOLOGY

The building blocks for toys are becoming less focused on—locks.Lego A/S is changing leadership as the toy maker focuses more fully on technology, the WSJ's Saabira Chaudhuri reports, following a market for toys that is moving in a digital direction. Lego's replacement of Bali Padda, a 61-year-old British-born executive who had been in job for just eight month, with Niels B. Christiansen, the 51-year-old former boss of Danish industrial group Danfoss A/S, is the most visible sign of change at the iconic Danish toy maker. The deeper shifts come as Lego copes with slowing sales growth and competition from smartphone apps and videogames, changes that may roil the global toy manufacturing and shipping world. Descartes Datamyne measured the U.S. toy import business at more than $14 billion in 2015. But Lego and rival Mattel Inc. are focused on modernizing toys for a digital era, and that may promise more screen time for children and fewer goods heading to ports.

What is a $10 billion factory for technology goods really worth? The question is raising new heat in Wisconsin as the state considers the costs of drawing Foxconn Technology Group to build a manufacturing facility employing up to 13,000 people. Gov. Scott Walker defends Foxconn's $3 billion tax incentive package, telling the WSJ's Shayndi Raice the deal will be "transformational" for Wisconsin, even as criticism arises over the hefty tax bill. A state fiscal analysis found taxpayers wouldn't recoup their investment until the 2042-2043 fiscal year. The debate highlights questions around the field of site selection that is critical to supply chains. Big manufacturers and logistics companies often seek significant local and state tax breaks, but critics say the incentives aren't always worth it, and may just move jobs around rather than spurring overall job growth. Mr. Walker insists the Foxconn deal carries bigger benefits, and will help spur a larger eco-system of technology research, manufacturing and employment.

QUOTABLE

Number of the Day

9.8%

Year-over-year growth in July in U.S. average spot prices for truckload van loads, according to DAT Solutions LLC.

IN OTHER NEWS

A gauge of U.S. business prices fell in July for the first time in 11 months. (WSJ)

SoftBank Group Corp.'s technology fund will invest about $2.5 billion in India's biggest e-commerce firm Flipkart Group. (WSJ)

Macy's Inc. and Kohl's Corp. reported that declines in sales moderated in the past quarter. (WSJ)

Italy has seen a sharp drop in the number of seaborne migrants, raising hopes that Europe's migration crisis is easing. (WSJ)

U.S. investigators say Islamic State used fake eBay transactions to funnel money to an alleged ISISoperative in the U.S. (WSJ)

Oil investors are losing confidence that drillers in West Texas' Permian Basin can keep production rising. (WSJ)

Casual dining bellwether DineEquity Inc. plans to close up to 160 Applebee's and IHOP restaurants. (WSJ)

Tesla Inc. is talking to state authorities about road-testing heavy-duty trucks that use autonomous and "platooning" technology. (Reuters)

Los Angeles-based startup Chanje plans to start selling electric-powered medium-duty trucks in the U.S. in the coming weeks. (Los Angeles Times)

Beauty products subscription service Birchbox has held acquisition talks with retailers including Wal-Mart Stores Inc. (Recode)

Brazilian mining giant Vale SA has sold almost all of its very large ore carriers. (Splash 24/7)

The National Retail Federation's Global Port Tracker forecasts U.S. import container volume will grow 2.1% in August amid a buoyant peak season. (Journal of Commerce)

Maersk Line parent A.P. Moller–aersk A/S will work with Danske Bank in a joint venture offering digital payment services for global customers. (Port Technology)

Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd. struck a logistics joint venture in Vietnam with local operator Minh Phuong to better manage the flow of its goods there. (VietNamNet)

Taiwanese shipping line Yang Ming Marine Transport Ltd. cut its second-quarter loss 90% to $14.7 million. (American Shipper)

Unionized workers at a New Jersey-based clothing distribution center supplying large retailers walked off the job to protest low wages. (Newark Star-Ledger)

Federal regulators are wrestling with the complexity of pharmaceutical supply chains in setting rules for identifying and tracing drugs. (Pharmaceutical Technology)

Indiana plans a $20 million expansion of cargo facilities at its Port of Indiana-Burns Harbor on Lake Michigan. (Northwest Indiana Times)

The lifting of a state of emergency in Ethiopia may put the country on track to attract textile and apparel firms. (Sourcing Journal)

Some states want truckers to change delivery schedules to avoid congestion expected during this month's solar eclipse. (Transport Topics)

ABOUT US

Paul Page is deputy editor of WSJ Logistics Report. Follow him at @PaulPage, and follow the entire WSJ Logistics Report team: @brianjbaskin , @jensmithWSJ and @EEPhillips_WSJ. Follow the WSJ Logistics Report on Twitter at @WSJLogistics.

Write to Paul Page at paul.page@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170811ed8b001jl



FBI Says  ISIS  Used eBay To Send Terror Cash to U.S.

By Mark Maremont and Christopher S. Stewart 
874 words
11 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. investigators uncovered a global financial network run by a senior Islamic State official that funneled money to an alleged ISIS operative in the U.S. through fake eBay transactions, according to a recently unsealed FBI affidavit.

The alleged recipient of the funds was an American citizen in his early 30s who had been arrested more than a year ago in Maryland after a lengthy Federal Bureau of Investigation surveillance operation that found the first clues to the suspected network.

The government had alleged in a 2016 indictment that the American suspect, Mohamed Elshinawy, pledged allegiance to Islamic State and had pretended to sell computer printers on eBay as a cover to receive payments through PayPal, potentially to fund terror attacks.

The recently unsealed FBI affidavit, filed in federal court in Baltimore, alleges that Mr. Elshinawy was part of a global network stretching from Britain to Bangladesh that used similar schemes to fund Islamic State and was directed by a now-dead senior ISIS figure in Syria, Siful Sujan.

The U.S. has said Mr. Elshinawy told investigators he was instructed to use the money for "operational purposes" in the U.S., such as a possible terror attack. He has pleaded not guilty to supporting the terror group, and currently is in federal custody awaiting trial. His lawyer declined to comment.

The case suggests how Islamic State is trying to exploit holes in the vast online financial world to finance terror outside its borders.

The U.S. and other countries for years since 9/11 have focused on the formal international banking systems that terror networks might use to transfer money to would-be terrorists.

But some alleged perpetrators inspired by Islamic State have gotten small sums through low-level fraud such as check scams, or through financial channels where regulators have been paying less attention.

Those include social-media fundraising, student-loan withdrawals and online lending fraud, according to the Financial Action Task Force, an intergovernmental body that makes counterterror recommendations.

That is making it more challenging for law enforcement to spot and stop terror attacks and terrorism recruits. A former Treasury official equated policing terror funding in the burgeoning financial marketplace to "looking for a needle in a massive haystack."

A spokesman for eBay Inc. said the company "has zero tolerance for criminal activities taking place on our marketplace" and said that they are working with law enforcement on the case.

A spokeswoman for PayPal Holdings Inc. said that it "invests significant time and resources in working to prevent terrorist activity on our platform. . . . We proactively report suspicious activities and respond quickly to lawful requests to support law enforcement agencies in their investigations."

The affidavit indicates that several other alleged operatives of the network had been arrested in Britain and Bangladesh, making it one of the most significant suspected Islamic State financial networks yet uncovered.

The operation pulled in investigators across the U.S. intelligence empire and involved coordination with several other countries, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Some of the key players in the alleged network, also used to buy military supplies, were arrested or killed in a coordinated global sweep in December 2015, according to the FBI affidavit. Mr. Sujan was killed in a drone strike on Dec. 10, 2015, according to a person familiar with the matter. At the time, Mr. Sujan was Islamic State's director of computer operations, according to the affidavit.

The financial network, according to the FBI affidavit, operated through a British technology company founded by Mr. Sujan. His company had offices in Bangladesh, and Mr. Sujan also was setting up a branch in Turkey, according to the affidavit. It is unclear when Mr. Sujan left to join Islamic State in Syria.

The FBI affidavit was filed under seal in January in support of search warrants requested by federal prosecutors for information from U.S. technology firms on social-media and email accounts established by Mr. Elshinawy and other suspects.

The unsealing of the affidavit was brought to public attention Thursday by a researcher with George Washington University's program on extremism.

Mr. Sujan's company, which built websites and "obtained and configured printers," spent $18,000 to buy, from a Canadian company, military-grade surveillance equipment that could be used for aerial targeting, according to the affidavit. It also ordered electronic bug-sweeping equipment from a U.S. company to be sent to Turkey, the affidavit said.

Mr. Elshinawy received a total of $8,700 from individuals associated with Islamic State, according to the affidavit, including five payments through PayPal from Mr. Sujan's company.

He used the money for a laptop, a cellphone and a VPN communications network, all of which the FBI claims he used to communicate with the Islamic State network, according to the affidavit.

Mr. Elshinawy told the FBI he knew the money was meant to conduct a terrorist attack in the U.S., according the affidavit. But he said he never planned to carry out any attack. Instead, the affidavit indicated, he said he was taking the money from "thieves."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170811ed8b00027



 ISIS  Airmail: The Bomb Shipped From Turkey to Australia

By Ahmet S. Yayla 
748 words
11 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A11
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Islamic State's plan to blow up a commercial jet out of Sydney last month was "one of the most sophisticated plots that has ever been attempted on Australian soil," police said last week. For reasons that aren't yet clear, the terrorists aborted the attack, and police are confident the bomb wouldn't have made it through airport security. Still, terrorists managed to acquire plastic explosives and the components needed to set it off -- all shipped by airmail from Turkey. The Australian authorities discovered the plan only when, nearly two weeks later, they received a tip from a foreign intelligence service.

Make no mistake: Islamic State jihadists will continue trying to carry out spectacular terrorist attacks in the West. Islamic State has lost control of Mosul, Iraq, where an estimated 30,000 of its fighters were killed. Now it is being pushed out of its putative capital, Raqqa, in Syria. As it begins to look less like a traditional state and more like an insurgency, Islamic State fighters will try to mobilize sympathizers around the world.

Last month, for instance, Islamic State affiliates in Turkey released the "Lone Wolf's Handbook," a manual of 60-some pages, with dozens of illustrations, that explains the most efficient way to make a bomb or drive a truck into pedestrians. Such attacks are meant to prove that Islamic State still exists and reinforce its bragging rights as the meanest, most fearsome warriors for Islamism. They're also meant to dominate the news, particularly in the West, to help recruit future jihadists.

At the same time, Islamic State is getting smarter about circumventing Western security, as the failed attack in Australia shows. An Islamic State commander, probably in Raqqa, coordinated the plot and guided the terrorists for more than three months. He had the bomb assembled with high-end, military-grade explosives. The device was shipped from Turkey to Australia by air cargo, probably in a passenger jet, evading security along the way. The plotters in Sydney received the package without any problems and set up the bomb. They put it in their luggage and went to the airport but then abandoned the plan before going through security. Instead they began working on a chemical-dispersion device to release hydrogen sulfide, a highly toxic gas.

Such sophisticated supply chain raises obvious questions: Where else may the Islamic State cell in Turkey have sent bomb components? How did it obtain the plastic explosives found in Sydney, and how much more does it have?

Western governments considering the Australia plot ought to respond in three ways: First, they should review the shipping and handling of air cargo and fortify security procedures. The successful delivery of plastic explosives constitutes a major world-wide threat. Plastic explosives are hard to detect, but newer X-ray machines usually have the capacity to find them.

Second, the other countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization should lean on Turkish authorities to crack down on jihadist networks. Almost all of the materials to produce the bomb in Australia were sent from Turkey.

Last month Brett McGurk, the U.S. special envoy for the coalition against Islamic State, said that al Qaeda fighters had established a "save haven" in Syria just across the Turkish border. "How are they getting there? They're not paratroopers," Mr. McGurk said. "The approach by some of our partners to send in tens of thousands of tons of weapons, and looking the other way as these foreign fighters come into Syria, may not have been the best approach."

Third, counterterrorism agencies should be more vigilant than ever about monitoring connections between their citizens and Islamic State fighters. Terrorists always try to recruit the people they trust. A foreign fighter's close circle in his homeland is perhaps the easiest recruitment target when Islamic State goes looking for future jihadists to carry out attacks.

The Australian suspects are instructive. The men arrested and charged, Khaled Khayat and Mahmoud Khayat, are brothers. They were reportedly recruited by another brother, Tarek Khayat, who is an Islamic State commander in Syria. Looking for these kinds of needles in the haystack is tiring work, but that is the essential job of intelligence agencies.

---

Mr. Yayla, an adjunct professor at George Mason University, formerly led the counterterrorism and operations department of the Turkish National Police in Sanliurfa (2010-13).

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170811ed8b0000x



Iran Is Using Syria to Advance Toward the Mediterranean

By Naftali Bennett 
715 words
8 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A15
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Hezbollah announced last month that it had captured the Syrian-Lebanese border area of Juroud Arsal from Islamic State forces. Far from being a minor development in a violent and unstable region, this marks another Iranian success in its quest for power and dominance across the Middle East.

Since its 1979 revolution, Iran has sought to become a dominant world power capable of imposing Islamic rule on as many people as possible. The Iranian regime finances and supports armed militias in other countries and is the world's top exporter of terror. Hundreds if not thousands of Americans have died at the hands of Iran's terrorist proxies.

An essential part of Tehran's grand strategy is to control a land corridor from Iran to the Mediterranean Sea. Under the cover of Syria's bloody civil war, Hezbollah is helping to build such a highway. Hezbollah, trained and supported by Tehran, is classified as a terror group by the U.S., France and the Arab League, among others.

Its effort endangers the entire Western world. Controlling this corridor would directly connect Iran with its proxies in Syria and Lebanon, allowing it to transfer advanced weapons cheaply and quickly. The highway would let Iran build its military presence on the Mediterranean, bringing much of Europe into the range of its air force, navy and midrange missiles. Iran could even build arms factories outside its borders.

Iranian apologists frame Hezbollah's capture of the border area as a victory over ISIS, as if the U.S.-led coalition ought to be cheering. ISIS needs to be stopped, but Iran is a far greater problem in the long run. Tehran shouldn't be mistaken for part of the solution.

As Syria disintegrated through civil war, Iran acted swiftly. It broke international law and forcefully expelled the Sunni population and replaced it with Shiites. This changed the local demography to support Tehran's planned land corridor through Syria and Iraq. Iran also sent its generals to train Bashar Assad's troops. Hezbollah has effectively morphed from a terror group into a division of the Iranian army, working for Tehran not only in Lebanon and Syria, but also in Yemen and Iraq.

In the game of chess that Syria has become, Western leaders are so focused on the knight attacking their pawns they cannot see the queen maneuvering to defeat them. Mistaking ISIS as the most serious threat has allowed Iran to move its pieces forward and gain better position. The nuclear deal Iran signed in 2015 demonstrates Tehran's patience, as it temporarily slows the country's preparations to acquire nuclear weapons without stopping them over the long term.

I and others are concerned by the cease-fire in southern Syria brokered by the U.S., Russia and Jordan last month. With American and allied forces present in the north, Iran has focused its efforts on the south. The hiatus from violence in that region only gives Tehran another piece of territory in its bid to build a highway to the coast.

It will take time and patience to stop Iran. The international community needs to defeat Tehran wherever its forces advance: in cyberspace, on the battlefields of Yemen and Iraq, and in advanced-weapons laboratories. This effort will be both public and covert, economic and technological. If it results in direct military confrontation, Iran's foes must be ready to win there too.

Iran must be made to pay a price every day its soldiers remain on Syrian soil helping the Assad regime kill its own people. Tehran's leaders must know that every violation of the nuclear deal will trigger harsh sanctions. They cannot direct terror attacks in Europe, Asia and America and expect the world to ignore their actions.

There are many possible courses of action against Iran. Yet the free world -- led by the U.S. -- has yet to take the first and most important step: declaring that it cannot abide an Iranian empire from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean Sea.

---

Mr. Bennett is a member of Israel's Security Cabinet and a reserve major in the Israel Defense Forces' General Staff Reconnaissance Unit.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170808ed880000m



Business
Today's Top Supply Chain and Logistics News From WSJ; Delivering up-to-the minute news, analysis, interviews and explanatory journalism on logistics, supply-chain management, e-commerce and more

By Paul Page 
1,432 words
7 August 2017
12:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Sign up: With one click, get this newsletter delivered to your inbox.

The most important targets of a new labor pact at West Coast ports aren't even parties to the agreement. The deal approved by longshore workers to extend their current contract by three years, to July 2022, is aimed at retailers, manufacturers and other importers that have been uneasy over labor disruptions at big gateways, and at ports in other parts of the country that are trying to convince those shippers to shift their supply chains. WSJ Logistics Report's Erica E. Phillips and Jennifer Smith write that the approval pushes off prospects of a repeat of the contentious talks of 2014 and early 2015, when the nation's busiest ports ground to a near-standstill. The deal marks a kind of challenge to organized labor at ports on the East and Gulf coasts, where operators hope to use the opening of an expanded Panama Canal to lure more cargo. At stake are jobs, along with untold millions of dollars to get ports, roads and rail operations lined up for the business.

There may be life after liquidation for some faltering retail brands—f they can get the logistics right. Investment groups have been snapping up retailers that have entered bankruptcy in the ongoing upheaval in the sector, the WSJ's Erica E. Phillips and Stephanie Gleason report, betting that brands like Wet Seal, American Apparel and The Limited can refashion their business models as online storefronts. Moving to web-only sales becomes a race against the clock, however, as companies revamp supply chains to retain fickle customers. The strategy is part of the changing landscape of retail, where fast-fashion, e-commerce and new marketing and shipping strategies are changing the business. Companies have popped up to handle inventory and distribution, helping brands make the transition from brick-and-mortar chains to online labels. Replacing store rents and employees with warehousing and shipping can pull more profit out of clothes sales, but experts say the margin advantage can wear out quickly if they don't move fast enough.

The last-mile is turning into fertile ground for hiring. Courier and messenger companies added 3,200 jobs last month, WSJ Logistics Report's Jennifer Smith, surpassing the previous high for the sector set last December and demonstrating that e-commerce demands are driving year-round changes in logistics. Courier companies, including the parcel carriers that deliver online purchases, have added more than 30,000 jobs in the past year. That's second in the logistics sector only to warehousing and storage operators, who cut 2,200 jobs in July in an uncharacteristic pullback. An earlier decline in that sector was revised to show a gain, however, and broader trends suggest warehouse will pick up. Industry executives say the labor market is tight, and online retail colossus Amazon.com Inc. held job fairs last week looking to add thousands of jobs. More importantly, U.S. online sales grew more than 10% year-over-year in the second quarter, far ahead of overall retail sales, putting plenty of goods in the pipeline for delivery.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE

Toyota Motor Corp. is redrawing its North American supply chain with its decision to build a $1.6 billion American car plant with Mazda Motor Corp. The plan to open the factory by 2021, at a location yet to be decided, marks a new win for the U.S. manufacturing sector, while extending a restructuring of automotive production in North America as car makers adjust to changing market demands and potential changes in trade guidelines. The WSJ's Sean McLain reports the new U.S. plant will produce 300,000 vehicles and employ 4,000 people. Half of those vehicles will be a new Mazda crossover, the rest Corolla sedans that had been slated for a new plant in Guanjuato, Mexico. The Mexican plant, meantime, now will make the Tacoma pickup truck, nearly doubling production capacity of the popular model to 400,000 vehicles. By the time the factory dust settles, Toyota's North American operations may look more complicated, with more parts and vehicles moving across borders than before.

A dark and efficient international supply chain for Middle Eastern antiquities plundered by Islamic State has formed in the shadows of the world's highly specialized art distribution channels. The trade in ancient objects from Iraq and Syria is handled through middlemen across complicated networks before they are sold to dealers in the West. The WSJ's Benoit Faucon, Georgi Kantchev and Alistair MacDonald report the stream of plundered precious artifacts has grown as \b ISIS\b0 's territorial grip in the region has faded and the group has sought new sources of revenue, building a trade that will ensure the group's legacy of looting will linger for many years. It's a grim example of illicit distribution operations being woven into legitimate trade channels, with the movement of goods spanning basic smuggling—ulgarian police last year found ancient coins disguised as buttons on jackets—o the "laundering" of artifacts through art dealers and warehouses in Europe and Asia. Middlemen and dealers build profits along the way, with each step costing the Middle East a bit of its history.

QUOTABLE

Number of the Day

14%

Year-over-year decline in U.S. rail carloads of grain in July, according to the Association of American Railroads.

IN OTHER NEWS

Twelve dock workers and a firefighter sustained injuries after a container ship leaked a hazardous material at California's Port of Long Beach. (Associated Press)

U.S. imports fell 0.2% in June on declining flows of consumer goods. (WSJ)

Banks cut their forecasts on oil prices for a third consecutive month, predicting prices will average $53. (WSJ)

Senate Democrats are holding up confirmation of three top Transportation Department nominees, including the head of the Federal Railroad Administration. (WSJ)

Workers at a Nissan Motor Co. plant in Mississippi voted against forming a union. (WSJ)

Blue Apron Holdings Inc. is moving its New Jersey fulfillment center from Jersey City to Linden and expects to lay off more than 400 people. (WSJ)

State-owned oil giant Saudi Aramco is in talks to invest up to $2 in a Chinese state-owned oil refinery. (WSJ)

Electric-car startup Faraday Future pledged its corporate headquarters in Los Angeles as collateral to secure a $14 million rescue loan. (WSJ)

Uber Technologies Inc. knowingly leased unsafe cars to drivers in Singapore. (WSJ)

Kraft Heinz Co and Kellogg Co. joined the litany of food makers plagued by lackluster U.S. sales in the second quarter. (WSJ)

U.S. generic-drug prices are falling at the fastest rate in years, hitting earnings at pharmaceutical wholesalers and manufacturers. (WSJ)

Walnut farmers near a massive Northern California dam that nearly ruptured are seeking $15 million they say they lost in flooding. (WSJ)

New municipal bonds to fund infrastructure projects were down 19.4% through July this year from a year ago. (Reuters)

The Royal Bank of Scotland has written off a large chunk of shipping debt and hinted at further pain from its bad shipping loans. (Lloyd's List)

U.S. rail carloads declined 0.6% in July, with growth in coal volume slowing while grain and motor vehicle shipments fell sharply. (Logistics Management)

India's Mahindra Logistics Ltd, a unit of auto maker Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd., filed for an initial public offering. (Economic Times)

Second-quarter profit at Atlas Air Worldwide Holdings Inc. nearly doubled to $38.1 million as the freighter operator reported new contracts with Asia-based airlines. (The Loadstar)

China's Zhejiang Shipyard will lay off 300 of its 560 workers amid the yard's troubled bankruptcy reorganization. (Seatrade Maritime)

GSC Logistics will test battery-powered trucks for its drayage operations at the Port of Oakland. (American Shipper)

A Mexican court sided with farm groups in barring the import of potatoes from the U.S. (Potato Pro)

The distribution of bananas across New York City is a complicated logistics operation that tolerates few slip-ups. (New York Times)

ABOUT US

Paul Page is deputy editor of WSJ Logistics Report. Follow him at @PaulPage, and follow the entire WSJ Logistics Report team: @brianjbaskin , @jensmithWSJ and @EEPhillips_WSJ. Follow the WSJ Logistics Report on Twitter at @WSJLogistics.

Write to Paul Page at paul.page@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170807ed87001jl



Life & Arts -- Antiquities: The Men Who Trade  ISIS  Loot --- The middlemen who buy and sell antiquities looted by  ISIS  from Syria and Iraq explain how the smuggling supply chain works

By Benoit Faucon, Georgi Kantchev, and Alistair MacDonald 
1,762 words
7 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A11
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A stream of plundered antiquities flowing out of Syria and Iraq to Western art collectors is dependent on men like Muhammad hajj Al-Hassan.

Mr. Al-Hassan, a 28-year-old Syrian, says he started to trade antiquities in 2015 after being contacted by a top official of Islamic State who sought his archaeological expertise to find Western buyers.

Later, he became a cog in an international supply chain smuggling art looted by ISIS.

ISIS's territorial grip is fading fast: Iraq has declared victory over the terrorist group in Mosul and ISIS is fighting to hold its self-proclaimed Syrian capital Raqqa -- the last major city under its control. But the group's legacy of looting will linger for many years, law enforcement officials say, in much the same way that art looted by the Nazis continues to surface 70 years later. The ancient statues, jewelry and artifacts that ISIS has stolen in Syria and Iraq, are already moving underground and may not surface for decades, according to these officials and experts in the trade.

"Once looted in Syria and Iraq, objects enter a gray market shrouded in secrecy," said Michael Danti, an archeologist who directs the Boston-based Cultural Heritage Initiatives and advises the U.S. State Department on the looting of antiquities in Syria. "It's a problem that will stay with us for years to come."

Western security officials say they expect revenue from looted antiquities from Iraq and Syria to become an increasingly important source of money for ISIS if its other revenue streams, such as oil, continue to dwindle.

"ISIS is increasing pressure on this line of trafficking to compensate for the loss of petroleum revenue," a French security official said.

While it's impossible to know how much money these stolen artifacts provide to ISIS annually -- estimates range from the low tens of millions by Mr. Danti to $100 million by another French security official -- the income is considered noteworthy.

The Wall Street Journal interviewed Syrian art traders, recent ISIS defectors who worked in antiquities, and law enforcement officials in the U.S., France, Switzerland, and Bulgaria to piece together how the international antiquities smuggling operation works.

Their accounts describe a pattern of trafficking in which ancient objects make their way from archeological sites in Iraq and Syria, across borders with Turkey and Lebanon, to warehouses in Europe and Asia to await sale to dealers in the West.

Last month, Oklahoma City-based arts-and-crafts retailer Hobby Lobby settled claims with the U.S. government by paying a $3 million fine and surrendering artifacts believed stolen in 2010 and smuggled from Iraq. In response to the claims, which are related to allegations of trading items looted prior to the emergence of ISIS, Hobby Lobby said it will surrender the artifacts, pay the fine and adopt new procedures for buying cultural property.

ISIS hasn't commented on the trade in antiquities.

Mr. Al-Hassan and another Syrian art trader, Omar Al-Jumaa, said they agreed to speak to the Journal in person to denounce ISIS and draw attention to the group's role in the antiquities trade.

Like others involved in antiquities smuggling, Mr. Al-Hassan trades under an alias. He identified himself by his trading name, Mohamed al-Ali, in an interview for a May 2017 Wall Street Journal video about looted art.

In more recent interviews, Mr. Al-Hassan declined to say whether he is currently active in the trade. Mr. Al-Jumaa said he is currently selling looted objects.

Before the civil war, Mr. Al-Hassan said he was an English-language student who had begun studying archaeology in his spare time, inspired by a friend's father. His knowledge in that field became an asset when the rebel Free Syrian Army took control of his region of Eastern Syria in 2013 and he began regularly digging antiquities for the group.

When the territory passed into the hands of Islamic State in June 2014, Mr. Al-Hassan said he and other young men were arrested by the terror group and accused of collaborating with the FSA. Mr. Al-Hassan said he and four other men, including his neighbor, were blindfolded by a Tunisian ISIS commander and lined up in a school. Everyone in the group, except for Mr. Al-Hassan, was shot in the head, he said. Mr. Al-Hassan says he was spared when ISIS officials told him they had no proof of his connection with the FSA.

One year later, he says, he was contacted by Abu Laith Al-Dairi, the ISIS official in charge of antiquities, to sell artifacts looted by the group. "We have a lot of objects," Mr. Al-Hassan remembers Mr. Laith Al-Dairi saying over the phone. "I need you to find European buyers."

For many Syrian traders and smugglers, antiquities are one of the few ways they can earn a living. "They are destroying our history," said Mr. Al-Hassan. But "traffickers love them because they can make money."

The Journal couldn't verify some details of Messrs. Al-Hassan and Al-Jumaa's stories about their lives in Syria. But their accounts of the antiquities trade squared broadly with those of law enforcement officials. Mr. Al-Hassan, for instance, told the Journal last year about a Roman-era ring that ISIS's Mr. Al-Dairi was trying to sell. Later, in December, the U.S. Justice Department filed a civil complaint seeking the recovery of that object and other Syrian-looted artifacts from the group and named Mr. Al-Dairi as a key figure in the trade.

Islamic State seizes antiquities from Syria and Iraq by giving licenses to locals to dig for them, according to people involved in the trade. The digging operation is often overseen by the group's cadre of foreign jihadists, which the organization considers more loyal than locals.

Initially, ISIS didn't charge for the licenses but demanded loyalty from diggers and 20% of the estimated value of each object they excavated, these people say. Now, however, ISIS demands that diggers sell all discovered items to the group at a 20% discount of their estimated market value; ISIS then resells the objects itself, according to Mr. Al-Hassan. As ISIS loses territory, such rules are applied unevenly depending on the local leader, Mr. Danti said.

The illegal trade is "not just for funding the [terrorist] group itself, but for creating ways to bring funds to its subjected population, whose hearts and minds Islamic State is trying to win," Yaya Fanusie, director of the Washington-based counterterrorism think-tank Foundation for Defense of Democracies, told a U.S. congressional hearing last year.

A network of independent intermediaries buy artifacts from ISIS and carries them out of Syria and Iraq, often blending in with humanitarian convoys and refugees, Western officials and ISIS antiquity traders say. They are also hidden in exports such as cotton, fruit and vegetables.

Outside Syria and Iraq, the intermediaries then sell to middlemen such as Messrs. Al-Hassan and Al-Jumaa.

Mr. Al-Hassan said he recently sold two antique bibles looted by Islamic State from a site in Eastern Syria to a Russian buyer in a city in Southern Turkey for <euro>10,000 ($11,800). The Russian then smuggled the bibles out of Turkey, hidden in a truck with vegetables, he said. Mr. Al-Hassan said he kept a commission of 25% and gave the rest to the trader who had brought the object to Turkey.

Other smugglers employ different ways to hide their cargo.

Mr. Al-Jumaa, said he paid $1,000 to a local Syrian woman wearing a long black robe known as an abaya to carry a bronze Roman statue across the Turkish border from Syria in her bag. The statue, of a warrior with winged helmet and a shield, had originally come from Raqqa, he said. The Turkish border police rarely check on women for religious reasons, Mr. Al-Jumaa said.

Mr. Al-Jumaa said he picked up the statue from the woman on the Turkish side of the border and drove it to a city in Turkey, where he said he is currently looking for a buyer. (Mr. Al-Jumaa said he later discovered that the object may be a reproduction made in the 1920s.)

Like Mr. Al-Hassan, Mr. Al-Jumaa has reason to hate Islamic State. He said he was jailed in 2014 after assaulting a member of the group who had refused to let him take a cousin badly burned in an air attack by the Syrian regime to Damascus for treatment. Every morning, an Islamic State jail warden put a large kitchen knife to his throat and said the group would execute him that day.

But after escaping to Turkey he said he began trading for the group. "I don't feel happy selling our history, but I need the money," said Mr. Al-Jumaa, who was a law student when the war broke out.

Despite ISIS's territorial losses, the trader says his business is doing well because so many items plundered by the group are now in circulation. Last week , he said he was set to meet four Lebanese men he had communicated with over WhatsApp who were travelling to Turkey to buy a cut emerald he said was looted by the organization in Mosul in 2014. Mr Al-Jumaa is asking $600,000 for the precious stone, he said, but negotiations with a British trader to sell for that amount failed in March.

Mr. Al-Hassan said an Iraqi-Kurdish trader on July 30 was trying to sell a 3rd-century Palmyrene limestone statue of a woman after bringing it to Istanbul. On Aug. 1, traders on the Syrian side of the border were offering an ancient Greek silver pendant and antique Hebrew coins looted in Western Syria, as they tried to smuggle them into Turkey, Mr. Al-Hassan said.

In the majority of cases, artifacts from Iraq and Syria are first smuggled into Turkey or Lebanon, European and U.S. officials say, calling those countries key smuggling hubs. From there they often pass through southeastern European countries like Bulgaria and Romania and then into Western Europe, in particular Germany and Switzerland, according to the officials.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170807ed870000g



World News: Police Say Islamic State Behind Failed Bomb Plot

By Rob Taylor 
632 words
7 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

CANBERRA, Australia -- Police said two men facing terrorism charges in Australia were involved in an aborted attempt to place an improvised explosive device on an Etihad Airways flight out of Sydney last month, in a plot directed by Islamic State.

The device was to be smuggled onto the July 15 flight, they said, but the plan was aborted before it reached security.

One of the men, a 49-year-old from Sydney, brought the device to the airport in a piece of luggage that he had asked his brother to take with him on the flight -- without telling the brother that the bag contained explosives, Australian Federal Police Deputy Commissioner Michael Phelan told reporters Friday.

For reasons still unclear, the bag never got past the check-in counter. Instead, Mr. Phelan said, the man left the airport with the bag, and his brother continued onto the flight without it.

"This is one of the most sophisticated plots that has ever been attempted on Australian soil," Mr. Phelan said.

The details Mr. Phelan provided are the first that officials have released since four men were arrested in a series of raids in Sydney last week.

Khaled Khayat, 49, and Mahmoud Khayat, 32, have been charged with two counts of planning a terrorist act. They were refused bail and the case has been adjourned until November. Their lawyer, Michael Coroneos, told reporters outside a Sydney court that the men were "entitled to the presumption of innocence."

A third man is in custody under special counterterrorism laws, while a fourth was released without charge.

Khaled Khayat's brother remains overseas and hasn't been charged in connection with the plot because police believe he had no idea the bag contained explosives, Mr. Phelan said.

After the initial bid failed, the two men changed tactics and were in the early stages of devising a "chemical-dispersion device" designed to release highly toxic hydrogen sulfide in a crowded area, police said.

Both plots were believed to have been planned with the help of a senior Islamic State member who sent the components for the device to the men in Sydney via air cargo from Turkey.

"The explosive was a high-end explosive, high military-grade explosive," said Mr. Phelan. "With assistancefrom the ISIL commander, the accused assembled the IED, the components, into what webelieve was a functioning IED to beplaced on that flight."

Etihad had no immediate comment, but earlier this week said it was assisting Australian police and "complying fully" with enhanced security measures.

The allegation that Islamic State was able to ship explosives to Australia undetected was troubling, Mr. Phelan acknowledged. Turkish embassy officials in Canberra declined to comment on how the material may have left the country.

Australia's five-tier terrorism threat alert system has been set at "probable," the third-highest level, since September 2014. In December of that year, a gunman, later identified as Iranian immigrant Man Haron Monis, took over a central Sydney cafeand held numerous people hostage for 16 hours before police killed him to end the siege. Two hostages -- the cafe's manager and a female customer -- also died.

Since then, police said there have been four attacks and 13 others disrupted, including a 2016 plot to behead police during national Anzac Day veterans' parades and a separate plot the same year to attack Christmas shoppers in Melbourne.

Mr. Phelan said that planning for the attack was believed to have begun around April, when the men were put in touch with the Islamic State commander through a relative fighting for the group in Syria.

If convicted, they could face life imprisonment.

---

With contributions from the Associated Press.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170806ed8700017



World News: Australia Charges Two in Bomb Plot

By Rob Taylor 
379 words
5 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

CANBERRA, Australia -- Police said two men facing terrorism charges in Australia were involved in an aborted attempt to place an improvised explosive device on an Etihad Airways flight out of Sydney last month, in a plot directed by Islamic State.

One of the men, a 49-year-old from Sydney, brought the device to the airport in a piece of luggage that he had asked his brother to take with him on the July 15 flight -- without telling the brother the bag contained explosives, Federal Police Deputy Commissioner Michael Phelan said Friday.

For reasons still unclear, Mr. Phelan said, the man left the airport with the bag, and his brother continued onto the flight without it. "This is one of the most sophisticated plots that has ever been attempted on Australian soil," he said.

Khaled Khayat, 49, and Mahmoud Khayat, 32, were charged with two counts of planning a terrorist act. They were refused bail and the case has been adjourned until November. Their lawyer, Michael Coroneos, told reporters outside a Sydney court that the men were "entitled to the presumption of innocence."

Khaled Khayat's brother hasn't been charged because police believe he had no idea the bag contained explosives, Mr. Phelan said.

After the initial bid failed, the two men changed tactics and were in the early stages of devising a "chemical-dispersion device" designed to release toxic hydrogen sulfide in a crowded area, police said.

Authorities believe both plots been planned with the help of a senior Islamic State member who sent the components for the device to the men in Sydney via air cargo from Turkey.

"The explosive was a high-end explosive, high military-grade explosive," Mr. Phelan said. "With assistancefrom the ISIL commander, the accused assembled the IED, the components, into what we believe was a functioning IED to be placed on that flight."

The allegation that Islamic State was able to ship explosives to Australia undetected was troubling, Mr. Phelan acknowledged. Turkish Embassy officials in Canberra declined to comment on how the material may have left the country

Etihad had no comment, but earlier this week said it was assisting Australian police.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170805ed850001w



World News -- Middle East Crossroads: Iraq's Murky Lesson For U.S. in Afghanistan

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
937 words
4 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A2
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

As President Donald Trump 's administration weighs how to handle Afghanistan's chronic war, looming large is the question of what is the right lesson of the 2011 U.S. withdrawal from another conflict: Iraq.

Was it a strategic failure -- or a step that, over the long term and at significant cost, forced the Iraqis to assume responsibility for their own war? And if so, can this experience be replicated in Afghanistan?

In 2014, as Islamic State surged to the doorstep of Baghdad and the Iraqi army collapsed, it seemed to many that the American pullout was a catastrophic mistake that enabled international terrorism.

Now that reinvigorated Iraqi security forces have rolled back most of Islamic State's gains, this perspective isn't as clear-cut -- even taking into account the war's huge human toll.

After all, in the absence of American backup, Islamic State's existential threat forced a strong immune response from the Iraqi body politic.

The Popular Mobilization Forces that sprang up from Shiite militias in 2014, after a call to defend the homeland by top Iraqi Shiite cleric Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, stopped the extremist group's blitzkrieg.

Then, quarreling Iraqi political factions came together. The Kurdish regional government in the north ushered in unprecedented security cooperation with Baghdad and the rebuilt Iraqi army. Defeating Islamic State became an Iraqi rather than an American war.

"The American withdrawal put Iraqis in front of their own challenges and they realized that they have to resolve these problems on their own," said Iraqi lawmaker Dhiaa al-Assadi. Mr. Assadi heads a parliamentary bloc of supporters of Moqtada al-Sadr, a populist Shiite cleric whose militias used to fight U.S. troops before 2011.

True, the U.S. and other Western allies had to send troops back to Iraq, mostly in an advisory capacity, in 2014. They are, however, viewed very differently these days. Even the once-hostile Shiite militias consider them, however reluctantly, de facto allies.

So, as the White House debates its options in Afghanistan -- ranging from a significant troop increase to a full withdrawal -- to what extent are Iraq's experiences applicable to the Afghan conflict? Could the Afghan state, left to its own devices at least for a time, also transform the battle against the Taliban into a national and popular struggle?

The answer is, most likely, no. America's Afghan war, now 16 years long, is different from the Iraqi conflict in many crucial respects. And that is not just because Afghan President Ashraf Ghani , unlike Iraq's leader six years ago, wants an American military presence to continue for as long as possible.

While the Iraqi insurgency raged within the country's Sunni minority, Afghanistan's Taliban are drawn mostly from the country's dominant ethnic group, the Pashtuns.

And the Taliban keep advancing despite the presence of nearly 9,000 U.S. troops. While U.S. casualties in Afghanistan are relatively rare nowadays, they still occur: On Wednesday, the Pentagon said two U.S. troops died in Kandahar. Unlike oil-rich Iraq, Afghanistan can't pay for its own military and requires several billion dollars in Western assistance every year.

Add to this a political class that is even more corrupt and riven by infighting than the Iraqis in 2014, and it becomes clear that removing the American backstop would likely precipitate a rapid and inevitable collapse of the Afghan state, former and current Western officials say.

"Withdrawing and daring the Afghans to 'step up' when they cannot without U.S. support is a recipe for disaster," said James Cunningham, a former U.S. ambassador to Kabul and a nonresident fellow at the Atlantic Council think tank.

In Iraq, he added, "'victory' depended on circumstances that are particularly Iraqi and the destruction of a major city.The circumstances in Afghanistan are different and collapse of the government and reversion to chaos will not be easily reversed, if at all."

That is one of the reasons why America's North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies, even though many of them pressed for an end date to the Afghan military mission five years ago, have since accepted the open-ended deployment. That is especially so given the emergence of Islamic State's regional affiliate in parts of Afghanistan.

Compared with Afghanistan today, "Iraq was far more stable at the time of the U.S. withdrawal, and it still collapsed," said Vali Nasr, dean of the School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University and a former State Department adviser on Afghanistan. "Afghan national security forces don't look like they have the capacity to take on the Taliban and ISIS. They are losing ground even with U.S. troops there and will lose even more ground without U.S. troops."

While a military victory against the Taliban isn't in the cards anytime soon, the relatively small U.S. presence in Afghanistan prevents the fall of Kabul and other main cities. Considering the failure of past military surges to permanently alter the situation on the ground, such a stalemate may be the best possible outcome.

"The overall lesson in the region as a whole and its various parts is we can neither pivot out of it, nor go in massively to fix it definitively," said James Jeffrey, a former U.S. ambassador to Iraq who is a fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. "Rather, we have to deal with it on a long-term basis like a chronic illness."

Document WSJE000020170804ed840001y



World News -- Middle East Crossroads: Iraq's Murky Lesson For U.S. in Afghanistan

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
937 words
4 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A2
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

As President Donald Trump 's administration weighs how to handle Afghanistan's chronic war, looming large is the question of what is the right lesson of the 2011 U.S. withdrawal from another conflict: Iraq.

Was it a strategic failure -- or a step that, over the long term and at significant cost, forced the Iraqis to assume responsibility for their own war? And if so, can this experience be replicated in Afghanistan?

In 2014, as Islamic State surged to the doorstep of Baghdad and the Iraqi army collapsed, it seemed to many that the American pullout was a catastrophic mistake that enabled international terrorism.

Now that reinvigorated Iraqi security forces have rolled back most of Islamic State's gains, this perspective isn't as clear-cut -- even taking into account the war's huge human toll.

After all, in the absence of American backup, Islamic State's existential threat forced a strong immune response from the Iraqi body politic.

The Popular Mobilization Forces that sprang up from Shiite militias in 2014, after a call to defend the homeland by top Iraqi Shiite cleric Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, stopped the extremist group's blitzkrieg.

Then, quarreling Iraqi political factions came together. The Kurdish regional government in the north ushered in unprecedented security cooperation with Baghdad and the rebuilt Iraqi army. Defeating Islamic State became an Iraqi rather than an American war.

"The American withdrawal put Iraqis in front of their own challenges and they realized that they have to resolve these problems on their own," said Iraqi lawmaker Dhiaa al-Assadi. Mr. Assadi heads a parliamentary bloc of supporters of Moqtada al-Sadr, a populist Shiite cleric whose militias used to fight U.S. troops before 2011.

True, the U.S. and other Western allies had to send troops back to Iraq, mostly in an advisory capacity, in 2014. They are, however, viewed very differently these days. Even the once-hostile Shiite militias consider them, however reluctantly, de facto allies.

So, as the White House debates its options in Afghanistan -- ranging from a significant troop increase to a full withdrawal -- to what extent are Iraq's experiences applicable to the Afghan conflict? Could the Afghan state, left to its own devices at least for a time, also transform the battle against the Taliban into a national and popular struggle?

The answer is, most likely, no. America's Afghan war, now 16 years long, is different from the Iraqi conflict in many crucial respects. And that is not just because Afghan President Ashraf Ghani , unlike Iraq's leader six years ago, wants an American military presence to continue for as long as possible.

While the Iraqi insurgency raged within the country's Sunni minority, Afghanistan's Taliban are drawn mostly from the country's dominant ethnic group, the Pashtuns.

And the Taliban keep advancing despite the presence of nearly 9,000 U.S. troops. While U.S. casualties in Afghanistan are relatively rare nowadays, they still occur: On Wednesday, the Pentagon said two U.S. troops died in Kandahar. Unlike oil-rich Iraq, Afghanistan can't pay for its own military and requires several billion dollars in Western assistance every year.

Add to this a political class that is even more corrupt and riven by infighting than the Iraqis in 2014, and it becomes clear that removing the American backstop would likely precipitate a rapid and inevitable collapse of the Afghan state, former and current Western officials say.

"Withdrawing and daring the Afghans to 'step up' when they cannot without U.S. support is a recipe for disaster," said James Cunningham, a former U.S. ambassador to Kabul and a nonresident fellow at the Atlantic Council think tank.

In Iraq, he added, "'victory' depended on circumstances that are particularly Iraqi and the destruction of a major city. The circumstances in Afghanistan are different and collapse of the government and reversion to chaos will not be easily reversed, if at all."

That is one of the reasons why America's North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies, even though many of them pressed for an end date to the Afghan military mission five years ago, have since accepted the open-ended deployment. That is especially so given the emergence of Islamic State's regional affiliate in parts of Afghanistan.

Compared with Afghanistan today, "Iraq was far more stable at the time of the U.S. withdrawal, and it still collapsed," said Vali Nasr, dean of the School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University and a former State Department adviser on Afghanistan. "Afghan national security forces don't look like they have the capacity to take on the Taliban and ISIS. They are losing ground even with U.S. troops there and will lose even more ground without U.S. troops."

While a military victory against the Taliban isn't in the cards anytime soon, the relatively small U.S. presence in Afghanistan prevents the fall of Kabul and other main cities. Considering the failure of past military surges to permanently alter the situation on the ground, such a stalemate may be the best possible outcome.

"The overall lesson in the region as a whole and its various parts is we can neither pivot out of it, nor go in massively to fix it definitively," said James Jeffrey, a former U.S. ambassador to Iraq who is a fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. "Rather, we have to deal with it on a long-term basis like a chronic illness."

Document AWSJ000020170803ed840000r



CN-Others
道琼斯海外投资动态信息-8月3日日报（节选）

5,645 words
3 August 2017
10:31
华尔街日报中文版 (简体)
WSJCN
Chinese - Simplified
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

中国政策汇             

                 中国"一带一路"政策和项目新闻汇编（以下来自于第三方媒体的内容未经道琼斯通讯社独立核实）                          

中国             

                 合规 |  财政部：国企投资海外需提交尽职调查和可行性报告，重大亏损要审计                          

中国财政部公布了加强对国有企业海外投资审查的新举措。从本月开始，所有国有企业在向监管机构申请投资许可时都必须提交尽职调查和可行性报告。财政部称，国企境外投资事前决策必须考虑财务可行性，对连续三年累计亏损金额较大或当年发生严重亏损等重大风险事件的境外投资企业（项目）进行实地监督检查或委托中介机构进行审计，并按审计监督情况采取相应措施。             

（来源：道琼斯）             

                 金融 |  中国加强对内保外贷业务的审查                          

中国国家外汇管理局8月2日表示，将加强监管，指导金融机构加强内保外贷业务的风险管理，严厉打击虚假担保和恶意担保等违规行为。             

                 背景分析：内保外贷是指母公司提供担保，该公司的海外附属公司藉此在相关银行的境外分行或附属机构取得贷款融资的行为。中国加大对该业务的审查力度旨在遏制因国内企业大力度开展海外交易而加剧的资本外流问题。                          

（来源：道琼斯）             

                 金融 |  匈牙利发行10亿熊猫债 资金用于"一带一路"项目                           

匈牙利首次在中国银行间债券市场发行10亿元人民币熊猫债，期限为三年，收益率为4.85%，所募资金将用于"一带一路"建设相关合作项目。未来匈牙利还将根据市场情况再发行20亿元人民币熊猫债。（来源：中国经济网）             

全球情报站             

                 道琼斯通讯社驻全球记者报道                          

                 亚太                          

                 印度                          

                 经济 |  印度央行降息25个基点                          

鉴于印度通胀和经济增速有所放缓，印度央行8月2日将主要贷款利率下调0.25个百分点，回购利率下调至6.0%，逆回购利率下调至5.75%。本次降息距离上次降息有将近10个月时间。经济学家预计，印度央行在未来一年还会将利率再下调0.25个百分点。印度6月份消费者价格指数(CPI)升幅放缓至1.5%，远低于央行设定的2%底部水平。             

                 医药 |  印度内阁否决复星医药收购Gland Pharma的交易                          

知情人士称，印度内阁已否决中国上海复星医药（集团）股份有限公司以13亿美元收购印度制药公司Gland Pharma Ltd.的交易，因不愿让复星医药获得Gland独特的血管注射剂技术。印度外国投资促进委员会此前已批准复星医药从包括KKR & Co.在内的一群投资者手中收购Gland Pharma 86%的股份，但该交易没有获得印度内阁经济事务委员会的同意。             

                 背景分析：该交易原本有望成为中资公司对印度企业规模最大的一笔收购。印度庞大的制药工业主导着全球仿制药市场。Gland Pharma主要从事注射剂仿制药的生产制造，是首家获得美国FDA批准的印度企业，在美国和欧洲药品市场均占有一席之地。                          

                 科技 | 印度最大移动支付公司Paytm将推出即时通信功能                          

印度最大的移动支付公司Paytm准备在其应用中添加即时通信功能，欲取代Facebook旗下的WhatsApp，成为印度最受欢迎的即时通信服务。此举可能令Paytm从WhatsApp那里抢走部分用户，进一步加速其平台发展。拥有2亿印度用户的WhatsApp也表示目前正在研究向印度市场添加支付功能的可能性。             

                 背景分析：不只是WhatsApp，Paytm还将威胁到印度本土最大的即时通信应用Hike。Hike拥有1亿用户，曾获腾讯和富士康投资。Hike在今年6月推出了支付功能。                          

近年来，廉价的智能手机和便宜的流量套餐催生了数百万印度网民，促使来自美国和中国的科技公司纷纷扩大印度市场。而去年莫迪政府的废钞举措料进一步刺激该国数字金融服务的发展。             

                 中东                          

                 卡塔尔                          

                 航空运输 | 卡塔尔航空放弃入股美国航空                          

在6月份提出计划收购美国航空公司(American Airlines) 至多10%股份后不到两个月，卡塔尔政府所有的卡塔尔航空(Qatar Airways) 8月2日表示，将放弃这一收购计划，理由是考虑到美国航空最近披露的财务业绩，这项投资已不再符合卡塔尔航空的目标。             

                 背景分析：卡塔尔航空这一突然的提议令美国航空公司首席执行长Doug Parker感到"奇怪"，并公开表示反对这一计划。卡塔尔航空的收购提议不同寻常，是因为该公司与美国航空公司之前在行业大战中势不两立。部分美国和欧盟航空公司指控卡塔尔航空和另外两家海湾国家航空公司受益于政府补贴，构成不公平竞争。卡塔尔公司否认了指控。                          

卡塔尔航空近年来快速扩张，但其核心业务因卡塔尔与沙特等阿拉伯四国的外交危机而遇挫，多个中东邻国已禁止该公司使用其空域，这迫使该公司改变航线，运营时间和成本因此上升。             

                 伊朗                          

                 制裁 |  特朗普签署对俄制裁法案，包含对伊朗的新制裁                          

美国总统特朗普8月2日签署旨在惩罚俄罗斯干预2016年美国大选的制裁法案，该法案还包括了针对伊朗弹道导弹项目和革命卫队的新制裁措施。             

                 背景分析：此前，在上周伊朗试射卫星运载火箭后，美国财政部宣布对伊朗六个和弹道导弹项目有关的实体实施制裁。制裁针对的是Shahid Hemmat Industrial Group的附属公司，这些公司为伊朗的导弹项目制造部件、提供燃料、研发和地面支持。                          

                 欧洲                          

                 英国                          

                 银行 |  机构预测脱欧将致英国投行职位流失17,000个                          

鉴于脱欧或导致在英国的银行无法向欧盟客户销售产品，在脱欧谈判正在进行之际，各银行正制定应急计划扩张在欧盟的业务。奥纬咨询预测，这将使15,000-17,000个批发银行职位转移至欧盟，长期看，这个数字将增至40,000个；如果英国切断与欧盟的所有联系，总部位于英国的银行将需要300-500亿美元的额外资本来支持新的欧洲实体，这可能导致银行业的年度成本增加4%，即10亿美元左右。             

                 背景分析：英国银行业目前约有56万名雇员，因此上述职位的流失不大可能动摇英国作为全球金融中心的地位，但欧洲投资银行服务机构集中在一个地方的效率可能会因此而降低。                          

                 移民政策 |  英国首相发言人：英欧人口自由流动将在英国退出欧盟时结束                          

英国首相特雷莎﹒梅的发言人7月31日表示，英国和欧盟之间的人口自由流动将在2019年3月份英国退出欧盟时结束。如果的确如此，英国和欧盟之间几乎不可能达成破坏性最小、同时也是最容易达成的脱欧过渡协议（即英国将暂时留在欧盟单一市场及其关税同盟内部），因为根据欧盟规定，若要获得贸易和服务自由流动所带来的好处，就必须接受人口自由流动。             

                 背景分析：上述言论凸显出英国政府内部围绕未来移民政策的分歧。过去一周英国内阁大臣们已经同意，英国将寻求与欧盟达成一个长达数年的过渡协议，从而为企业适应英国退欧留出时间，但他们对于欧盟哪些规定将继续适用存在分歧，尤其是移民问题。                          

近期经济制裁             

制裁文件被制裁方国别被制裁机构/个人事项背景欧盟理事会实施条例(EU)2017/1374；欧盟理事会决议(CFSP)2017/1386俄罗斯Arkady Romanovich Rotenberg对欧盟理事会实施条例（EU）269/2014及欧盟理事会决议(CFSP)2014/145中特定制裁对象的身份信息进行修改。7月26日起生效。 欧盟理事会实施条例(EU)2017/1390N/A来自英国的Alexanda Amon Kotey等六名个人，位于叙利亚的Selselat Althahab等四家实体。将与ISIL和基地组织有关的六名个人和四家实体加入欧洲理事会实施条例(EC)  881/2002附件1的制裁名单，冻结其财产和经济资源；并从名单中移除一名个人。立即生效。2017年7月20日，联合国安理会制裁委员会决定对上述对象进行制裁，欧盟理事会追随了这一决议。             

深度阅读             

                 美国计划采取对华贸易行动                          

特朗普政府计划采取贸易措施来迫使中国政府打击知识产权侵权行为，以及放宽有关美国公司必须共享先进技术方能进入中国市场的规定。             

据知情人士透露，美国政府正在考虑使用美国贸易法中一个很少使用的条款，以调查中国的知识产权政策是否构成不公平贸易做法。             

这将为美国制裁中国出口企业或进一步限制向中国公司及美中合资公司转移先进技术铺平道路。             

近年来美国企业对于中国在贸易和市场准入方面的做法感到愈发不满，美国商界组织呼吁政府在贸易问题上对中国采取更强硬的立场。许多组织抱怨称，在特朗普政府对中国制造业以及去年中国对美国贸易顺差达3,470亿美元的关注上升之际，其在知识产权等领域对中国的态度不够强硬。             

随着中国经济持续扩张，并且其计算机及软件产业在国际市场上的竞争实力增强，美国商界的不满情绪愈发强烈。西方企业担心，中国将利用法规禁止外资进入那些中国政府重点投资的产业，包括集成电路、先进机床设备以及人工智能。             

目前尚不清楚特朗普政府在对外发布声明前需要多长时间进行内部评估。美国政府官员一度暗示，最早可能于本周发布声明。             

白宫发言人未就对华贸易制裁前景置评。             

近几周白宫一直在研究如何处理与中国的贸易关系，此前美中两国在7月中旬进行的双边经济对话未能取得任何实质进展。特朗普近日也公开就朝核问题对中国表示失望，白宫的官员们也越发直言批评中国的贸易政策。             

美国商务部长罗斯(Wilbur Ross)周二在《华尔街日报》(The Wall Street Journal)发表观点文章，指责中国和欧盟设置了强大的非关税贸易壁垒，誓言利用一切可用工具对抗这些限制。             

白宫预计，对中国公司侵犯知识产权行为的打击会得到那些抱怨过中国商业行为的美国企业的广泛支持。             

不过业内官员称，美国企业的反应可能更加分化。那些不想让其最先进技术落入中国公司之手的美国企业可能会支持这些限制措施，而其他一些希望向中国企业提供技术授权的公司则可能认为限制措施会带来阻碍。             

中国也可能进行报复，比如阻止美国的投资，或者让美国企业在中国的日子更加不好过。             

不过，与特朗普的其他贸易行动相比，预计针对中国知识产权问题采取的任何措施在美国商界势必会更受欢迎；其他行动包括退出跨太平洋伙伴关系协定(Trans-Pacific Partnership，简称TPP)的决定，以及撤出北美自由贸易协定(North American Free Agreement)及对进口钢铁征收关税的威胁。             

特朗普政府考虑对华采取新贸易行动的意义重大，因为这将需要动用长久被忽视或者说很少被使用的条款。美国政府正在探讨的一个方案是，启用《974年贸易法案》(Trade Act of 1974)中的第301条款，该条款授权美国政府调查涉嫌不当行为的贸易伙伴，并自行决定相关惩罚措施。批评人士认为，如此一来，美国政府既是法官，又是陪审团，同时也是执法者。             

另一个探讨中的方案将是启用1977年的《国际紧急状态经济权力法案》(The International Emergency Economic Powers Act)，该法案赋予总统广泛的权力，在宣布国家紧急状态之后管控经贸活动。             

301条款在20世纪70和80年代曾被广泛使用，但自1995年世界贸易组织(World Trade Organization, 简称WTO)成立以来，使用301条款的情况已基本消失。WTO有自己的争端解决流程，这家国际机构一个主要目标就是减少此类单边贸易行动，并将其交由一家更为中立的国际仲裁机构处理。过去二十年来，美国政府都是决定通过WTO解决几乎所有贸易申诉，而很少动用301条款。             

但特朗普的助理常说，他们认为WTO的规定不足以应对中国的做法，并暗示他们或许会动用WTO之前的单边措施。             

彼得森国际经济研究所(Peterson Institute for International Economics)贸易救济专家Chad Bown表示，如果是任何其它一届政府自发启动301条款调查，他都会觉得极不寻常，但对于特朗普政府的美国贸易政策，即便是动用最鲜为人知和不曾使用过的法律条款似乎也是理所应当的。             

逾48个美国、欧洲和亚洲的商业协会在5月份致信中国负责监控网络安全的政府部门，对中国的一项新法规表示不满，这些协会认为，该法规将要求其成员公司在中国设立数据中心、寻找中方合作伙伴以及把技术转移给合资公司。             

这些商业协会在信中写到，所有国家都对隐私和国家安全问题存在合理的担忧，但在应对这些担忧方面，中国是要求外国公司转移技术、放弃自己品牌和营运控制权以在华经营的主要国家。             

中国政府通常称，这样做是为了保护自己，避免西方情报机构进入中国的电脑系统。             

                                      Jacob M. Schlesinger / Bob Davis                                           

                 中资背景买家将收购莱迪思交易受阻归因于政治因素

一家中资支持的公司不同寻常的公开对其并购交易受阻表达不满，称"压制中国"的情绪导致该公司对一家美国半导体公司的收购无法在美国政府一个委员会推进。             

这家名为Canyon Bridge Capital Partners Inc.的公司合伙人表示，该公司完全是出于商业目的而考虑收购位于俄勒冈州波特兰的莱迪思半导体(Lattice Semiconductor, LSCC)，而且该公司已尝试消除美国海外投资委员会(Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, 简称CFIUS)在国家安全方面的担忧。尽管如此，在Canyon Bridge表示首次就这宗交易接触CFIUS九个月之后，这桩13亿美元交易依然停滞不前，该公司合伙人表示政治因素是主要原因。             

Canyon Bridge合伙人Ray Bingham在接受《华尔街日报》(The Wall Street Journal)采访时称，自去年总统大选以来，任何事只要和中国有关就会引起担忧，遭受严苛的对待，并且朝不利的方向渲染。他称，这桩交易受到的审查主要与政治因素有关。             

Bingham和公司其他合伙人愿意谈论该交易陷入的审查困境不同寻常，因为鲜有公司愿意讨论和CFIUS打交道的经历，这个神秘的跨部门委员会负责从国家安全隐患的角度审查外国公司在美投资。             

Canyon Bridge与莱迪思半导体的合作在美中围绕半导体不断加剧的斗争中一直是一个焦点。半导体这种芯片技术用于驱动计算机、手机和大量军用硬件的运行。             

去年口在中国公司反复尝试收购美国半导体生产商后口美国政府的担忧加剧。Canyon Bridge是在帕洛阿尔托注册成立的私募股权公司口由中国政府提供资金。该公司的结构引起美国国会议员的警觉。之后美国进行了总统大选口当时特朗普(Donald Trump)将中国描述成为贸易掠夺者口进一步破坏了围绕中资发起交易的气氛口近几个月中国公司的收购交易面临来自CFIUS的更多审查。             

Canyon Bridge目前第三次尝试获得CFIUS的批准口前两次在审核期未能通过口每次审核都持续了约两个半月。CFIUS由美国财政部领导口成员还包括国防部、国务院、司法部和商务部以及其它部门的代表。             

财政部一名发言人称，保护美国国家安全是CFIUS的首要职责，他们非常认真地对待这项职责。             

Canyon Bridge执行合伙人Ben Chow称，他和他的合伙人对于其资金来源一直向CFIUS开诚布公，他说，他们资金的99%来自于中国国新控股有限责任公司(China Reform Holdings Corp.)，后者是中国国有独资投资公司。             

Chow在采访中表示，他们从未隐藏过任何事。             

莱迪思半导体首席执行长Darin Billerbeck在另外一个采访中称，该公司曾提出强化知识产权保护，以避免其被转移至中国，并且在与CFIUS的最初会晤时，官员们未曾暗示有任何问题。他说，官员们表示从其提交的数据来看，应该不会有什么大问题。             

知情人士称，CFIUS自那时起开始告知交易各方，不打算批准该交易，理由是存在没有解决的国家安全担忧。知情人士表示，遭受了最新的挫折后，上述公司曾考虑将交易直接上报给特朗普。考虑到美国总统通常接受CFIUS的建议，同时这种高级别的否决可能损害其他交易前景，这将是一个有风险的举动。这些公司最后决定撤回来并在6月份重新提交申请。             

美国企业研究所(American Enterprise Institute)的中国问题专家史剑道(Derek Scissors)表示，即便该交易失败，Canyon Bridge公开发声的决定将可能令中国受益。             

史剑道称，这对中国政府来说可能是一个双赢的局面。如果该策略帮助交易获得批准，那么中国获得了一个半导体公司。如果失败了，该交易将成为中国政府谈论令人担忧的美中贸易关系时的一个论据。             

史剑道称，如果交易被驳回，这件事中国方面可能会不厌其烦地反复提起。他还说，未来三年莱迪思和Canyon Bridge会不断被提及。             

由北卡罗来纳州共和党众议员Robert Pittenger牵头的22名众议院两党议员去年12月就莱迪思交易致函CFIUS，表示担心该交易可能为中国提供至关重要的军用技术，指责Canyon Bridge最初试图掩盖其有中国政府的背景。             

莱迪思于2012年出售了军用设计子公司，同一年，美国联邦调查局(FBI)指控两名中国公民合谋从该公司获取军用级芯片。莱迪思称，目前只生产民用芯片，这类芯片主要用于消费电子产品，不具有军用芯片所需的热敏护罩和其他性能。             

Billerbeck仍乐观地认为特朗普会对该交易持开放态度。从理论上讲，特朗普可在CFIUS反对的情况下，批准该交易。Billerbeck称，他知道特朗普是一个非常有头脑的商人，他知道如果有10分钟的时间向特朗普解释该交易，特朗普会说这是一桩好买卖。             

                                      Eva Dou 发自北京 / Kate O'Keeffe 发自华盛顿                                           

Document WSJCN00020170803ed83001e1



World
In Afghan Debate, Is There a Lesson in the 2011 Pullout From Iraq? Faced with the threat from  ISIS , Iraqis came together. But the situation in Afghanistan is different.

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
994 words
3 August 2017
12:49
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

As President Donald Trump 's administration weighs how to handle Afghanistan's chronic war, looming large is the question of what is the right lesson of the 2011 U.S. withdrawal from another conflict: Iraq.

Was it a strategic failure—r a step that, over the long term and at significant cost, forced the Iraqis to assume responsibility for their own war? And if so, can this experience be replicated in Afghanistan?

In 2014, as Islamic State surged to the doorstep of Baghdad and the Iraqi army collapsed, it seemed to many that the American pullout was a catastrophic mistake that enabled international terrorism.

Now that reinvigorated Iraqi security forces have rolled back most of Islamic State's gains , this perspective isn't as clear-cut—ven taking into account the war's huge human toll.

After all, in the absence of American backup, Islamic State's existential threat forced a strong immune response from the Iraqi body politic .

The Popular Mobilization Forces that sprang up from Shiite militias in 2014, after a call to defend the homeland by top Iraqi Shiite cleric Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani , stopped the extremist group's blitzkrieg.

Then, quarreling Iraqi political factions came together. The Kurdish regional government in the north ushered in unprecedented security cooperation with Baghdad  and the rebuilt Iraqi army. Defeating Islamic State became an Iraqi rather than an American war.

"The American withdrawal put Iraqis in front of their own challenges and they realized that they have to resolve these problems on their own," said Iraqi lawmaker Dhiaa al-Assadi. Mr. Assadi heads a parliamentary bloc of supporters of Moqtada al-Sadr, a populist Shiite cleric whose militias used to fight U.S. troops before 2011.

True, the U.S. and other Western allies had to send troops back to Iraq, mostly in an advisory capacity, in 2014. They are, however, viewed very differently these days. Even the once-hostile Shiite militias consider them, however reluctantly, de facto allies.

So, as the White House debates its options in Afghanistan —anging from a significant troop increase to a full withdrawal—o what extent are Iraq's experiences applicable to the Afghan conflict? Could the Afghan state, left to its own devices at least for a time, also transform the battle against the Taliban into a national and popular struggle?

The answer is, most likely, no. America's Afghan war, now 16 years long, is different from the Iraqi conflict in many crucial respects. And that is not just because Afghan President Ashraf Ghani , unlike Iraq's leader six years ago, wants an American military presence to continue for as long as possible.

While the Iraqi insurgency raged within the country's Sunni minority, Afghanistan's Taliban  are drawn mostly from the country's dominant ethnic group, the Pashtuns.

And the Taliban keep advancing despite the presence of nearly 9,000 U.S. troops. While U.S. casualties in Afghanistan are relatively rare nowadays, they still occur: On Wednesday, the Pentagon said two U.S. troops died in Kandahar . Unlike oil-rich Iraq, Afghanistan can't pay for its own military and requires several billion dollars in Western assistance every year.

Add to this a political class that is even more corrupt and riven by infighting than the Iraqis in 2014, and it becomes clear that removing the American backstop would likely precipitate a rapid and inevitable collapse of the Afghan state, former and current Western officials say.

"Withdrawing and daring the Afghans to 'step up' when they cannot without U.S. support is a recipe for disaster," said James Cunningham, a former U.S. ambassador to Kabul and a nonresident fellow at the Atlantic Council think tank.

In Iraq, he added, "'victory' depended on circumstances that are particularly Iraqi and the destruction of a major city. The circumstances in Afghanistan are different and collapse of the government and reversion to chaos will not be easily reversed, if at all."

That is one of the reasons why America's North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies, even though many of them pressed for an end date to the Afghan military mission five years ago, have since accepted the open-ended deployment. That is especially so given the emergence of Islamic State's regional affiliate in parts of Afghanistan .

Compared with Afghanistan today, "Iraq was far more stable at the time of the U.S. withdrawal, and it still collapsed," said Vali Nasr, dean of the School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University and a former State Department adviser on Afghanistan. "Afghan national security forces don't look like they have the capacity to take on the Taliban and ISIS. They are losing ground even with U.S. troops there and will lose even more ground without U.S. troops."

While a military victory against the Taliban isn't in the cards anytime soon, the relatively small U.S. presence in Afghanistan  prevents the fall of Kabul and other main cities. Considering the failure of past military surges to permanently alter the situation on the ground, such a stalemate may be the best possible outcome.

"The overall lesson in the region as a whole and its various parts is we can neither pivot out of it, nor go in massively to fix it definitively," said James Jeffrey, a former U.S. ambassador to Iraq who is a fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. "Rather, we have to deal with it on a long-term basis like a chronic illness."

Write to Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com 

Related Coverage

* Two U.S. Service Members Killed in Afghanistan 

* White House Looks at Scaling Back U.S. Military Presence in Afghanistan 

* Afghan Leader Struggles to Build Working State Amid Dysfunction 

Document WSJO000020170803ed83000p8



U.S. News: U.S. Watch

283 words
3 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

TRUMP ADMINISTRATION

Congress Urged to

Retain War Powers

The Trump administration urged Congress not to revise the law underpinning the global war on terrorism and armed conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan, arguing Wednesday that the Pentagon already has the legal authority it needs under a war authorization passed after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

In a letter to the Republican chairman of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, a State Department official said that the administration "is not seeking revisions" the 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists, also know as an AUMF, nor is it seeking additional congressional authority to fight terrorist groups across the globe.

"The United States has sufficient legal authority to prosecute the campaign against al-Qaida and associated forces, including against the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)," Charles Faulkner, an official with the State Department's bureau of legislative affairs wrote to Sen. Bob Corker (R., Tenn.) Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and Defense Secretary Jim Mattis also traveled to Capitol Hill to brief the Foreign Relations committee on the administration's position.

-- Byron Tau

---

FBI

Senate Confirms

Director Nominee

Christopher Wray , President Donald Trump 's pick to lead the Federal Bureau of Investigation , won Senate confirmation with the support of most Democrats, putting the former Justice Department official and private lawyer in charge of an agency buffeted by political crosswinds.

The bipartisan nature of the 92-5 vote Tuesday was a shift after Mr. Trump's abrupt firing in May of the last FBI director, James Comey . Mr. Comey's dismissal alarmed lawmakers in both parties, but Democrats were especially critical.

-- Aruna Viswanatha and Del Quentin Wilber

Document WSJE000020170803ed8300019



Tillerson Can End the Qatar Standoff

By Dennis Ross 
758 words
2 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A17
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Defeating Islamic State is the Trump administration's most important national-security priority. But removing ISIS from Mosul and Raqqa may end up meaning little absent the ability to secure, reconstruct and govern these and other cities. Preventing a dangerous power vacuum from forming in areas liberated from ISIS control requires the urgent involvement of unified Sunni Arab states.

Unfortunately, the Saudis, Emiratis, Bahrainis and Egyptians are currently distracted by a diplomatic imbroglio with Qatar over its support for Hamas and the Muslim Brotherhood. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson has tried to mediate, but he erred by traveling to the region before negotiating a plan for ending the conflict. Good statecraft requires making it unacceptable to say "no" to the U.S.

Already there are signs that both sides may be more amenable to a face-saving settlement. The Saudi-led coalition has softened its original 13 demands, which included shutting down Al Jazeera and closing a Turkish military base. Instead they are asking for Qatar to act on a set of principles, including combating terrorism and extremism, denying financing and safe haven to terrorist groups, ending incitement of hatred, and refraining from interfering in the internal affairs of other countries.

These principles are broad enough to create space for both sides to reach understandings, and Qatar's emir, Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, has said he is open to dialogue.

The Al-Thani regime allows the U.S. to use Al Udeid Air Base and has invited American universities such as Northwestern, Texas A&M and Georgetown to open campuses in Qatar. Yet the tiny oil-rich emirate also hosts senior Taliban leaders, supports radical Islamists in Libya and Syria, and finances media platforms for the Muslim Brotherhood to broadcast its message. Any resolution to the conflict must ensure that Qatar gives up this double game.

Assuming that Mr. Tillerson has the support of President Trump, the former Exxon CEO should quietly but bluntly inform all sides how the standoff will end -- with Qatar implementing its recently signed memorandum of understanding with the U.S. on terror financing, committing to arresting or expelling all those that the U.S. has designated as supporters or facilitators of terror, and ceasing to provide material support to any group that the U.S. deems a threat to regional stability.

Mr. Tillerson must make clear that if the Qataris balk, the U.S. will withdraw its forces from Al Udied. This is the type of threat that should concentrate Mr. Al-Thani's thinking. The Qataris view the American military presence as a security guarantee. Preventing a U.S. withdrawal gives them the political cover they need to end the current standoff. The last thing the Qataris want is to be seen giving in to the Saudis.

Effective American intervention now is necessary for several reasons. A wounded ISIS could exploit the current confusion to regain its strength. Iran and its Shiite militias are already positioning themselves to fill any power vacuum in both Iraq and Syria, further destabilizing the region. And, for Mr. Tillerson, his future effectiveness as secretary of state could depend on it.

Mr. Tillerson's reluctance or inability to fill out senior State Department positions and the Trump administration's often contradictory messaging have cast doubt on his ability to speak for the president. This is an untenable position for a secretary of state. Mr. Tillerson needs to demonstrate that he can solve diplomatic problems by exercising leverage and producing results. He needs to put a win on the board, lest America's partners and adversaries begin to question whether it makes sense to work with him.

The most effective secretaries of state were characterized not by their strategic brilliance but their unmistakable authority. No one questioned whether Henry Kissinger or James Baker spoke for the president. The power and authority they exuded made their threats and inducements believable. Without leverage, diplomacy rarely works.

Unlike Messrs. Kissinger and Baker, Mr. Tillerson can't count on the White House's messaging to reinforce his diplomacy. Unless he wants to see his authority slowly erode over time, Mr. Tillerson needs a high-profile diplomatic success -- and soon. The standoff with Qatar provides a perfect opportunity.

---

Mr. Ross has held senior national security positions in several presidential administrations and is counselor at the Washington Institute.

(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: End Qatar's Policy of Strategic Ambiguity" -- WSJ August 8, 2017)

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170802ed820000c



US
Trump Administration Urges Congress to Retain 2001 War Powers Law; State, Defense heads travel to Capitol Hill to brief on position on authorization

By Byron Tau 
893 words
2 August 2017
22:50
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—he Trump administration on Wednesday told Congress it didn't need a revision of the law underpinning the global war on terrorism and ongoing armed conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan, arguing the Pentagon already has the legal authority it needs under a war authorization passed shortly after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

In a letter to the Republican chairman of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, a State Department official said that the administration "is not seeking revisions" the 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists, also known as an AUMF, nor is it seeking additional congressional authority to fight terrorist groups across the globe.

"The United States has sufficient legal authority to prosecute the campaign against al Qaeda and associated forces, including against Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)," wrote Charles Faulkner, an official with the State Department's bureau of legislative affairs, to Sen. Bob Corker (R., Tenn.).

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and Defense Secretary Jim Mattis also traveled to Capitol Hill Wednesday to brief the Foreign Relations committee on the administration's position on the AUMF. Emerging from the classified meeting, members of both parties said they believed they could work with the administration to find an acceptable compromise.

"The administration's not seeking an AUMF," Mr. Corker said. But "they wouldn't be opposed to one that was written in the appropriate way," he said. "I'm confident they'll work us."

Objections from President Donald Trump's administration to a renewed war powers debate could stymie efforts in Congress to revise and re-evaluate the legal authority governing U.S. military action against terrorist groups. After more than 15 years of conflict across more than a dozen countries, representatives and senators of both parties support repealing the 2001 AUMF and replacing it with a law tailored to current conflicts.

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has deferred to the White House on the issue of new war powers, saying he would be willing to consider it if the president felt it was necessary, even as many on Capitol Hill are calling for Congress to update the war powers laws.

"I'd be interested in taking a look at an AUMF if the president feels like he needs it," the Kentucky Republican said in April. "If the president can think of some AUMF that he thinks will strengthen his hand, I will take a look at it."

Under the Constitution, Congress alone has the authority to declare war. The 2001 AUMF authorized military action against the groups responsible for the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks as well as their affiliates. A year later, Congress authorized the war in Iraq in a separate AUMF. Both remain in effect, while Congress debates whether to repeal the Iraq resolution completely and replace the 2001 AUMF.

Together, the two laws have provided the legal basis for nearly every sustained military action the U.S. has taken in recent years. But since the Sept. 11 attacks, the nature of the war on terror has evolved far beyond what the law envisioned—or example ISIS, which the U.S. is fighting directly and by advising Iraqi troops, didn't exist when the 2001 AUMF was passed.

"It's absurd, using the 2001 authorization for the current military campaign against ISIS," said Sen. Ben Cardin of Maryland, the top Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

In June, a group of House Republicans and Democrats voted to repeal the 2001 AUMF through an amendment to an appropriations bill in part to force Congress to debate a new AUMF. The repeal measure was later stripped from the bill by House leadership, who said a spending bill wasn't the proper way to debate war powers.

In the Senate, a bipartisan bill introduced in May by Sens. Jeff Flake (R., Ariz.) and Tim Kaine (D., Va.) would have specifically authorized the conflict against Islamic State, repealing both the 2001 and 2002 AUMFs in the process. The proposal is similar to a House bill authored by Rep. Adam Schiff (D., Calif.) in 2015. Several GOP-led House and Senate committees are examining the issue of a new AUMF.

"When I voted in 2001 to authorize military force against the perpetrators of the Sept. 11 attacks, I had no idea I would be authorizing armed conflict for more than 15 years, and counting. It is past time for Congress to voice its support for the war against ISIS," said Mr. Flake about his proposal.

Former President Barack Obama twice asked Congress to pass new AUMFs to address the changing nature of U.S. military action, though he continued to rely on those authorizations. Ultimately, members of Congress couldn't agree on details of the AUMF and the proposals never advanced.

Write to Byron Tau at byron.tau@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* Trump Signs Russia Sanctions Bill He Calls 'Seriously Flawed' (Aug. 2)

* Pence Says U.S. Won't Hold Talks With North Korea (Aug. 2)

* As Washington Churns, the World Grows More Dangerous (July 31)

* White House Looks at Scaling Back U.S. Military Presence in Afghanistan (July 30)

* Trump Administration Slaps Iran With Additional Sanctions (July 18)

Document WSJO000020170802ed820050l



Markets
Iraq Set to Raise $1 Billion in Bond Sale; First independent international bond sale in more than a decade for war-racked country

By Nikhil Lohade in Dubai 
653 words
2 August 2017
22:59
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Iraq is set to raise $1 billion through its first independent international bond sale in more than a decade, bankers aware of the transaction said on Wednesday, as the war-torn country looks for cash to support its finances.

The country is one of the biggest producers of oil globally, but a sharp fall in the price of crude in recent years has weighed heavily on its petrodollar-dependent economy, which is also suffering from the war with Islamic State militants.

The bonds due in 2023 are set to yield 6.75%, tighter than the initial price guidance of more than 7%, after banks marketing the deal had received orders worth more than $6.6 billion by Wednesday afternoon.

The cash will help plug the country's budget deficit, which the International Monetary Fund expects to be 5.1% of gross domestic product in 2017.

Citigroup, Deutsche Bank and J.P. Morgan are joint lead managers on the deal, while Trade Bank of Iraq is co-manager for the bond issue.

Iraq last sold bonds worth $1 billion in January but that issue was backed by the U.S. It attempted to sell bonds last year as well as in 2015, but ditched those plans after investors demanded a higher yield. It last issued bonds on its own in 2006, raising $2.7 billion due in 2028.

The new bond issue doesn't have a U.S. guarantee, but analysts expected the appetite to be high for its yield, which is attractive compared with those of similarly rated countries. Fitch and S&P both have assigned Iraq a B- rating.

The final yield "was bang in line with our expectations," said Stuart Culverhouse, head of fixed income research at Exotix Capital. "Investors like emerging markets at the moment for yield, and see Iraq as having decent yield given strong international support for the country," he added.

Iraq's bond issue comes just a week after Greece sold € billion ($3.56 billion) of 2022 bonds and after Argentina raised $2.75 billion of debt with a 100-year maturity in June, reflecting investor hunger for yield despite the higher risk.

Analysts say Iraq's new bond issue also comes at a good time for the country, with oil prices steadying around $50 a barrel and the International Monetary Fund backing the country's efforts to revive the economy. Baghdad last year agreed to a $5.34 billion loan facility with the IMF to support Iraq's economic reforms.

"The economic policies implemented by the Iraqi authorities to deal with the shocks facing Iraq—he armed conflict with ISIS and the ensuing humanitarian crisis and the collapse in oil prices—re appropriate," David Lipton, the IMF's first deputy managing director, said Tuesday after the IMF completed a review of the country's economy.

The IMF said the reforms process has been slow in some key areas but understandings have been reached on sufficient corrective actions in 2017-18 to keep the Iraqi program on track.

Anthony Antonelli, director at Greylock Capital in New York, bought the bonds, in part because Iraq's program with the IMF caps the rest of the year's financing. Robust demand for other recent deals, like Greece's, he said, indicated that there would be interest in the Iraqi bonds.

"They're putting in reforms, in full compliance with the IMF, they defeated ISIS in Mosul, and oil sentiment is greatly improved over several weeks ago," he said.

Mr. Antonelli said the bonds were already trading higher in the gray market.

Emese Bartha in Frankfurt, Christopher Whittall in London and Julie Wernau in New York contributed to this article.

Write to Nikhil Lohade at Nikhil.Lohade@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170802ed820053e



Opinion
Tillerson Can End the Qatar Standoff; To preserve his credibility as a diplomat, the secretary of state needs to put a win on the board.

By Dennis Ross 
752 words
1 August 2017
23:54
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Defeating Islamic State is the Trump administration's most important national-security priority. But removing ISIS from Mosul and Raqqa may end up meaning little absent the ability to secure, reconstruct and govern these and other cities. Preventing a dangerous power vacuum from forming in areas liberated from ISIS control requires the urgent involvement of unified Sunni Arab states.

Unfortunately, the Saudis, Emiratis, Bahrainis and Egyptians are currently distracted by a diplomatic imbroglio with Qatar over its support for Hamas and the Muslim Brotherhood. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson has tried to mediate, but he erred by traveling to the region before negotiating a plan for ending the conflict. Good statecraft requires making it unacceptable to say "no" to the U.S.

Already there are signs that both sides may be more amenable to a face-saving settlement. The Saudi-led coalition has softened its original 13 demands, which included shutting down Al Jazeera and closing a Turkish military base. Instead they are asking for Qatar to act on a set of principles, including combating terrorism and extremism, denying financing and safe haven to terrorist groups, ending incitement of hatred, and refraining from interfering in the internal affairs of other countries.

These principles are broad enough to create space for both sides to reach understandings, and Qatar's emir, Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, has said he is open to dialogue.

The Al-Thani regime allows the U.S. to use Al Udeid Air Base and has invited American universities such as Northwestern, Texas A&M and Georgetown to open campuses in Qatar. Yet the tiny oil-rich emirate also hosts senior Taliban leaders, supports radical Islamists in Libya and Syria, and finances media platforms for the Muslim Brotherhood to broadcast its message. Any resolution to the conflict must ensure that Qatar gives up this double game.

Assuming that Mr. Tillerson has the support of President Trump, the former Exxon CEO should quietly but bluntly inform all sides how the standoff will end—ith Qatar implementing its recently signed memorandum of understanding with the U.S. on terror financing, committing to arresting or expelling all those that the U.S. has designated as supporters or facilitators of terror, and ceasing to provide material support to any group that the U.S. deems a threat to regional stability.

Mr. Tillerson must make clear that if the Qataris balk, the U.S. will withdraw its forces from Al Udied. This is the type of threat that should concentrate Mr. Al-Thani's thinking. The Qataris view the American military presence as a security guarantee. Preventing a U.S. withdrawal gives them the political cover they need to end the current standoff. The last thing the Qataris want is to be seen giving in to the Saudis.

Effective American intervention now is necessary for several reasons. A wounded ISIS could exploit the current confusion to regain its strength. Iran and its Shiite militias are already positioning themselves to fill any power vacuum in both Iraq and Syria, further destabilizing the region. And, for Mr. Tillerson, his future effectiveness as secretary of state could depend on it.

Mr. Tillerson's reluctance or inability to fill out senior State Department positions and the Trump administration's often contradictory messaging have cast doubt on his ability to speak for the president. This is an untenable position for a secretary of state. Mr. Tillerson needs to demonstrate that he can solve diplomatic problems by exercising leverage and producing results. He needs to put a win on the board, lest America's partners and adversaries begin to question whether it makes sense to work with him.

The most effective secretaries of state were characterized not by their strategic brilliance but their unmistakable authority. No one questioned whether Henry Kissinger or James Baker spoke for the president. The power and authority they exuded made their threats and inducements believable. Without leverage, diplomacy rarely works.

Unlike Messrs. Kissinger and Baker, Mr. Tillerson can't count on the White House's messaging to reinforce his diplomacy. Unless he wants to see his authority slowly erode over time, Mr. Tillerson needs a high-profile diplomatic success—nd soon. The standoff with Qatar provides a perfect opportunity.

Mr. Ross has held senior national security positions in several presidential administrations and is counselor at the Washington Institute.

Document WSJO000020170801ed81002sa



World
War-Torn Syria's Battered Economy Marked by Inflation and Poverty; Nation's GDP has dropped by more than half this decade; 'a pretty nightmarish' situation

By Raja Abdulrahim 
1,018 words
28 July 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

After the Syrian government recently introduced a 2,000-pound bank note—he largest denomination it has ever issued— satirical obituary circulated online for a currency that has lost 90% of its value over more than six years of war.

"The Central Bank of Syria is accepting condolences," it announced.

The introduction of the note, worth less than $4, comes as Syria's economy is in tatters, grappling with wartime inflation, lost production and widespread poverty that could threaten stability even in regime-held areas.

Syria's consumer-price index soared more than 500% between 2010 and 2016, according to Syrian economists and local news reports that cited the Syrian government's Central Bureau of Statistics.

Incomes haven't kept pace. The average civil servant's salary was worth at least $200 a month before the conflict; now, even with raises, it is only worth less than $60, because of the falling currency.

The World Bank estimates that Syria's gross domestic product has fallen by more than half this decade.

The sharp fall in economic activity has cost at least two million people their jobs and about 60% of Syrians are unable to buy food and essential nonfood items, according to the Bank.

"It's going to be a pretty nightmarish economic situation for a long time to come," said David Butter, an economic analyst at U.K.-based think tank Chatham House.

Syria has been divided, in effect, by the fighting. The Syrian regime of President Bashar al-Assad, antigovernment rebels, U.S.-backed Kurds and the militant group Islamic State all control parts of the country.

But the faltering economy spans those areas, and the war has altered consumer behavior. Subsidies for fuel in government-held areas have plummeted, leading more middle-class Syrians, even women, to ride bicycles—arely seen before the war. Panhandlers—any of them children—rowd the streets and even hang around military checkpoints to swarm stopped vehicles.

In some parts of the country, the marriage dowry, paid to the bride as a gift, has almost disappeared. Some grooms give brides 1 Syrian pound— fraction of a penny—s a symbolic gesture.

"The fabric of society has been destroyed," said Jihad Yazigi, Beirut-based editor of an economic trade publication, The Syria Report.

Markets for used goods, which many Syrians once viewed with a measure of shame, have prospered. "There's no security in Syria so why buy new if it could all be destroyed?" said Khalid al-Najjar, who owns a used-car dealership in rebel-held territory in northwest Syria.

Even Facebook groups advertising used items have flourished and prices are typically listed in U.S. dollars.

The regime banned the use of foreign currencies in 2013, but that hasn't stopped people from doing business in dollars because of the volatility of the Syrian pound.

Some landlords demand rent in dollars. Even in the heart of the regime's security apparatus, bribes to release people detained by the regime are sometimes paid in U.S. dollars, according to families who have paid the bribes.

Yet uttering the word "dollar" in public can lead to trouble, and Syrians have taken to using code words such as "green."

With the reliance on larger denominations for Syrian currency, few even bother with coins. Rather than giving a 15-pound coin as change, a pharmacist might give an extra pill instead. At the grocery, change may come in the form of a cookie.

Even government supporters have voiced concern. Ali al-Sattouf, a lawmaker from the city of Aleppo, which the regime recaptured full control of in December, warned last month of "the possibility of a group or groups of citizens in this area or another protesting over hunger or fear of hunger," according to pro-regime media. He called for action to reduce the burden of inflation on Syrians.

The Syrian economy relies on foreign assistance, including wheat from Russia and fuel from Iran. Both countries are major allies of the Assad regime.

Individual Syrians also rely on help from abroad. Many Syrians receive remittances from family members who live elsewhere.

Between 4 million and 5 million Syrians receive food aid from the World Food Program each month. Another million or so receive other food assistance, according to the World Bank. Many who receive food aid end up selling some of it to buy other necessities.

In Aleppo, residents contend with dayslong power cuts months after battles for the city subsided. Some who receive meat as food aid try to sell it on the street because they are unable to refrigerate it or cook it at home and hope to make some money before it goes bad, according to former residents in touch with people in the city.

"People are caught between two pincers, the pincer of war and the pincer of a bad economic situation," said Mulham al-Jazmaty, a researcher with the Syrian Economic Forum, a Syrian think tank based in Turkey.

The 2,000-pound note, the first ever to carry Mr. Assad's image, was introduced this month after a period when the exchange rate had been relatively steady for months.

"We waited until people were assured that the situation was calm and stable," Central Bank of Syria Governor Duraid Durgham said in a video posted online this month by pro-regime media. He added, "Prices are no longer rising like they did previously."

In the days after the government introduced the new note, the Syrian pound lost about 5% of its value as people worried more inflation was coming.

Nikhil Lohade in Dubai and a special correspondent in Syria contributed to this article.

Write to Raja Abdulrahim at raja.abdulrahim@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* At Least 12 Killed in Syria by Damascus Car Bomb

* U.S. Says It Shot Down Syrian Aircraft

* Civilian Casualties Mount as Coalition Moves to Oust \b ISIS\b0  in Raqqa

Document WSJO000020170728ed7s001pa

