 


Connect the Dots to Stop Terror Plots

By Adam Klein 
768 words
27 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A15
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Why didn't intelligence agencies prevent 9/11? According to the 9/11 Commission, before the attacks, information from intelligence agencies "often failed to make its way to criminal investigators" at the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

By the summer of 2000, the Central Intelligence Agency already knew that two future hijackers were associates of known terrorists, that both men held visas to enter the U.S., and that one had in fact flown to Los Angeles in March 2000. Unfortunately, the FBI learned of this in August 2001 -- at which point the men had already made their last, fateful entry into the U.S. With better information-sharing, the FBI might have arrested the terrorists and prevented the 9/11 attacks.

Some members of Congress now propose to erect new barriers against information-sharing within the intelligence community that could make it even more difficult for officials to spot future terrorists before they strike.

The proposal would affect Section 702, a 2008 law that allows the intelligence community to collect the communications of foreign intelligence targets when the communications travel across U.S. internet cables or are stored on U.S. servers. This has been an effective counterterrorism tool because foreign targets' messages often touch the U.S. internet infrastructure.

Foreign targets are not protected by the Fourth Amendment, so the government has the authority to collect their messages under Section 702 without a warrant. But when foreign targets communicate with Americans, those messages are collected as well, raising privacy concerns.

Another key aspect of the privacy debate around Section 702 is what intelligence agencies should be allowed to do with that data. Courts have allowed agencies to search their 702 records for foreign intelligence purposes and, in the FBI's case, for evidence of crime, which sometimes includes searches for information about Americans.

Privacy-minded House members from both parties are now reportedly considering amending Section 702 to bar government officials from searching 702 data for information about an American unless they get a warrant, based on probable cause, from a federal judge. Reformers have leverage this year because Congress must pass a 702 reauthorization bill before the law sunsets on Dec. 31.

But keeping officials from searching this data would make it more difficult to prevent homegrown terrorist attacks. In 2009 the National Security Agency used 702 to collect emails in which an unknown person in the U.S. asked an al Qaeda member in Pakistan for advice on making explosives. Those emails led the FBI to Najibullah Zazi, a Colorado man with imminent plans to bomb the New York subway system. Catching him saved dozens if not hundreds of lives. If an American appears to be radicalizing, the first thing the FBI should do is check the information already in its database to see whether that person has been in contact with known ISIS or al Qaeda operatives.

Privacy advocates argue that agencies could continue to run these searches as long as they obtain a warrant. The problem is that database checks are most useful at the early stages of an inquiry, when officials are seeking to determine whether a person of interest has connections to terrorists. At that point, investigators rarely have gathered enough evidence to demonstrate probable cause. For that reason, requiring a warrant will make these queries effectively impossible.

Courts have found that this practice comports with the Constitution. In November 2015, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court held that the Fourth Amendment does not require the FBI to get a warrant before conducting routine database checks, which include some 702 data. The scale of the potential privacy concern also appears small: In 2016 only one FBI search for information about an American in a non-national-security criminal investigation led the FBI to review messages collected under 702.

Congress is right to examine the privacy implications of Section 702; powerful tools require powerful constraints. But members concerned about 702 should focus on bolstering the program's oversight and transparency -- by strengthening judicial review and requiring more transparency about how prosecutors use 702 information -- rather than creating barriers to information-sharing within the intelligence community.

The 9/11 Commission report taught that "connecting the dots" using the intelligence government agencies already possess is the key to disrupting terrorist plots. With the threat of terrorism still high, let us not forget this lesson now.

---

Mr. Klein is a senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security, a bipartisan national-security think tank in Washington.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170727ed7r0000b



Bookshelf
After the Death Of bin Laden

By Mark Moyar 
1,002 words
25 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A15
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Anatomy of Terror

By Ali Soufan

(Norton, 359 pages, $27.95)

Terror in France

By Gilles Kepel with Antoine Jardin

(Princeton, 220 pages, $29.95)

Six years ago, U.S. helicopters infiltrated Pakistani air space to deposit Navy SEALs at Osama bin Laden's compound. Storming it in the dark of night, the SEALs shot dead all the adult male inhabitants and secured the site within 20 minutes. During the next 20 minutes, they loaded bin Laden's corpse, computers and flash drives onto helicopters, then departed into the moonless sky.

What happened next is the subject of Ali Soufan's "Anatomy of Terror." A Lebanese-born Muslim, Mr. Soufan tracked al Qaeda during his career as an FBI special agent and went on to publish a book on the period from 9/11 to 2011 titled "The Black Banners." "Anatomy of Terror" picks up the story since 2011, though much of it, for context, rehearses the events of the preceding decade.

Bin Laden's demise, Mr. Soufan says, deprived al Qaeda of a charismatic leader at its apex. His successor, the Egyptian doctor Ayman al Zawahiri, had the personal magnetism of a falafel. By 2011, however, bin Laden had set the conditions for al Qaeda to survive without his inspirational guidance, by seeding his lieutenants across Africa, the Middle East and Asia and shifting from spectacular terrorism to governance in fragile states.

The most successful al Qaeda offshoot, ISIS, attracted an estimated 38,000 foreign nationals to its cause. Its explosive growth, however, provoked interventions by Iran, Russia and the United States. Although ISIS has since lost much of its caliphate, it has begun to adjust in a manner similar to al Qaeda, by going underground in sympathetic areas and establishing franchises in other Islamic countries.

Mr. Soufan asserts that the United States has relied too much on military power to contend with al Qaeda and ISIS, neglecting the diplomatic, political and economic tools required for developing local institutions and countering extremist ideas. In fact, the United States has spent huge sums on reconstruction, nation building and information operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. Regrettably, much of it was squandered by corruption or by Barack Obama's hasty withdrawal from the two countries.

According to Mr. Soufan, recent events have disproved Samuel Huntington's prediction of a clash among civilizations. The struggles of al Qaeda and ISIS, he says, are struggles within Islamic civilization. "All of the major combatants are Muslim," he writes. "For all their military might, outside powers like the United States and the Russian Federation can at best only marginally affect the outcome."

Yet only in an ahistorical sense has the United States not been a "major combatant." Less than a decade has passed since 160,000 U.S. troops were at war in Iraq, and fewer than six years since 100,000 were fighting in Afghanistan. Russia's intervention in Syria saved Bashar al Assad's government from a defeat that could have turned the broader conflict upside-down. Today both the United States and Russia remain capable of more than marginal influence.

If one looks outside the Middle East, one can find plenty of violent conflicts between Islamic and Christian civilizations. At the moment, the most violent are taking place in Africa. Less violent, but more momentous, are the clashes between Muslims and Westerners in Europe. Those clashes are the subject of Gilles Kepel's "Terror in France."

Mr. Kepel published the first edition of his book in French in late 2015, just weeks after ISIS operatives killed 130 civilians in Paris. During the next year, Islamic terrorists conducted further deadly attacks in France and struck in Belgium, Denmark and Germany. Mr. Kepel gives the impression that ISIS has generated little sympathy among French Muslims; one would have liked more from him on that subject, given how much controversy surrounds the extent of support for ISIS among Europe's Muslims.

Mr. Kepel traces the radicalization of some French Muslims to the riots of 2005, during which Muslim youths erupted in protest against alleged police misconduct. Initially, France's Socialists tried to win Muslim voters by pushing for more government spending in blighted neighborhoods. They were overshadowed by Nicolas Sarkozy, whose vow to restore law and order won him middle-class votes and the 2007 election. As president, he promoted French national identity and called on immigrants to assimilate -- e.g., by forgoing the veiling of women. Muslims were pivotal in Mr. Sarkozy's narrow defeat in 2012, as more than 80% of Muslim voters cast their ballots for Francois Hollande, the Socialist candidate, who espoused multiculturalism. Mr. Hollande, in his turn, alienated large segments of the Muslim population by pushing for same-sex marriage.

Mr. Kepel blasts political elites, saying that they are an insular class reliant on "pseudo-experts who block public financing for in-depth research that would expose their imposture." But he reserves his greatest scorn for the populist nationalists. Their overreaction to Islamic terrorism, he says, will drive French Muslims into the arms of the extremists. Unfortunately, he offers little in the way of alternative policies. He calls for greater attention to academic research on Islam but does not spell out the academic insights that remain unknown to government leaders.

Given the absence of clear alternatives, one must conclude from "Terror in France" that the French should keep muddling along, avoiding any bold changes lest they antagonize Muslims. The election of Emmanuel Macron seems to set France on that track. But if the Muslim population in France continues to grow faster than the non-Muslim one, its political clout will grow as well. With greater power, Muslims will be even more inclined than now to clash with a Western civilization whose vitality seems to erode with every passing day.

---

Mr. Moyar is the author of "Oppose Any Foe: The Rise of America's Special Operations Forces."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170725ed7p0000m



World News: Sunni Iraqis Freed From  ISIS  Grow Angry --- Baghdad struggles to regain trust, rebuild war zones following Islamic State battles

By Maria Abi-Habib 
1,019 words
24 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

RAMADI, Iraq -- Latifah Rasheed is the 74-year-old matriarch of a Sunni Arab family that lived, until one year ago, under Islamic State rule. A son and two grandsons fought for Islamic State and were killed by the Iraqi forces who wrested their town from the extremists.

Mrs. Rasheed and her surviving sons and grandsons said they were prepared to embrace a new Iraq under the Shiite-led government in Baghdad -- but Shiite militias guarding their town said they would arrest the men if they return.

"If we're unable to return home, we'll join whatever comes after Islamic State," said Mrs. Rasheed, who is now living with 13 family members in a one-bedroom home on the outskirts of Baghdad. On the day she spoke, a double suicide attack killed nine pro-government forces in her town, Garma, about 35 miles east of Ramadi.

Such is the challenge Iraq faces in rebuilding cities and towns liberated from Islamic State amid a cycle of sectarianism that shows little sign of ending and an insurgency that remains active across much of the country.

Iraqis from the Sunni Arab minority have been on the outside of power since the 2003 ouster of Saddam Hussein's regime -- an upheaval that ushered in the multiple reincarnations of Sunni insurgency that spawned Islamic State.

Three years ago, when Islamic State took over about 40% of Iraqi territory, its gains were restricted to Iraq's three Sunni-majority provinces.

With the recent recapture of the city of Mosul, Sunni lands have now been largely retaken. Yet one-third of the country's seven million Sunni Arabs have been displaced. Some are blocked from returning at checkpoints manned by Shiite or Kurdish militias screening for militants. Others are prevented from returning because of Islamic State mines.

Many more have no homes to return to, after the militants and the battles to remove them destroyed their towns

"Islamic State flourishes in poverty and desperation," said Ibrahim al-Awsaj, mayor of the Sunni city of Ramadi, which was retaken from the Sunni extremists more than a year ago. "We'll see a second, third or fourth version of Islamic State."

The mayor rattled off the problems his city has faced since it was retaken 1 1/2 years ago. Around 80% of infrastructure remains damaged, including 40,000 of the city's 63,000 residential units.

In this climate, said Mr. Awsaj, who is Sunni, thousands of war widows are struggling to feed their children, many of them sons and daughters of Islamic State fighters. That leaves families vulnerable to insurgents who have drafted child soldiers and lured the destitute by offering salaries.

Government officials say rebuilding has been slow because of a lack of federal funds and international aid. Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi said this month that the government is working at maximum capacity to return the displaced.

U.S. Col. Ryan Dillon, the spokesman for the U.S.-led campaign to beat Islamic State, praised what he said were Mr. Abadi's efforts to involve all ethnicities and religions in reunification and reconstruction.

For many Sunnis, Baghdad isn't doing enough. "This government is a complete failure. The only thing it's good for is corruption and sectarianism," Mrs. Rasheed said. That view has helped fuel multiple incarnations of Sunni insurgency.

The Iraqi government is working to regain the population's trust to fight off future radicalism by employing local residents to help with reconstruction.

"With Islamic State, Iraqis have learned their lesson. Islamic State ended in destruction and Iraqis won't let themselves be cheated again," said Dr. Majda Mohamed, spokeswoman for a special task force designed to stabilize post-Islamic State areas.

Baghdad doesn't have enough money to rebuild war zones. The economy is heavily dependent on oil and the global slump in prices left the central government without enough revenue.

About $210 million has been put into Iraq's reconstruction fund since it was created in 2015, far from the $100 billion that the government estimates is needed.In some places where reconstruction has started, residents said corruption is seeping into the process.

Saad Hamadi, 33, clears Ramadi's streets of the postwar detritus. As a city employee, he is supposed to be paid 15,000 Iraqi dinars a day, or about $13. He said he usually gets 10,000 dinars because the municipality charges him to use their tools. That, he says, is illegal.

"We already lack services and then we see that we are victims of corruption," said Mr. Hamadi. "The people talk, but no one listens to us."

---

Ghassan Adnan contributed to this article.

---

Minority Discontent

Fueled Militants

---

Ex-Saddam-era officers

established insurgency

After the 2003 U.S.-led invasion, a group of Iraqi and foreign fighters emerged as al Qaeda in Iraq. The group was soon infused with military officers forced by the U.S. from their posts, with thousands of government officials, because they were members of former President Saddam Hussein's Baath Party.

Disgruntled security officers established the insurgency that haunts Iraq to this day.

The insurgents killed thousands of U.S. and Iraqi troops before the group was severely weakened by 2007 and melted back into the population.

In the years that followed, they pursued a low-level insurgency while maintaining ties to local Sunni communities.

Sunni discontent with the government continued to fester, and in 2013, Sunni insurgents took advantage of antigovernment protests in parts of Iraq. They called themselves "tribal revolutionaries" -- then, in 2014 unfurled their black banners and morphed into Islamic State.

As the group sought to set up a religious empire across Iraq and Syria, it presented itself as the protector of a minority under siege.

Three years of war against Islamic State have done little to heal the divides between majority Shiites and the sizable Sunni Arab and Kurdish minorities.

-- Maria Abi-Habib

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170724ed7o0001c



US
Grand Jury Indicts U.S. Soldier on Charges of Attempting to Aid  ISIS ; Ikaika Kang provided classified military documents to undercover FBI agents

Associated Press
238 words
24 July 2017
03:18
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

HONOLULU— federal grand jury in Hawaii indicted a U.S. soldier on Friday for attempting to provide material support to Islamic State.

Army Sgt. 1st Class Ikaika Kang was arrested by an FBI SWAT team on July 8. Sgt. Kang was ordered held without bail.

Sgt. Kang will be arraigned in federal court on Monday when he had previously been scheduled for a preliminary hearing. Sgt. Kang's court-appointed attorney, Birney Bervar, said his client will plead not guilty on Monday when a federal judge will set a trial date.

Sgt. Kang is charged with four counts of attempting to provide material support to the Islamic State group based on events that occurred in Hawaii between June 21 and July 8, prosecutors said.

Federal officials say Sgt. Kang met with undercover FBI agents he thought were with the terror group and provided classified military documents to the agents.

The FBI said in their criminal complaint that Sgt. Kang wanted to commit a mass shooting after pledging allegiance to the Islamic State group.

Sgt. Kang served in Iraq from March 2010 to February 2011, and in Afghanistan from July 2013 to April 2014, according to the complaint. He was most recently stationed at Schofield Barracks in Hawaii.

Copyright 2017 the Associated Press

Document WSJO000020170724ed7o0002t



CN-Others
道琼斯海外投资动态信息-7月20日日报（节选）

4,261 words
21 July 2017
02:26
华尔街日报中文版 (简体)
WSJCN
Chinese - Simplified
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

中国政策汇             

                 中国"一带一路"政策和项目新闻汇编（以下内容来自于第三方媒体，未经道琼斯通讯社独立核实）                          

中国             

                 政策 |  中国多部门酝酿"一带一路"法律保障服务                           

为帮助"走出去"的企业防范法律风险，国资委将研究起草央企合规管理工作指引，外交部正在建设面向公众的条约数据库，最高人民法院将重点研究完善"一带一路"争端解决机制，商务部则正在推动多个区域贸易规则谈判。（来源：经济参考报）             

                 地方 |  新疆拟构建"一带一路"交通枢纽                           

中国国家发改委称，到目前为止，全国31个省市自治区出台了推进"一带一路"建设的政策和规划，其中 新疆计划构建"一带一路"交通枢纽，今年计划完成投资超2000亿元。（来源：中新网）             

全球情报站             

                 道琼斯通讯社驻全球记者报道                          

                 亚太                          

                 澳大利亚                          

                 银行 |  澳大利亚监管机构提高对银行的资本要求                          

澳大利亚审慎监管局(APRA) 7月10日下令该国大银行增加资本金，澳洲联邦银行、西太平洋银行、澳新银行和澳大利亚国民银行需将普通股一级资本比率提高到至少10.5%，这意味着这四家最大的银行平均需要将资本水平较去年12月底提高约一个百分点。规模较小的银行平均需提升资本比率约0.5个百分点。各银行需在2020年1月前满足新标准。             

                 背景分析：这是APRA自2015年以来第二次下令银行提高资本金，以便银行能经受全球性的冲击。根据要求，各家银行有两年多的时间达到新的目标，对比各家银行的盈利能力以及近年来因预期将出现进一步改革而增加资本缓冲的行动，这一新目标相对而言较为适度。                          

                 印度                          

                 汽车 |  Mahindra未来五年对美投资将翻倍

印度大型综合性集团Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.计划未来五年对美国投资10亿美元，使总规模增加一倍，并将美国员工数量扩大至约5,000人，以提升其品牌实力。公司还计划在美国扩大汽车产量，近期在底特律郊外建立了一个工程中心，并在附近设立了一个工厂，预计10月份开始生产一款多用途车。当前该公司正参与竞标美国邮政总局更换运输车辆的合同。             

                 背景分析：Mahindra & Mahindra总部位于孟买，该公司高管将其形容为多个独立运营的企业共同组成的联盟。该公司生产运动型多用途车(SUV)，而国际大品牌车企纷纷进入印度市场使其面临竞争压力。当前该公司在美国的汽车销量相比印度要小得多，其在美国的投资努力又远不及大型车企。董事长Mahindra认为眼下美国经济似乎处在强劲发展阶段，商业形势十分乐观，正是扩大美国市场的好时机。                          

                 中东                          

                 伊朗                          

                 合规 | 美国对伊朗实施新制裁                          

美国政府7月18日对伊朗实施新制裁，目标瞄准该国精英部队和弹道导弹项目，财政部指称16家实体和个人为伊斯兰革命卫队以及跨国犯罪组织提供了支持，美国国务院也认定伊朗两个组织参与了弹道导弹项目。美国财长姆努钦表示，美国政府将继续大力打击伊朗的恶意行为，包括对恐怖主义持续的国家支持、弹道导弹项目以及侵犯人权等。             

                 背景分析：美国政府在宣布新制裁的前一天告知国会，伊朗政府遵守了2015年与国际六国达成的核协议。伊朗外交部长表示，白宫释放的信号相互矛盾，伊朗不知道如何解读。                          

                 卡塔尔                          

                 外交 |  阿拉伯四国降低对卡塔尔的复交条件                          

为化解持续数周的断交僵局，沙特等四个阿拉伯国家7月18日向卡塔尔做出友好姿态，称已修改并且缩减了对卡塔尔的复交要求清单，将13项具体要求修改为六条原则性的笼统要求。清单较为显著的一个调整是，不再要求卡塔尔关闭半岛电视台以及驱逐持有极端伊斯兰主张的传教士等问题人物。新清单也没有设定最后期限，只是宽泛地要求卡塔尔不能煽动暴力，并支持打击恐怖主义的地区及国际努力。             

                 欧洲                          

                 匈牙利                          

                 金融 |  匈牙利发行人民币计价债券 目标投资者为中资机构                          

匈牙利政府债务管理局7月19日表示，匈牙利已聘请中国银行和汇丰安排人民币计价债券发行事宜，这批债券的目标投资者主要为中资机构投资者。该部门称，此次债券的发行和定价将视市况而定。             

                 背景分析：匈牙利曾于2016年4月在中国市场发行10亿元三年期人民币债券，这是中东欧地区发行的首支人民币债券。匈牙利在金融危机期间从国际货币基金组织和欧盟贷款，导致2011年外币国债占全部国债的比例高达52%，2014年下降至40%，2015年下降至35%。                          

                 英国                          

                 并购 |  味好美42亿美元收购利洁时食品业务                          

调味品制造商味好美7月19日表示，同意斥资42亿美元收购英国消费品公司利洁时旗下食品部门RB Foods，未来将把后者并入其商业和工业部门。这是近期包装食品行业的又一笔并购交易。味好美表示口按模拟基础，预计该合并交易后，公司利润率将大幅提升。该公司还预计该交易将带来约5,000万美元成本协同效应，其中绝大部分将在2020年前实现。             

近期经济制裁             

制裁文件被制裁方国别被制裁机构/个人事项背景欧盟理事会实施条例(EU)2017/1241；欧盟理事会决议(CFSP) 2017/1245叙利亚名为Abdulkarim Group (又名l Karim for Trade and Industry/Al Karim Group)的实体欧盟将名为Ahmad Barqawi的个人从Regulation (EU) No 36/2012制裁名单上移除，加入一个实体，同时修改名单上名为George Haswani的个人的信息。上述更新立即生效。George Haswani是在叙利亚工程、制造业和油气领域经营的商人，有一定影响力。Abdulkarim Group是一个国际公认的与Wael Abdulkarim有关联的叙利亚企业集团。Wael Abdulkarim是叙利亚首屈一指的商人。 欧盟理事会实施条例(EU)2017/1251N/A名为Jamaat-ul-Ahrar (JuA) 的实体欧盟将一个实体加入Regulation (EC) No 881/2002制裁与基地组织和ISIL相关的个人和实体名单，将冻结其财产和经济资源。制裁措施于7月6日生效。联合国安理会制裁委员会于7月6日将该实体加入冻结财产和经济资源的人员、组织和实体名单。欧盟追随了安理会的行动。             

深度阅读             

                 美中对话成果寥寥 特朗普对华态度或转强硬                          

为缩小对华贸易逆差，特朗普政府的经济事务官员与中国代表举行了谈判，试图在合作与对抗之间找到平衡点。             

周三美国和中国的高层经济对话未能取得任何进展，让白宫重新构建美中贸易关系的努力陷入困境。             

在为时一整天的双边会谈后，美方发表了一篇简短声明，称中方认同两国的共同目标，即双方应共同努力削减美国对中国的贸易逆差。             

但声明中没有透露双方在多大程度上取得了共识以及何时能够重启谈判。中方官员没有发表声明。             

如果不能采取实质性措施缩小对中国3,470亿美元的贸易逆差，白宫将面临更大压力，不得不考虑改变对华态度，从合作变为进一步对抗。             

此次会谈也标志着美国总统特朗普(Donald Trump)与中国国家主席习近平共同提出的"百日计划"的结束，该计划旨在制定一套综合方案，重新理顺两国经贸关系。             

美方声明还表示，白宫将寻求一项贸易政策，为美国工人和企业营造公平竞争环境。这份声明是由带领美方代表团参与这次会谈的美国商务部部长罗斯(Wilbur Ross)和财政部部长姆努钦(Steven Mnuchin)联名发布的。             

但声明没有提到美国是否会像特朗普助理近期建议的那样采取单边贸易行动来实现上述目标。             

会谈结束后仅由美国单方面发表声明的做法打破了近年来中国在奥巴马(Barack Obama)和小布什(George W. Bush Jr.)执政时期与美国进行类似谈判中的一个惯例。过去，美中两国在会谈结束后通常会发表共同声明，总结双方谈判内容并强调共识。与此次会谈不同的是，特朗普与习近平今年4月份在佛罗里达州会晤后也发表了友好的共同声明。             

双方在会谈结束后均取消了召开新闻发布会的计划。             

美国商务部长罗斯(Wilbur Ross)称，他希望重新平衡两国贸易关系，使其向着更加公平和平等的方向发展；罗斯提到了他在两个月前与中国达成了针对特定领域的小范围市场开放协议，但指出最艰难的工作尚未完成。             

中方官员则提醒称应避免偏离合作的轨道。             

中国副总理汪洋在双方会谈开始时对罗斯表示，对话不能立即解决所有分歧，但对抗会立即损害双方利益。             

4月份在佛罗里达州海湖庄园举行峰会期间，特朗普和中国国家主席习近平意外建立了亲切友好的双边关系，在特朗普政府对这种双边关系进行评估之际，周三的磋商从某种意义上来说提醒了官员们现实情况是怎样的。特朗普4月份抛开竞选期间对中国贸易行为的抨击，和习近平达成启动贸易百日计划的共识，希望通过建立新的"全面经济对话"重建两国商业关系。             

本周举行的会谈是全面经济对话框架下的首次，标志百日计划的结束，同时也将检验两国政府是选择合作还是对抗：最终结果到底是通过合作制定内容广泛的计划、缓解长期存在的贸易紧张关系，还是特朗普制定计划采取更多对抗性措施？特朗普的贸易顾问包括一些长期批评中国的官员。             

特朗普助手在预备后一种结果时，一直在考察的措施包括对中国的钢铁和太阳能板征收关税，以及收紧中国向美国投资的限制。             

目前为止美国政府选择不实施这些政策，但特朗普此前暗示对中国贸易问题的进展感到失望，希望能够取得更多成果。他上周向记者表示，必须解决对华贸易问题，因为这种贸易关系并未形成互惠，而且严重失衡，美国和中国的贸易协定是最糟糕的。             

中美在地缘政治谈判中也面临类似的合作还是对抗的两难局面。在海湖庄园(Mar-a-Lago)峰会之后的几周里，特朗普逐渐偏向了更强硬的路线。特朗普不顾中国政府的反对，批准向台湾出售武器的新交易，本月早些时候还派出轰炸机和海军前往南中国海(South China Sea , 中国称南海)巡逻，以维护美国在这些争议水域的航行自由。特朗普还收紧了对涉嫌帮助朝鲜核计划的企业和银行的经济制裁。             

朝鲜问题尤其有可能影响特朗普的对华策略。特朗普早些时候表示，如果中国政府能帮助遏制朝鲜的核野心，他会在贸易方面放宽对中国的某些限制。但特朗普后来又表示，他对中国在这方面的努力感到失望。这可能令特朗普更有理由挥舞贸易限制大棒。特朗普上周称，在朝鲜问题上，美国的优势在于贸易。             

特朗普团队最初曾表达过乐观看法，声称他们找到了新办法，可以解决上届政府未能解决的麻烦重重的贸易冲突。今年5月，作为美中关系取得快速进展成果的一部分，两国政府宣布就中方开放农业和金融市场的举措达成协议，中方承诺在本周的对话之前取得切实成果。             

不过一些美国企业组织和受影响的公司抱怨，虽然表面看来中国政府履行了承诺，但并没有彻底贯彻执行；中国政府消除了承诺消除的贸易壁垒，但仍放任其他障碍存在。本周又出现了新的争执。陶氏化学公司(Dow Chemical Co., DOW)称，中国政府5月份承诺加快审批一度搁置的八种生物科技产品，但似乎言而无信，并未对其转基因大豆进行快速审批。             

中国政府称中间存在误会，陶氏化学的产品未上优先审批名单。             

《财富》世界500强(Fortune 500)企业CEO今年强烈游说白宫，劝白宫缓和咄咄逼人的贸易立场，受此鼓舞中国官员寄望美国商界维持两国平稳的双边贸易关系。汪洋周二在丽思卡尔顿(Ritz Carlton)举行的午宴上向美国商界领袖发表讲话，称美国大选后出现的对特朗普挑起贸易战的担忧已经消退。             

他向观众问道，为什么会有这种变化？然后对高管们说，答案就在这里，这是你们的功劳。他还补充说，新一届政府转变了方向，这反映了企业界的主流意见。             

官方会谈的间隙，20名美国和中国的高管本周在华盛顿会晤，以黑石集团(Blackstone Group LP)联合创始人、特朗普顾问苏世民(Stephen Schwarzman)和中国电子商务巨头阿里巴巴集团(Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., BABA)创始人马云为首。根据周四发布的一份联合声明，他们试图说服并鼓励各自的政府避免采用传统的贸易救济措施，通过有效协商找出解决争议的办法。苏世民在接受采访时表示，会谈的气氛非常友好。             

但最近几周，越来越多的行业组织和高管发出了不同的声音，他们鼓励特朗普团队利用本周的会谈，以超过以往的力度敦促中国改革并开放其经济。             

在本周会谈举行前发布的一份报告中，上海美国商会(American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai)表示，百日计划带来了某些早期成果，但重要的是，这些对话也凸显出进行实质性经济改革的重要性。该机构对其成员进行的一项调查显示，成员对市场准入、行业政策及起码的公平公正存在严重的担忧，56%的受访成员表示，中国政府的政策仍然偏向本土公司，对外国公司不利。             

                                      Jacob M. Schlesinger                                           

Document WSJCN00020170720ed7k000xd



World News -- Middle East Crossroads: After Mosul, Faraway  ISIS  'Provinces' Fight On

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
661 words
21 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

DUBAI -- In the three years since it proclaimed a world-wide caliphate, Islamic State has become a global franchise -- which means the loss of its core in Syria and Iraq won't pacify the far-flung conflict zones where the group's affiliates operate.

Regional "provinces" of Islamic State have sprung up from West Africa to the Philippines after the group's self-appointed "caliph," Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, seized the Iraqi city of Mosul in 2014 and demanded allegiance from Muslims world-wide.

Most of these "provinces" grew out of existing insurgent organizations, such as Nigeria's Boko Haram or Ansar Beit al-Maqdis in Egypt's Sinai Peninsula. These groups simply reflagged with Islamic State's new brand -- then seen as uniquely appealing to recruits and donors because of Islamic State's seeming invincibility.

Other "provinces" were breakaways from relatively more-moderate groups, such as Islamic State Khorasan, which absorbed the most violent elements of the Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Some groups, like Boko Haram, controlled huge territory. Other Islamic State "provinces," such as the one in Russia's North Caucasus, consisted of scattered militants.

In any case, the conflicts in which these "provinces" thrived preceded Islamic State's 2014 proclamation. And even after the recent liberation of Mosul and the impending collapse of Islamic State's second-largest stronghold of Raqqa, Syria, these distant conflicts will persist.

"Operationally, the fall of Mosul changes nothing because every one of these groups is autonomous from Islamic State central," said Mathieu Guidere, a terrorism expert at the University of Toulouse. "The only impact is psychological -- these groups will fear that something like what happened to Mosul will happen to them, and will draw their lessons."

In fact, just as Iraqi troops were mopping up the last pockets of resistance in Mosul, Islamic State's Asian affiliate halfway around the world attempted a dramatic takeover of Marawi, one of the largest Muslim cities on the southern Philippines island of Mindanao.

"Islamic State is a very resilient organization, it's not one single group but a movement now," said Rohan Gunaratna, head of the International Center for Political Violence and Terrorism Research at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. "And because the world has no real strategy to contain, isolate and eliminate Islamic State beyond Iraq and Syria, we will see a significant global expansion of this group."

Asia, home to many more Muslims than the Middle East, is a particular concern. "We should prepare for a Daesh pivot to Asia," said Richard Javad Heydarian, a security analyst in the Philippines, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

While Islamic State -- routed from much of its territory in Syria and Iraq -- no longer has the winning momentum that once made it so attractive to potential jihadists, the organization has left a permanent mark on the motley assortment of militant groups that joined its caliphate project.

One consequence of Islamic State's losses in the Middle East may be a rekindled debate within the organization's affiliates about just how indiscriminately brutal they should be.

That issue has already split Boko Haram, with one faction treating anyone not actively aiding the group as apostates deserving death and another preaching more-targeted violence.

In trying to assess Islamic State's future after Mosul, terrorism experts and counterterrorism officials look for clues in what happened to al Qaeda after the loss of its Afghan base in 2001 and the killing of Osama bin Laden10 years later. While these events weakened al Qaeda's core and reduced its ability to target the West, regional affiliates have flourished.

Niger parliament member Lamido Moumouni Harouna represents a region frequently attacked by Boko Haram. "The conflict here is a local conflict," he said. "And the way it will develop will depend on how the local environment develops."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170721ed7l0001m



World News: Ankara Rebuked Over Syria Map

By Dion Nissenbaum 
292 words
20 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- A detailed map purportedly showing where U.S. forces are deployed in northern Syria was published by Turkey's state-run news agency, drawing a sharp retort and a warning from the Pentagon that the move could undermine the battle against Islamic State.

The U.S. government on Wednesday expressed its concerns to Turkish officials after Anadolu Agency released a lengthy article and a map it said showed the locations of 10 bases used by hundreds of U.S. forces in northern Syria battling Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

"The release of sensitive military information exposes coalition forces to unnecessary risk and has the potential to disrupt ongoing operations to defeat ISIS," the U.S. military said in a statement. "ISIS is the greatest threat to regional stability and it is critical that all parties operating in Syria remain focused on what is most important -- the annihilation of ISIS."

Release of the map angered some U.S. officials, who privately expressed frustration that Turkey, a North Atlantic Treaty Organization ally, would threaten its relationship with Washington by allowing its state-run news agency to publish sensitive information.

"While we cannot independently verify the sources that contributed to this article, we would be very concerned if officials from a NATO ally would purposefully endanger our forces by releasing sensitive information," the Pentagon said. "We have conveyed these concerns to the government of Turkey."

Turkish officials didn't respond to requests to comment about the release of the information, which comes as the U.S. military is stepping up its efforts to push Islamic State out of Raqqa, its de facto capital in Syria.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170720ed7k0000y



The City Is the Battlefield of the Future

By John Spencer 
833 words
20 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A17
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The battle for Mosul represents the future of warfare -- and it wasn't pretty for America's allies. A ragtag army of a few thousand Islamic State fighters managed to hold the city for months against some 100,000 U.S.-backed Iraqi security forces. The ISIS fighters communicated via social media and were armed with crude explosive devices and drones available at Wal-Mart. In the end the rebel fighters were dislodged, but not before an estimated 7,000 people were killed and another 22,000 wounded.

U.S. commanders ought to imagine how they would handle a similar environment. Future American conflicts will not be waged in the caves or craggy mountaintops of Afghanistan, much less the open deserts of Iraq or the jungles of Vietnam. They will be fought in cities -- dense, often overpopulated and full of obstacles: labyrinthine apartment blocks, concealed tunnels, panicking civilians. The enemy will be highly networked and integrated into his surroundings. America's next war will be the 1993 Battle of Mogadishu on steroids.

The U.S. military must wake up to the reality of demographic trends. Over half of the world's population resides in cities, and the United Nations estimates that figure will reach 60% by 2030. By the same year, the number of "megacities," those with more than 10 million residents, will climb from 31 to more than 40. Such urbanization makes less plausible the traditional tactic of coercing civilians out of conflict zones to give the military free rein.

This in turn makes cities increasingly attractive to bands of violent nonstate actors in places like the Middle East and Northern Africa. Dense populations, advances in communication technology, and the often-poor coordination between city and national-security forces can allow terror groups to control urban territory at a fraction of the cost states spend to fight back. No amount of money thrown into the U.S. defense budget will correct this urban disadvantage without a major shift in the way Americans prepare to fight.

Surprisingly, few militaries specifically train for major urban operations. The U.S. military has no location that can adequately replicate a big city. The training sites on Army bases that are generously labeled as "urban" include a few dozen buildings at best. The three centers that certify major units for combat -- the National Training Center at Fort Irwin, Calif., the Joint Readiness Training Center at Fort Polk, La., and the Joint Multinational Readiness Center in Hohenfels, Germany -- are in rural places. We don't transport sand into the woods to train for desert warfare or build greenhouses to simulate jungles. We train in those environments, and we should train for urban warfare in cities.

The only site available to the Army that comes close to what's needed is the Indiana National Guard's Muscatatuck Urban Training Center. This 1,000-acre facility has 68 buildings, a reservoir, a system of tunnels, and more than nine miles of roads. But Muscatatuck still lacks the density American and allied forces have repeatedly faced since the beginning of the Iraq war in 2003.

American forces also need to be equipped to operate in large cities with new equipment, formations and doctrine. Nowhere in the U.S. Army's doctrine -- the manuals of concepts and operating procedures that guide the action of its forces -- does the word "siege" appear. But this oldest form of warfare has become the chosen tactic to end urban fights in Iraq and Syria. Islamic State was able to drag out the conflicts in Mosul and Raqqa while U.S.-backed forces struggled to cut off supply routes.

What can be done to level this imbalance on urban terrain? A first step would be to create an authentic, full-scale training site to prepare American troops. I imagine a school in an actual city, analogous to the mountain, desert and jungle operations centers the U.S. currently maintains. Major cities such as Detroit and the outer boroughs of New York have large abandoned areas that could be safely redeveloped as urban training sites.

This is a long-term investment: A new training facility would not prevent quagmires like Mosul overnight. Critics might argue that the U.S. should focus on retaining its advantage against strategic adversaries like Russia, China and North Korea. But strategic deterrence and battlefield readiness are not mutually exclusive. Equipping soldiers to fight in cities is one way to deter enemies -- state and nonstate actors alike -- from challenging America directly.

The city is the battlefield of the future, whether the U.S. military trains for it or not. Failing to invest in urban warfare only means American soldiers will be sent into combat in environments they have never seen.

---

Maj. Spencer is an Army infantryman and deputy director of the Modern War Institute at the U.S. Military Academy in West Point, N.Y.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170720ed7k0000h



World
Map Said to Show Location of U.S. Forces in Syria Published in Turkey; U.S. decries release, warns of disruption in fight against Islamic State

By Dion Nissenbaum 
679 words
20 July 2017
00:17
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON— detailed map purportedly showing where U.S. forces are deployed in northern Syria was published by Turkey's state-run news agency, drawing a sharp retort and a warning from the Pentagon that the move could undermine the battle against Islamic State.

The U.S. government on Wednesday expressed its concerns to Turkish officials after Anadolu Agency released a lengthy article and a map it said showed the locations of 10 bases used by hundreds of U.S. forces in northern Syria battling Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

"The release of sensitive military information exposes coalition forces to unnecessary risk and has the potential to disrupt ongoing operations to defeat ISIS," the U.S. military said in a statement. "ISIS is the greatest threat to regional stability and it is critical that all parties operating in Syria remain focused on what is most important—he annihilation of ISIS."

Release of the map angered some U.S. officials, who privately expressed frustration that Turkey, a North Atlantic Treaty Organization ally, would threaten its relationship with Washington by allowing its state-run news agency to publish sensitive information.

"While we cannot independently verify the sources that contributed to this article, we would be very concerned if officials from a NATO ally would purposefully endanger our forces by releasing sensitive information," the Pentagon said. "We have conveyed these concerns to the government of Turkey."

Turkish officials didn't respond to requests for comment about the release of the information, which comes as the U.S. military is stepping up its efforts to push Islamic State out of Raqqa, its de facto capital in Syria.

Turkey and the U.S. remain at odds over Washington's decision to work in Syria with the Kurdish YPG militia. Turkish leaders consider the force a threat to their country and have expressed frustration that the Trump administration decided to step up its military cooperation with the YPG earlier this year.

Turkish officials see the YPG as an offshoot of the PKK, a Kurdish separatist force that the U.S. and Turkey both classify as a terrorist group. The U.S. treats the YPG as a distinct force from the PKK, allowing it to work with Kurdish fighters in Syria.

In May, President Donald Trump approved plans to directly arm the YPG for the first time, raising new concerns in Turkey that the weapons would be turned on Turkish soldiers fighting in Syria or smuggled across the border into Turkey.

The U.S. has tried to assuage Turkish concerns, but the issue remains a divisive one for the two countries.

Turkey has launched airstrikes on YPG positions in northern Syria and repeatedly turned its artillery on Kurdish forces. The U.S. responded by launching joint border patrols in April with the YPG, a move that helped temporarily defuse tensions.

While the Turkish news agency published the map, the German newspaper Bild released satellite imagery of what it said was a major U.S. base in northern Syria, a sprawling facility with a long runway, hangars, barracks and fuel depots.

Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has denounced the U.S. military presence in Syria.

"Any foreign troops coming to Syria without our invitation or consultation or permission, they are invaders, whether they are American, Turkish, or any other one," Mr. Assad said in an interview earlier this year. "They didn't succeed anywhere they sent troops, they only create a mess. They are very good in creating problems and destroying, but they are very bad in finding solutions."

Margaret Coker in Istanbul and Nour Alakraa in Beirut contributed to this article.

Write to Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com

Related

* U.S. to Supply Antitank Weapons to Kurdish Fighters in Syria (May 15)

* Trump Set to Arm Kurds in \b ISIS\b0  Fight, Angering Turkey (May 9)

* Borderlands: A Year on the Syrian-Turkish Border

Document WSJO000020170719ed7j0080x



World
Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte Pushes to Extend Martial Law; Duterte says he won't be able to subdue threat by  ISIS -aligned militants on Mindanao by coming end of 60-day period

Jake Maxwell Watts 
703 words
18 July 2017
10:02
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA—hilippines President Rodrigo Duterte has asked the country's Congress to extend martial law in the southern island of Mindanao to the end of the year, arguing that the continued suspension of some civil liberties is necessary to contain a threat from Islamic State-linked militants.

The request would see the duration of martial law more than tripled, a sign of the difficulties the Philippines faces in ridding Mindanao of several violent extremist groups.

The country's military is struggling to end a bloody battle in the southern city of Marawi, where Islamic militants who occupied the city eight weeks ago are still in a standoff with government forces. The uprising has been described by government officials as an attempt by armed groups to declare an Islamic caliphate in a small Muslim-majority part of Mindanao.

Mr. Duterte is seeking an extension to martial law because he has come to the conclusion that the fighting in Marawi won't be subdued by the time its term expires this weekend, according to a letter to Congress read to reporters on Tuesday by presidential spokesman Ernesto Abella. Mr. Abella didn't provide an explanation for why such a long extension is required.

Several deadlines set by officials to end the siege have passed. Nearly 550 people have died since a failed attempt to arrest a militant leader triggered the battle. At least 45 of the dead are civilians, some of whom were beheaded by the militants.

Martial law allows the military to search and arrest suspects without the usual need for a warrant. Philippine law allows the president to declare martial law for up to 60 days but requires congressional approval for an extension. It isn't clear whether Mr. Duterte's request for more time would be granted, although the president's allies dominate both houses of Congress.

The government has responded forcefully to the occupation of Marawi, declaring its intention not to negotiate with the militants and sending troops into a pitched battle for the city that included the use of heavy weaponry and airstrikes. An unknown number of civilian hostages are being held by a handful of militants who retain control of small pockets of the city.

Despite the carnage, Mr. Duterte continues to enjoy high approval ratings. A Pulse Asia survey in June found that 82% of Filipinos approved of his performance, with 5% disapproving and the rest undecided.

Those who do oppose the president have argued that martial law has been unnecessarily imposed upon the island of Mindanao, home to 22 million people and the city of Marawi. Many Filipinos remain wary of martial law, which is remembered for its use by former dictator Ferdinand Marcos, who was ousted by popular revolt in 1986.

The island of Mindanao has long been restive, with several concurrent insurgencies raging at any one time for decades. The island is poorer and less developed than the rest of the Philippines. Poverty is particularly prevalent among its minority Muslim population, making it vulnerable to radicalization by Islamic State-inspired groups such as the Maute.

The Philippines government says it intends to rebuild the city of Marawi as a model municipality once the siege is ended, with upgraded medical facilities and other infrastructure. Nearly half a million people have been affected by the fighting, many displaced and dependent on government shelter.

Mr. Duterte has repeatedly said he intends to win in Marawi, even if it means some loss of life. He told reporters on Monday that protecting civilians is a priority but that the militants would be targeted ruthlessly. "If need be, you can bomb the whole place," he said. "I don't mind. But skip the thing about, you know, hurting the children and women.'

Write to Jake Maxwell Watts at jake.watts@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* Islamic State Sinks Its Teeth Into the Philippines (June 14)

* Philippines Struggles to Suppress \b ISIS\b0 -Linked Rebels as Foreign Fighters Found (June 1)

* Philippines Declares Martial Law on Southern Island (May 23)

Document WSJO000020170718ed7i000p1



Opinion
The GOP's Fickle Health-Care Factions; A transcript of the weekend's program on FOX News Channel.

7,443 words
17 July 2017
17:28
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

PAUL GIGOT: Welcome to the 'Journal Editorial Report.' I'm Paul Gigot.

Senate Republicans released a revised version of their health care bill this week, hoping to jump-start their stalled effort to repeal and replace ObamaCare. President Trump urging members of his party to get it done, saying the time to act is now.

PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: I am sitting in the Oval Office, with a pen in hand, waiting for our Senators to give it to me. For years, they have been talking about repeal, replace, repeal replace. Now we have a president that's waiting to sign it. I have pen in hand.

GIGOT: So will changes to the bill be enough to get moderate Republican holdouts on board? Let's ask "Wall Street Journal" columnist and deputy editor, Dan Henninger; assistant editorial page editor, James Freeman; and editorial board member, Joe Rago.

Joe, the bill has changed for the better or worse, and how?

JOE RAGO: Well, I would say both. This is a bill that's moved to the political center. It's moved leftward. It's worse in the sense that it gets rid of a lot of the tax—t keeps a lot of the tax increases on investment income, 3.8 percentage—

GIGOT: That were part of ObamaCare.

RAGO:—hat were part of it.

GIGOT: That Republicans promised to repeal?

RAGO: They did for years. And it spends that money on other stuff. It's got $45 billion for opioid treatment. It's got a lot more up-front Medicaid spending. It's good and better in the sense that it retains the fundamental Medicaid reform. That's really the most important part of this bill. Moving to a per capita block grant—

GIGOT: To the states from the federal government.

RAGO: Right. A lot of devolution to the states and putting the program on a budget for the first time since 1965. It's a structural reform, which is the only way to rationalize the entitlement state.

GIGOT: That still is the part, in your view, that is worth really worth passing this bill?

RAGO: It is worth passing for that reason. The new bill also adds something from Senator Ted Cruz. It's called the freedom option. It's a lot of deregulation that will start to potentially bring down premiums in the individual market. That's the type of progress that we need to stand up, a more liquid, richer insurance market with more options and more competition.

GIGOT: But this isn't the root-and-branch repeal of ObamaCare they promised. It's a compromise. It is sort of, let's try to please all sides of the Republican coalition.

DAN HENNINGER: I guess so, Paul. I have a grimmer view of it. At the end of the day, what does the solution come down to? Something very familiar in Washington, throw more money at it, right? That's kind of what it came down to.

GIGOT: More money because the so-called moderate, centrist Senators, the Rob Portman of Ohio, Mr. Cassidy of Louisiana, these are the people who wanted more money—

HENNINGER: You know something, Paul?

GIGOT:—or opioids and Medicaid.

HENNINGER: We thought people like Portman, and Senator Cassidy from Louisiana, could be called conservatives. I think this is a moment of reckoning for the Republican Party. What we're finding out is that a lot of these Republican Senators really are not conservative, as the way we thought the party had evolved. A lot of them are acting like big- government Republicans, back from the 1970s. And what we saw was that when they got pushed, by the left and by the media, they caved. And they were sort of running from the party of Reagan. So I think that conservatives, whether they actually represent Republican and conservative voters, is another question. But this behavior on this bill suggests to me that the Republican Party has to step back and think a little bit about what they stand for.

GIGOT: There's one Senator who's already said he's not even going to vote to a motion to proceed and that's Rand Paul of Kentucky. He's not a moderate. He's a Libertarian.

Why would he blow up this bill? If this fails, James, you get ObamaCare.

JAMES FREEMAN: Yes. And I think Republicans who vote against it also deserve primary challenges because the United States government has unfunded liabilities in the tens of trillions or perhaps the hundreds of trillions. This is one little baby step towards reforming the fastest-growing entitlement program—

GIGOT: Which is Medicaid.

FREEMAN: Which is Medicaid. There's good evidence that you're no healthier with Medicaid than if you have no insurance at all. It's not working for anyone. And the idea that you can't begin to reform it, to have money spent better, it boggles the mind that Republicans can say no to this opportunity.

GIGOT: And, Joe, the Cruz option, which I happen to like, being part of the bill, is that going to help with some of the conservatives?

RAGO: Yes, you've already started to see Senator Cruz, who had been calling this ObamaCare-lite, start to come on, Ron Johnson from Wisconsin, maybe Mike Lee from Utah. So it is starting to assuage them. They have sort of given up some of their reservations about this bill. As you said, it is not root-and-branch reform, but it is a net improvement and directional progress.

GIGOT: But you think it's actually a pretty important reform?

RAGO: I think it is pretty important reform. What James is talking about, with Medicaid, this bill saves $772 billion over 10 years. Now, look, that's not—

GIGOT: And even more as you go out.

RAGO: Right. It's a structural reform that makes changes over the long-term. That's the type of change we need in Washington.

GIGOT: All right. So here's—tep back and look at the politics. Republicans in the Senate in 2018 have one Senator in a tough race, Dean Heller of Nevada. One. Everyone else is generally pretty safe. They are 18 months from that election. One Senator, and if they can't make this pass right now, with that kind of a limited vulnerability, politically, 18 months from now, when will they ever pass any reform of entitlements?

HENNINGER: Yes, it is a really good question, because what the Republican voters and the American electorate did was give them control of the government, after allowing the Democrats to control it. They passed the Affordable Care Act. They passed Dodd-Frank. There was obviously disaffection with both of those big pieces of legislation. Now it was the Republicans' chance, as they promised when they got control of the government, to revise these—ix these things, and they are not pulling it off.

GIGOT: Thank you. We will see. It's going to be a historic week.

When we come back, President Trump's oldest son being pulled into the Russia probe after taking a meeting with a Russian lawyer during the 2016 campaign. But is it proof of collusion? Our panel weighs in, next.

GIGOT: The president's oldest son now being drawn into the investigation into Russia's interference in the 2016 election. Donald Trump Jr released e-mails earlier this week from 2016, showing that he agreed to meet with someone he believed to be a Russian government attorney after receiving an e-mail from a publicist offering him information that would incriminate Democratic presidential nominee, Hillary Clinton.

President Trump defended his son Thursday during his trip to Paris.

TRUMP: I have a son who is a great young man. He is a fine person. He took a meeting with a lawyer from Russia. It lasted for a very short period and nothing came of the meeting. And I think it is a meeting that most people in politics probably would have taken.

GIGOT: All right. Dan, so people say this finally proves that there is collusion, there was collusion between the Trump campaign and the Russian government. How do you see it?

HENNINGER: I don't think any serious Washington lawyer would agree with that, that there is collusion, an actionable act that could be taken to a prosecutor and prosecuted. But look, the media has had this narrative from the beginning, that there was collusion. They are going to chase it to the ends of the earth.

Let's talk a little bit about what happened here. He met with these people to talk about opposition research, oppo, as we call it. oppo research happens in every campaign. Do campaigns meet with individuals from foreign governments? Yes, they have done that. Are there dirty tricks in politics? Yes, there is that.

HENNINGER: But the difference here is that we know that the Russians did hack into the election, into servers.

GIGOT: Right.

HENNINGER: There's been congressional testimony that they hacked into, tried to hack into 20 state election systems as well. That is what is new here. And so the Trump—Donald Trump Jr has walked up to the line with the Russians, where these two intersections meet. And that's why the prosecutors are now going to take a hard look at what this meeting was about.

GIGOT: But the e-mail, the come-on e-mails was, look, this is part of—e have dirt on the Clinton campaign, and we have also think that this is representing the support from the Russian government—

HENNINGER: Right.

GIGOT:—or the Trump campaign, and Donald Trump Jr said, "I love it."

HENNINGER: Yes.

GIGOT: That suggests that he was happy—e didn't object to help from the Russian government. This is a government that is not our friend.

HENNINGER: And in a normal—ight. And in a normal campaign, you've got the candidate, the people right below him. That would include Donald Trump Jr. If you get a request like that, you send somebody who is about five or six layers below that to go talk to them and see if they have anything. And then they talk to the lawyers in the campaign who say, "Get away from these people." But, no, the Trumps took it on themselves.

GIGOT: He even roped in Jared Kushner, the son-in-law, and Paul Manafort, you know, the Beltway lobbyist, who represents a lot of unseemly foreign clients. So I mean, at a minimum, it's stupidity, incompetence in my humble opinion, but it's hard to defend.

FREEMAN: It is hard to defend. I think, certainly, a lot of people in Washington would like to get information. And you don't want to say it is illegal to gather information. But, yes, I think more seasoned political pros, maybe more classier, shall we say, politicians, might have at least wanted to keep more distance from this kind of meeting.

But this kind of brings up the choice that people had last year, two very flawed candidates. And you look at what's happened here. We're a year into the collusion investigation. So far, nothing showing the Trump campaign actually doing anything.

GIGOT: Well, wait a minute. This meeting isn't anything? It did something. They met.

FREEMAN: Well, OK, a meeting, but I mean in terms of colluding, in terms of working together to rig an election, which is the charge.

GIGOT: In terms of saying, OK, we have an idea, we're going to hack the Democratic National Committee, good idea. That we don't have any evidence of.

FREEMAN: Right.

GIGOT: On the other hand, if they say, we have some dirt on the Clintons, come and meet with us, they go, great. I mean, that's not—hat's not really very good politics.

FREEMAN: It's distasteful. And it is—e're seeing, really, the initial stages of learning about what happened—here did this whole collusion theme come from? It looks like it may have come from Democratic-funded opposition research, seeking from Russian sources—

GIGOT: This is the so-called dossier—

FREEMAN: Right.

GIGOT:—hat created that—hat has been discredited

FREEMAN: Right. So the question is, we seem to have two campaigns last year or at least two parties that were willing to take dirt on their opponents from foreign sources.

GIGOT: But here's the thing. There's only one president right now.

FREEMAN: True.

GIGOT: Not Hillary Clinton. It is Donald Trump. He won. There's a special counsel looking into this regarding the Trump campaign.

How much legal jeopardy is there here, Joe?

RAGO: Well, I suppose it depends on the underlying merits of the case. Donald Trump Jr showed terrible judgment here in taking this meeting. But the question is, did it ever advance into anything that was not only unsavory and reflects poorly on the Trump family business, but into something that's potentially criminal? And—

GIGOT: We don't know that.

RAGO: We don't know this. The Russian lawyer he met with was apparently arguing against the Magnitsky Act, which was a law that sanctioned—merican law that sanctioned Russian human rights abusers. It looks like, potentially, a cutout to lobby to weaken this law. But still other than the e-mail, nothing of substance seems to have come out of it.

GIGOT: The other—o far.

RAGO: So far.

GIGOT: And that's the question, Dan. They issued an incomplete account of this when it first came out.

HENNINGER: Right

GIGOT: And that's part of the problem. They released the e-mails two or three days later, which I'm glad they did it. Let's get it all out. It's the sort of thing, instead of just trying to say, oh, well, at first, this is just a meeting about adoption, the Magnitsky Act related to adoption, they didn't get the truth out.

HENNINGER: They didn't get the truth out. So now, what this ensures, as you were suggesting earlier, is that the special counsel, Robert Mueller, and the lawyers working for him, are going to overturn and look at everything related to this campaign and the Trump people who were involved with it, Jared Kushner, Manafort, the president himself. They are going to want to look at all the e-mails, all the documents, all the phone records. That's the way these investigations work. And all of them are going to be preoccupied with this. Jared Kushner has had to hire his own lawyer. It is inevitable that it is going to preoccupy them.

GIGOT: All right. When we come back, while the White House deals with its latest Russia headache, Congress seems to be creating one of their own, as a new Russia sanctions bill stalls in the House. What's the holdup all about?

GIGOT: While the White House is facing fresh questions about Russia's role in the 2016 campaign, Congress is bogged-down in a debate over just how much authority to give President Trump to potentially ease sanctions against Moscow. The Senate overwhelmingly passed a bill last month to impose new penalties on Russia and to make sure the administration can't change course without congressional approval. But that measure has stalled in the House. What's behind the holdup?

Let's ask Tennessee Senator Bob Corker. He's the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee.

So, welcome Mr. Chairman. Glad to have you here.

So let me ask you first about the meeting that Donald Trump Jr had with the Russian—uring the campaign. Do you agree with President Trump that anybody would have taken this meeting?

SEN. BOB CORKER: Well, Paul, good to be with you, first.

Let me just say look, we have these daily drippings out of what had occurred during the campaign. We have a Senate Intel Committee that's going through this. They will be able to put all this in proper context. Personally, had I received a call from some—bout some Russian official wanting to give me information, I would have said no. But look, I think the Intel Committee can put all this in context. If I responded to these on a daily basis, Paul, I wouldn't be able to deal with the policy issues that we have to deal with. So I just think we ought to wait, let them go through all of this, and at the end, we will have everything in proper context.

GIGOT: All right. Let's talk about that policy, the Russia sanctions. Passed the Senate 98-2. That's—ome republicans in the Senate and Democrats don't agree on much these days. Why the overwhelming support for this bill? Why the bipartisan support for this legislation?

CORKER: I think that, you know, first of all, there had been concerns early on that maybe some cheap deal would be made with Russia over Syria that would eliminate the sanctions on eastern Ukraine or the sanctions relative to what Russia did there. In addition to that, the cyber issues, we want to make sure that we push back against all those who are involved in cyber issues. As Russia continues to privatize state-owned enterprises, we want to make sure that those who are, through corruption, unfairly benefitting from that we punished. We wanted to make sure those who were supplying arms to Assad were punished. We wanted to make sure those doing business with certain intel agencies and defense agencies within Russia were punished. I just think there's an overwhelming, on both sides of the aisle—nd I will say, candidly, among national security folks, within the Trump administration, a desire to push back against what Russia has done. And I strongly support this bill. Obviously, I think the House will take it up very soon.

GIGOT: Right. OK, so on the sanctions provision, you have the additional sanctions. And the White House says we support the sanctions, but what we want is more presidential flexibility. And they don't like the fact that your bill denies the president the ability to—he flexibility—lexibility to ease sanctions if he comes to some agreement with the Russians. In the past, Democrats have insisted that Barack Obama have that kind of flexibility. Why not give it to this president in this case?

CORKER: Well, if you remember, Paul, we had this same problem come up with Iran, where—

GIGOT: Right, I do remember.

CORKER:—Obama was able—e was able to go straight to the U.N. Security Council, lift all the sanctions that Congress had put in place for eight years, which was not Congress's intention. So I'm the one that's been leading the effort to ensure that we have congressional review. Had this provision been in place, the Iran deal, that I think was a terrible deal for our nation, would have never been put in place. So this is us asserting our rightful equal role in foreign policy. And I'm all supportive. I'm very supportive of congressional review. I feel like I've led the charge on that. And it will be a part of this bill.

GIGOT: So—

CORKER: When it comes out of the House. It will be part of the bill when it comes out of the House, no question.

GIGOT: What if the House doesn't include it? Because the White House is pressuring the House not to include it, and it goes back to you guys.

CORKER: It is going to come out with congressional review from the House. I get no sense whatsoever that they plan to change it. I have been on the phone just in the last 30 minutes with Ed Royce. I have talked to leaders on both sides of the aisle there. This bill will come back to us, I'm absolutely convinced, with congressional review. It's the right place for us to be. And it will stay.

GIGOT: All right. There's one other question, obviously, that we wrote about this week, which is the oil companies are objecting that the way the Senate bill is written, it could block American investments, not just in Russia, but anywhere around the world, if there was just a small bit of Russian participation in Brazil or Nigeria. Are you willing to get that fixed?

CORKER: Yes. You and I have talked about it. And Ben Cardin and I, my Democratic counterpart, did a colloquy on the Senate floor to resolve this issue. I have talked to Treasury about this issue. I think they could fix it with colloquy. But McCarthy's staff has been over to see us about it. And as you know, it is about betting on grids out in the ocean.

GIGOT: Right.

CORKER: And the United States and U.S. company could bid on a grid out there and win, and right beside it could be a Russian entity. A lot of time, government says, hey, we want you all to form a consortium so we have one pipeline that's bringing that oil back. And that is an issue. It's a legitimate issue. And the House can either solve it through legislative text change, which I've talked to Hoyer about it, and he's in agreement with that.

GIGOT: OK.

CORKER: Or they could do it through colloquy. But it is a legitimate issue.

GIGOT: But you are willing to fix that? It sounds like it will be fixable.

CORKER: Absolutely.

GIGOT: OK.

CORKER: And Senator Cardin, on the Democratic side in the Senate, is, too.

GIGOT: All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate it.

Still ahead, Mitch McConnell cuts the Senate's summer vacation short as the GOP scrambles to get some legislative wins. A look at what this Republican Congress has achieved in its first seven months, and what it still needs to do to satisfy voters ahead of the 2018 midterms.

SENATE MAJORITY LEADER MITCH MCCONNELL: Due to this unprecedented level of obstruction that we have been experiencing, we will be in session the first two weeks of August.

SENATE MINORITY LEADER CHUCK SCHUMER: If I were them, I wouldn't want to go home and face the voters either.

GIGOT: Blaming it on obstruction by Democrats, Majority Leader Mitch McConnell cancelled almost half of the Senate's August recess this week, saying he will keep lawmakers in Washington in order to give Congress more time to make progress on President Trump's agenda. In addition to repealing and replacing ObamaCare, passing a budget, and beginning work on tax reform, are at the top of the to-do list. But Mr. McConnell also hopes to push through the backlog of more than 100 presidential nominees who have yet to be confirmed by the Senate.

We're back with Dan Henninger, Joe Rago and James Freeman.

James, let's take a step back here, for a second. As they approach the August recess, seven months, almost eight, into this— guess, it's seven into the presidency, typically, a time when a new Congress, a new government with the same party running both sides of Pennsylvania avenue, gets a lot done. What do they have to show for it so far?

FREEMAN: By the traditional measures, maybe not much. We think of Nancy Pelosi and Harry Reid putting a huge $800 billion stimulus on Barack Obama's desk within a month, that hasn't really happened here. But if you are a Trump voter reflecting on your choice, you can say there's a great Supreme Court addition in Neil Gorsuch. You can talk about a burgeoning rollback of federal regulation, congressional review act bills, a lot of them have gone to the president's desk.

GIGOT: How many, 13, I think, is that it, something like that? How many of them?

FREEMAN: 13. These are basically rescinding rules from the Obama era. President Obama was the greatest regulator in history, measured by pages in the Federal Register. So there is a good start here. But the big the agenda items are still hanging out. And that's—e talked about health care, and it is the big tax cut that I think a lot of workers, investors, really, everybody who wants a faster-growing economy is still waiting for.

GIGOT: But there's also, Joe, the sort of the smaller bills that some of these new governments, Congress has put together, they really haven't done too many of those one on the Veterans Affairs.

RAGO: There's one on V.A. There's some FDA, on the Food and Drug Administration. But there's a lot of stuff that's passed the House and hasn't gotten through the Senate.

GIGOT: Right

RAGO: Typically, a bottleneck on Capitol Hill. But I think you kind of have to look at this and be disappointed in what they've done so far. Really not the kind of progress that traditionally happens.

GIGOT: There are two big reasons here, Dan. One is, I think, that health care choice that they made, to go with health care first, has just proven to be a lot harder than they thought. First, in the House, it took longer. Now it is approaching a moment of truth in the Senate.

But also, Democrats have really just done everything they can to slow the Senate down, particularly on nominations. How bad is it?

HENNINGER: Well, it is very bad on nominations. I mean, there are many, many important seats in the government that have not been filled. I came in with a little bit of a list. They are just about to start moving: the U.S. ambassador to Japan, Bill Haggerty, the solicitor general, Noel Francisco, many undersecretaries and deputy secretaries, Kevin Hassett, who is going to be chairman of the Council of the Economic Advisors, David Malpass, undersecretary for international finance. These are very important positions that have not been fulfilled for seven months.

GIGOT: But Chuck Schumer's response would be, well, they got so far behind, the Trump administration, in nominating them, what do you expect, it's their fault, not ours.

HENNINGER: Ambassador Haggerty was nominated back in February. Some of these people have been sitting for six months. These are nominations that are not controversial.

The thing here, though, Paul is, there's a new reality in Chuck Schumer's opposition. The Democrats are simply not participating in the government. Now, in fairness, the Republicans, in Obama's first term, did not participate in the passage of the Affordable Care Act or Dodd-Frank. So, that suggested, I was saying earlier, if you get control of the government, as these Republican Senators have now, you have to make a concerted effort to get some things done while you have those votes. That's what they are not doing.

GIGOT: What Schumer has done is he's used every tool, procedural tool in the Senate to stretch out these nominations. So they have a 30-hour rule of debate, I think, they are stretching that out. When Harry Reid had cut a deal with Republicans limiting it to eight hours on any nominee. They are stretching everything out. They're stretching—hey are denying hearings under an archaic Senate rule.

Republicans, what do they do about it, James?

FREEMAN: Well, I think they may go further to change the rules. We saw how Chuck Schumer, the Democrats, basically put up the goal-line stand against Neil Gorsuch. Bad move. He was a blue-chip nominee. Should not have been a big fight about that. That ended up killing the filibuster for judicial nominees going forward. So I think, normally, the Senate, a lot of it runs on unanimous consent.

GIGOT: Right.

FREEMAN: And that's how they waive all these complicated rules that basically prevent anything from happening. If the Democrats are saying, no, we're going to insist on the rules that prevent anything from happening, I think Republicans will naturally look at what other rules ought to be rewritten.

GIGOT: Let's assume health care passes this month, Joe, in the Senate, and they move on and it gets—he House and Senate pass it before the end of the recess. Can they pass tax reform before the end of this year?

RAGO: It's going to be hard. I mean, tax reform, I think, in a lot of ways will be harder than health care reform. The thing that will help is a sense of urgency. This has been so difficult on health care. I think this is a Congress that knows that they and the Trump administration are going to be judged on economic results, on their performance, and that might speed things along sort of tamp down some of these divisive debates.

GIGOT: It is really do-or-die on tax reform, especially if they can't pass health care.

All right. Still ahead, Iraq's prime minister declares victory over Islamic State in Mosul. But is the war against the terror group really coming to an end? What the U.S. needs to do to avoid repeating past mistakes, next.

GIGOT: Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al Abadi declared victory this week over the Islamic State in Mosul where the terror group declared its so- called caliphate in 2014. But after a bloody three-year struggle there, my next guest says the fight is far from over.

Seth Jones is the director of the International Security and Defense Policy Center at the Rand Corporation and author of "Waging Insurgent Warfare, Lessons from the Vietcong to the Islamic State."

Seth Jones, welcome. Good to have you here.

SETH JONES: Good to be on. Thanks, Paul.

GIGOT: How significant, for American interests, we know it matters a lot to the Iraqis, but how significant for American strategic interests is this liberation of Mosul?

JONES: I do think it is important. I think it is important to note that the U.S. strategy changed quite a bit in the 2003, 2004, 2005 period. And all the way up through the surge, the U.S. did a chunk of this kind of clearing with U.S. Marine or Army forces. In this case, the U.S. supported Iraqi counterterrorism forces, Kurdish militia and, unfortunately, some Shia in the area. So we've done much better, I think, this time.

GIGOT: Why do you say, unfortunately, some Shia? Because that's really Iranian front groups and militias.

JONES: Yes. Well, the number of Iranian—he amount of Iranian support here and the number of Shia militia in Iraq is staggering right now. Almost 150,000 mobilization—

GIGOT: Wow.

JONES: That's pretty significant. It actually shows how much influence Iran has in Iraq right now.

GIGOT: All right. Now the campaign against Islamic State also making progress inside Syria, where the fall of Raqqa, their headquarters in Syria, could also be heading that way. Is that victory? That liberation imminent, too?

JONES: Probably not imminent. I think if the liberation of Mosul tells us anything, it's Raqqa and some of the villages and cities that sit south along the Euphrates River valley are going to be brutal fights. They're going to be filled with car bombs, suicide bombers. Children that are being used as shields in the fighting. I think it is likely going to be intense. But I think, in the end, the Americans are likely to prevail with their local allies and remove most of ISIS from these towns and villages, including Raqqa.

GIGOT: OK. Let's assume that liberation does take place, you've written for us this week that already the jihadists from Islamic State are spreading out and returning essentially to their insurgent strategy, blending into villages, smaller towns, waiting for another opportunity to regroup and, no doubt, committing terror along the way. What has to happen on the part of the Iraqi government and the U.S. to make sure that ISIS doesn't revive?

JONES: Well, I think, at the core, we have to remember that this is primarily a political struggle going on, not a military one. And if we look at some of the Anbar cities like Fallujah and Ramadi, Fallujah was cleared by the U.S. in 2003.

GIGOT: Right.

JONES: Then we had insurgents move back. It was re-cleared. The last decade and a half has been constantly re-clearing some of these cities. So I think what has to happen is, in particular, in Sunni areas, some of the key issues that have disenfranchised Sunnis have got to be better addressed. That is, in part, a heavy political effort by the U.S. and U.S. diplomats to push the Iraqi government—his is going to put it really at loggerheads with Iran—o settle some of these Sunni disenfranchisement issues. And that is a large number of Shia militia, more rapid reconstruction in cities like Fallujah, now, Mosul and Ramadi. And then to treat this as a political rather than just a military struggle.

GIGOT: So they can't seem to be—he Baghdad government or with the Shiite forces that back Iran can't seem to be imposing a new kind of tyranny on those Sunni areas of Anbar Province in Iraq. Because that's the root, that's the base from which the insurgency grows.

JONES: That's an important base of support. If one looks at the rise of the Islamic State in 2014, certainly, its ability to gain sanctuary in Syria was helpful, but also ability to take advantage of grievances among the Sunni populations, who identified their government in Baghdad as essentially an Iranian stooge, was a key component of ISIS getting into that area.

GIGOT: All right. What would be your recommendation to the Trump administration about how to handle U.S. forces there? We've got several thousand that are on the ground there, mostly special forces, advisors, and targeters. But should we negotiate a more permanent presence there off troops, 10,000 or so, of the kind that President Obama refused to do in 2011?

JONES: Yes, I think there's no question right now the U.S. needs to recognize that Iraq does have a strategic importance for the United States. I don't think it requires a large number of U.S. conventional forces.

GIGOT: Right.

JONES: But I do think it does require for the U.S. to remain, to remain and have access to Iraqi bases. To continue to train Iraq's counterterrorism service, which was incredibly important in the retaking of Mosul, and will be in the retaking of other cities, including al Khayyam in Iraq. To continue to train Iraqi police forces, which will be the bedrock for law enforcement in Fallujah and Ramadi and other Sunni-heavy cities in the future. So those are some of the key issues. And to keep—ry to push out and then demobilize some of the Shia militia forces operating in the country right now, which is counterproductive for the U.S. forces.

GIGOT: So, in a way, it's a counterforce, would be a counterforce, at least politically, not militarily, politically, to Iranian influence in Iraq and, I assume, maybe a balancing role politically. You have the Kurds in the north. You have the Shiites in the south and the east. And then you have the Sunnis. So there's kind of a political balancing role here, too?

JONES: Yes, I think there is a clear political balancing role. The Kurds in the north have generally been pretty effective over the long run in taking care of their own security. I think the balance there is there is a growing interest in broader Kurdish independence—

GIGOT: Right.

JONES:—inking up with Kurdish units in Syria and Turkey. Slightly different struggle than the Sunni fight down in Anbar. So there are multiple political issues the U.S. will have to balance.

GIGOT: Thank you very much, Seth Jones, for being here. Appreciate it.

JONES: Thanks, Paul.

GIGOT: When we come back, the so-called "Summer of Hell" has started for New York area commuters as long-needed repairs divert tens of thousands of riders from the nation's busiest rail hub. A look at what's behind the rising costs and mounting delays in infrastructure projects across the country, next.

GIGOT: It's being dubbed the "Summer of Hell" as tens of thousands of commuters in the New York area scramble to find alternative routes to work. Hundreds of trains that run through New York City are being delayed or diverted this summer as Amtrak makes long-overdue repairs to tracks at Penn Station, the busiest rail hub in north America. Derailments are now common. And New York City subway breakdowns almost a daily occurrence. But the mess is just a sign of things to come, as officials make plans to repair the 107-year-old tunnel under the Hudson River, which was badly damaged by Hurricane Sandy in 2012.

"Wall Street Journal" editorial page writer, Allysia Finley, joins us with more on this ongoing saga.

And condolences to Brother Freeman who commutes from New Jersey

So, Allysia, what is behind this mess?

ALLYSIA FINLEY: Look, as you mentioned, there are nearly daily breakdowns. That is because they have not invested the money into repairing the system over the past 20, 30 years.

GIGOT: Or 70 or 80.

FINLEY: Some of them date back to the '30s. They are analog signals and they haven't gotten around to computerizing them. And they are working on it but it will not be done for another half a century.

GIGOT: So I guess the politicians would say, well, we just need to spend more money on this and it would be fine. If the politicians in Washington weren't so—uch tightwads, we could just do this. But is that really—s it really simple, more cash?

FINLEY: Most of the cash goes to the labor costs, including pensions. 60 percent of the MTA, New York City's subways, go to labor costs.

GIGOT: 60 percent?

FINLEY: 60 percent. Pension costs have doubled in the last decade. That is where the money is going, to the public unions, not to these improvements.

GIGOT: Even the money that's earmarked for transportation ends up going to labor costs or pension costs—hat's not even current workers—ather than in the upkeep of the plant.

Let's take the MTA, for example, subway cars. If you invest in the unions, the workers, you skimp over the years on things like buying trains or upgrading signals.

FINLEY: That's right. The politicians have been paying off their public unions, who are big donors to their campaign, and just neglected these repairs. But they've also been investing to an extent in some, you know, the 2nd Avenue subway

GIGOT: Right. They finally built that after—

FINLEY: They could cut some ribbons. They can maybe win some more voters on the Upper East Side.

GIGOT: There's, I think, four stations there. Thank you very much. It's a lovely subway. But it is not—f it keeps—f all the other trains keep breaking down, it really doesn't help, James?

FREEMAN: Yes, lead us not into Penn Station, is the fervent prayer of all commuters.

So I think viewers around the country, don't live here, they just beyond our griping. I think they appreciate how this does have a larger meaning here.

GIGOT: Yes.

FREEMAN: Because this really is the failure, you could say, of blue state governance, you could say of government period, in terms of costs have been driven up by labor laws, but also environmental impact statements, everything that goes into making an infrastructure project so difficult, time consuming, expensive. There's a Republican member of Congress who is trying to get $900 million in funding for a new tunnel under the Hudson River. It sounds like a lot of money. It is a drop in the bucket. It is projected to cost $20 billion. I think there's a real opportunity here and around the country for a politician who wants to say privatize, let's bid out the rights to these things, and let's take away the rules because we need more infrastructure here.

GIGOT: And just to elaborate on your point, this is not just about New York City at all. We're talking about the Amtrak corridor from Boston all the way down to Richmond, Virginia.

FREEMAN: Right.

GIGOT: It needs new investment, if you want to maintain that train service.

FINLEY: We are talking the entire country. This are issues, the labor costs, project labor agreements for the west coast and east coast. It is breaking down. It's probably more visible where you have a lot of commuters. But the same problems are occurring everywhere.

GIGOT: And where some of the systems are the oldest here because some of the tracks were laid and the infrastructure laid in the 1930s, '20s, and earlier, Dan?

HENNINGER: Well, there's a big question of whether it's doable at all or whether these, as James was suggesting, blue state, blue cities, New York, Boston, are so dysfunctional, that they are not going to get the job done. I mean, they argue that the transportation systems are, you know, crucial to the economic integrity of those—

GIGOT: They love public transit.

HENNINGER: But if it doesn't work, it's going to be solved by out migration. By people moving out of the north, into areas of the south, where they do have viable transportation systems. And I think you will just see something like Detroit happening, where it's simply winds down because they can't get it done.

GIGOT: All right. Thank you all.

We have to take one more break. When we come back, "Hits & Misses" of the week.

GIGOT: Time now for our "Hits & Misses" of the week—ames?

FREEMAN: Paul, this is a hit to Facebook founder and CEO, Mark Zuckerberg. His company collects terabytes of data about all of us. Apparently, it is not enough. So he is personally going out to middle America to meet people, find out what their concerns are, hockey moms, steelworkers, oil workers. I think there's some question of what his motives are here. Is it marketing? Is it about a political run? But I think we ought to give him some credit. He's one coastal elitist who is willing to go out and find out how the rest of the country lives.

GIGOT: All right, James.

Allysia?

FINLEY: I want to give a hit to modern medicine and the FDA for recommending this innovative new "T" cell treatment that harnesses the immune system to attack cancer cells in leukemia patients. This is a huge medicine breakthrough that opens up all kinds of possibilities.

GIGOT: And the Food and Drug Administration looks like it might even approve it.

Dan?

HENNINGER: I'm going to give a miss to the idea of "boys meets girls." The "Wall Street Journal" recently reported that guys are no longer picking up tab on dates with women. They're actually asking them to split it, or even pay it for themselves. Now, you have to ask, what is going on here? Partly, I guess it's because dating has become very expensive. But as a professor in the article said, women can no longer be thought of as commodities. So, a lot of guys are saying, I don't want to insult you, you're on your own now.

GIGOT: Are you buying that, Allysia?

I don't know.

FINLEY: I welcome being treated as a commodity.

GIGOT: When it comes to paying for dinner, yes. All right. Thank you all.

And remember, if you have your hit or miss, be sure to tweet it to us, @JERonFNC.

That's it for this week's show. Thanks to my panel. Thanks to you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. Hope to see you all right here next week.

Document WSJO000020170717ed7h00335



World
Messaging App Telegram to Boost Efforts to Remove Terror-Linked Content; Indonesia limited access to service and threatened a complete ban

By James Hookway 
648 words
16 July 2017
16:14
WSJ Pro Cybersecurity
RSTPROCY
English
Copyright ©017, Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

JAKARTA, Indonesia—he co-founder of encrypted messaging app Telegram said Sunday that it will put together a team of moderators who are familiar with Indonesia's language and culture to remove terrorist-linked content after Indonesia's government limited access to the service and threatened a complete ban.

The country's Ministry of Communications and Information Technology on Friday complained militants were using the app to recruit Indonesians and spread information on how to carry out terrorist attacks. It threatened to block Telegram entirely if it didn't introduce new measures to filter illegal content, despite an uproar from some users. It also asked internet service providers to block access to the web-based version of the service.

"The government has long observed Telegram and we are a country that prioritizes the safety of our nation, our people," Indonesia's President Joko Widodo said Sunday.

Pavel Durov, who launched the app in 2013 with his brother Nikolai, wrote in a message to his followers on Telegram that he hadn't been aware of the Indonesian government's request to block several chat groups where Islamist radicals are active. He said Telegram had now blocked those chat groups, or channels, as they are known, and would take additional steps to respond to requests from authorities in Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim nation.

"We are forming a dedicated team of moderators with knowledge of Indonesian culture and language to be able to process reports of terrorist-related content more quickly and accurately," Mr. Durov, a Russian national, said. "Telegram is heavily encrypted and privacy-oriented, but we're no friends of terrorists—n fact, every month we block thousands of ISIS-related public channels…e're constantly striving to be more efficient at preventing terrorist propaganda, and are always open to ideas on how to get better at this."

Security officials here have said that suspected militants detained by police have told them that they received instructions through the app, including orders from an Indonesian national with Islamic State in Syria, Bahrun Naim, who has been accused of masterminding several attacks in Indonesia over the past two years. Officials also have said that militants use the app to share instructions on how to make bombs.

Governments around the region are stepping up efforts to disrupt Islamist radical groups after militants affiliated with Islamic State seized the city of Marawi in the southern Philippines nearly two months ago and are still holding parts of the town. The rebels there also used Telegram to prepare for the assault and publicize the attack.

While other apps also provide a secure, encrypted messaging service, Telegram in addition provides the option to create open channels which are free for anyone to join. This has made a useful way to spread propaganda and recruit new militants.

Rudiantara, the Communications Minister, said that the government had received an apology from Mr. Durov, and that he proposed several measures to tackle the way the app can be used to spread militant ideas.

"I appreciate the response from Pavel and the ministry will follow up the details on the technical side ASAP," Mr. Rudiantara, who uses one name, said in response to a question.

Russian authorities also threatened to block Telegram in June unless it provided more information about the companies which own it. Mr. Durov said at the time he had no issue with providing corporate information, "but not a single byte of data will ever be shared with any government."

Other countries, including the U.K. and Australia, have called on technology companies to do more to help security agencies tackle terrorist threats.

Anita Rachman contributed to this article

Write to James Hookway at james.hookway@wsj.com

Document RSTPROCY20170717ed7g0008d



Declarations: Victory, Sacrifice and Questions of 'Collusion'

By Peggy Noonan 
1,283 words
15 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A13
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Three important things happened this week. Two were insufficiently noted.

Iraq's second-largest city, Mosul, fallen three years ago to Islamic State, was liberated by forces of the Iraqi government. Not long ago ISIS, the first and true sustained scum of the 21st century, was seen as militarily formidable and ideologically perhaps indomitable. Now they've disappeared into the hills. The fall of Mosul is a blow to their mystique, and that of radical Islam. As for the Iraqi military, not long ago it was derided as unprofessional and barely loyal to its own country. Now it has succeeded, with the help and encouragement of the U.S., including its special forces.

Whatever your convictions about America's presence and policy in the Mideast, whether you trend nationalist or neoconservative, America First or Lead From Behind; whatever your personal disposition, be it bitterness over the blunders of the past or half-mad with schemes for the future; and whether you judge the ultimate beneficiary of Mosul's liberation to be the current Iraqi government, the idea of a stable democracy, or the schemers of Iran, we should pause to recognize what just occurred and say:

Good. Bravo.

This is a victory. For what? Civilization.

---

The second story too involves admirable people in uniform.

This week the New York City Police Department buried one of its own, also one of our own. We should put aside a moment to mourn.

The murdered officer was Miosotis Familia, 48, reportedly the youngest of 10 children of Dominican immigrants and the first in her family to attend college. She had three children and cared for her own ailing mother. She'd been a cop for 12 years. She was one of the people who keep my city of 8.5 million up and operating each day, in both its personal and public spheres.

She was on the midnight shift in the Bronx on Wednesday, July 5. Her killer, 34-year-old Alexander Bonds, was a lowlife and prison parolee with untreated mental illness. He posted threatening anticop rants on Facebook. The night of the murder he walked up to her police vehicle and fired once through the window, shooting Officer Familia in the head. Police shot him dead soon after.

Here is NYPD Commissioner James O'Neill at her funeral this week at the World Changers Church: "Let me tell you something. Regular people sign up to be cops. They sign up for this job of protecting strangers knowing the inherent risks. . . . But not one of us ever agreed to be murdered in an act of indefensible hate. Not one of us signed up to never return to our family or loved ones. So where are the demonstrations for this single mom who cared for her elderly mother and her own three children?"

The 4,000 mourners stood and burst into sustained applause. Mr. O'Neill continued: "There is anger and sorrow, but why is there no outrage? Because Miosotis was wearing a uniform? Because it was her job? I simply do not accept that. Miosotis was targeted, ambushed and assassinated. She wasn't given a chance to defend herself. That should matter to every single person who can hear my voice in New York City and beyond."

It should.

Unnamed but a clear focus of Mr. O'Neill's remarks was the radicalism and rage of the Black Lives Matter movement, coupled with a national media too often willing to paint the police, in any given incident, as guilty until proven innocent. This sets a mood that both excites and inspires the unsteady and unstable.

Mr. O'Neill: "When we demonize a whole group of people, whether that group is defined by race, by religion or by occupation, this is the result. I don't know how else to say it. This was an act of hate, in this case against police officers -- the very people who stepped forward and made a promise to protect you day and night."

We are not paying enough attention to what is happening to the police throughout the country. As this was being written, Newsweek reported the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund claims that the number of officers killed in the line of duty was up 30% for the 12 months ending June 30, compared with the preceding year. That number doesn't include Miosotis Familia. The head of the Memorial Fund said: "Officers have been targeted for the job they do, shot and killed, or hit with vehicles."

It should be a major, sustained national story when cops are killed for being cops. Yet each incident never gels into a theme. The media caravan moves on.

Orwell spoke of forcing inconvenient stories down the memory hole. It is a feature of our age that we now force them down the hole before they've had a chance to become a memory.

---

Now to the story that did get attention. Can you hear your columnist sigh?

Donald Trump Jr.'s adventure with sketchy characters claiming to represent Russia made me think of a quote from a deadly old 19th-century European diplomat. It's no trick to fool a man who thinks himself clever, he said, but a plain, honest man -- that can be a challenge.

One of the things campaigns always have to watch out for is bumptious oafs who think themselves sophisticated.

The White House defense of the Trump Jr. meeting is essentially a question: Who wouldn't take a meeting with someone who has negative information on your political opponent?

But that's not the question. This someone was purportedly representing a foreign government. And that government was an adversary of the U.S.

Who wouldn't take that meeting? Anyone with a brain and a gut. Anyone who didn't think "House of Cards" is a moral template for modern political behavior.

Former opposition researchers are angry. I asked one, who worked in George H.W. Bush's 1988 campaign: Suppose a representative of a foreign state, or a person claiming ties to that state, contacted you and said: "We have some dirt on your opponent." What would your reaction have been?

"Immediately we would have walked away," he said.

What if the foreign government was an adversary of the U.S.? "Hell no. You don't go there."

He recalled there was chatter in 1988 that the Stasi, East Germany's domestic spy agency, had dirt on the Democratic presidential nominee. The Bush campaign rejected any possible contact out of hand. "There's such a thing as self-discipline," he said.

It is wrong to let another nation take an active role in a campaign for the U.S. presidency. It is imprudent, and also rather unpatriotic. It's not their government, it's ours. It can be assumed that we will attempt to look out for America's interests, and they will not.

What should Donald Trump Jr. have done when the music promoter urged him to meet with the representative of the Russian government who had secret, big-league, deep, dark info on Hillary Clinton?

As Sen. Lindsey Graham told President Trump's FBI nominee: "If you get a call from somebody suggesting that a foreign government wants to help you by disparaging your opponent, tell us all to call the FBI."

I add: And send word of the contact to Mrs. Clinton's campaign, with the information that you have not and will not respond. Because that would have helped our political civilization.

Was it collusion? It was worse, it was classless.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170715ed7f0001x



REVIEW --- Historically Speaking: The Perils of Cultural Purity

By Amanda Foreman 
586 words
15 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
C12
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

"Cultural appropriation" is a leading contender for the most overused phrase of 2017. Originally employed by academics in postcolonial studies to describe the adoption of one culture's creative expressions by another, the term has evolved to mean the theft or exploitation of an ethnic culture or history by persons of white European heritage.

The accusation of cultural appropriation is now having a chilling effect on cultural life itself. In Canada, editors of two different magazines resigned in recent months amid controversies for voicing their support of creative cultural borrowing. In the U.S., protests in Minnesota against the Walker Art Center led to the dismantling of "Scaffold," a sculpture by the white artist Sam Durant, which referenced, among other victims, the 1862 execution of 38 Native Americans of the Dakota people.

It's a lamentable trend. As history bountifully attests, all cultures have borrowed and exchanged ideas with one another. Sometimes the exchange has been between equal powers, and sometimes not. Either way -- whether it's the Japanese adoption of Chinese literary culture in the ninth century, the American Transcendentalists' embrace of Hindu thought in the 19th century or the influence of African sculpture on Pablo Picasso -- there's no getting away from the fact that one man's cultural appropriation is another man's appreciation.

The Romans still hold the world record for appropriating culture, enthusiastically basing their own, from law to literature, on the Greeks. In the 4th century A.D., Rome sealed its championship by appropriating the religion of a tiny minority culture in the Middle East -- thus introducing Christianity to much of the world. The appropriation wasn't all one way, however. The image of Jesus as "the good shepherd" may have evolved from the Greco-Roman god Hermes/Mercury, who was often shown with a ram across his shoulders. Likewise, early Christian imagery of the Virgin Mary with the baby Jesus echoes ancient Egyptian depictions of the goddess Isis with the godchild Horus on her lap.

Both ancient Rome and early Christianity demonstrate how cultural appropriation produces growth and innovation. By contrast, the fate of societies that have embraced the ideology of cultural separatism offers up a cautionary tale of decline.

In 529, Justinian I -- the Christian emperor of Byzantium, which had inherited the eastern part of the Roman Empire -- closed down the Neoplatonic Academy in Athens, ending a 900-year-old tradition of philosophical inquiry. The blow to Western culture was immense. Only with the founding of the University of Bologna in 1088 did Christian Europe begin to rebuild higher education.

Almost 500 years later, Emperor Jiajing of China was guilty of similar folly when he ordered the destruction of all oceangoing ships. The edict effectively sealed his subjects inside China's borders. Instead of protecting the status quo against foreign ideas and money, as Jiajing had intended, his action helped to precipitate China's descent from being the world's richest and most powerful nation in the 15th century into a cultural and economic backwater by the 19th.

The same shortsightedness can be seen in the Ottoman Empire's 1515 ban on printing in Arabic, because the printed word would defile God's name, and in the Spanish Inquisition, which focused on religious purity at the expense of every other cultural good. Today's cultural-appropriation thought police might want to recall that some victories are worse than defeats.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170715ed7f00012



World
U.S. Forces Kill Head of Islamic State's Afghanistan Operations; Other members of the group, known as  ISIS -K, were also killed in a July 11 military operation

By Gordon Lubold 
524 words
14 July 2017
22:12
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—.S. forces in Afghanistan killed the head of Islamic State's branch in the country earlier this week, the Pentagon said Friday.

American forces killed Abu Sayed, considered the emir of the group that runs the terror network's operations in Afghanistan, on July 11 in Kunar province, chief Pentagon spokeswoman Dana White said in a statement. The Pentagon provided no additional details on the operation.

Other members of the group, known as ISIS-K, were also killed, which will "significantly disrupt the terror group's plans to expand its presence in Afghanistan," Ms. White said in the statement.

The death of Sayed is largely symbolic, since ISIS-K replaces its leaders as soon as they are killed. Sayed is the third such leader in a year, after the previous emir, Abdul Hasib was killed in April by U.S. forces. The emir who held the position before him was Hafiz Sayed Khan, killed by U.S. forces in July 2016.

"Afghan and U.S. forces launched a counter-ISIS-K offensive in early March 2017 to drive fighters from Nangarhar and send a clear message to ISIS that there is no sanctuary for their fighters in Afghanistan," Ms. White said.

The U.S. has been officially fighting Islamic State in Afghanistan since January 2016, after the group began to establish a presence, mostly in Nangarhar province in eastern Afghanistan. Then-President Barack Obama provided the authority to the Pentagon to begin fighting the group at the time, when there were as many as 3,000 Islamic State fighters there.

That authority has helped curb the group's activities and now officials estimate the group has fewer than 1,000 fighters inside Afghanistan, according to U.S. officials.

In April, Gen. John Nicholson, the top commander in Afghanistan, gave orders for U.S. forces to drop the largest nonnuclear bomb in the U.S. arsenal, the GBU-43B Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb, the so-called Mother of All Bombs, killing dozens of ISIS fighters in caves in Afghanistan.

The July 11 operation came as the Trump administration is grappling with the way forward in Afghanistan and the Taliban appears to have the upper hand, controlling a majority of the country. About 10,000 U.S. troops are deployed to Afghanistan. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis is considering whether to send up to another 4,000 American troops there.

The Trump administration provided Mr. Mattis with the authority to decide on his own how many troops to send to Afghanistan, with a ceiling of 3,900, according to U.S. officials.

Mr. Mattis is under pressure from lawmakers and inside the Pentagon to first complete a strategy review of the war. In testimony earlier this summer, Mr. Mattis promised to provide that to the White House by mid-July, but the review is still under way, according to defense officials.

Write to Gordon Lubold at Gordon.Lubold@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170714ed7e00669



Life & Arts -- Film Review: Journalism Faces Terror Head On --- An improvised news organization exposes the horrors of life under Islamic State

By Joe Morgenstern 
513 words
14 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A13
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

At a time of ceaseless blather about fake news, it's easy to forget what journalism at its finest can do. "City of Ghosts," a documentary by Matthew Heineman, provides a vision of dedication to reportorial truth in the desperate efforts of an improvised news organization with a haunting, if unwieldy name: "Raqqa Is Being Slaughtered Silently," or RBSS.

In 2012 Raqqa, a Syrian city on the banks of the Euphrates River, was the site of demonstrations against the Assad regime. Once the protests were crushed, an ensuing political vacuum was filled by foot soldiers of Islamic State who moved in, declared a caliphate and made the city an Islamic State stronghold. Soon afterward, a small group of young, middle-class residents began to document the atrocities that Islamic State was visiting on their defenseless hometown. They weren't trained as reporters -- among them were university students, a teacher and a self-described hermit who loved photography -- but they had cellphone cameras, and used them to shoot on the fly and send stories to the outside world, whether the world was interested or not.

They were grass-roots journalists where there wasn't any grass, only the daily danger of being caught by murderous Islamic State zealots and tortured or killed, as several of the RBSS people were. Using their guerrilla footage, Mr. Heineman's film gives us a stunning picture of life in a city gone mad: casual sidewalk executions; bodies left as cautionary displays in Raqqa's centrally located and surreally named Paradise Square; signal-detection vans on the move in a constant campaign to shut down the town's communication networks; Islamic State thugs throwing satellite dishes on trash trucks; Islamic State recruiters rounding up kids for indoctrination in day camps. ("Children are ISIS's firewood," a journalist says.)

As city life grows intolerably dangerous, some RBSS stalwarts flee to the supposed safety of a Turkish town across the border, or to the guilt-producing comfort of Germany. They're connected by a network, after all; they can relay stories sent by colleagues who stayed behind. At this point, though, "City of Ghosts" takes a sinister turn. What began as a celebration of amateur journalists becomes a more familiar story of refugees. Islamic State retaliates against one RBSS refugee by killing his father and brother, both of whom remained in Raqqa. Another activist is killed on a Turkish street by an Islamic State operative who crossed the border to track him down.

No one feels safe, yet the reports keep coming and the RBSS efforts bear fruit.The word gets out. The images get out. Shaky cellphone videos shot on Raqqa's streets show up on CNN world news broadcasts. Whether the truth sets anyone free is unknowable at this point, but the city that was being slaughtered silently has been heard, and its suffering has been seen.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170714ed7e0001o



World
Islamic State Turned Desperate in Mosul Fight, Iraqis Say; Militants deployed suicide bombers and sought young boys for battle, according to commanders and residents

By Asa Fitch and Ali A. Nabhan 
879 words
14 July 2017
01:01
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq—n their final days in Mosul, Islamic State militants dispatched dozens of suicide bombers—ncluding women with babies in their arms—nd searched homes for young boys they could force into battle, said Iraqi commanders who led the fight and residents who survived.

Almost all of the terror group's remaining fighters in Mosul's Old City wore suicide vests during gunbattles, and the extremists also strapped bombs to disabled civilians, according to Iraqi commanders who described the fierce resistance Islamic State put up as the last stage of the battle unfolded over the past week.

Civilians who fled late in the battle said Islamic State fighters searched homes periodically. Hassan Yunis Khidhir, a bakery worker who fled his neighborhood last week, said he had his three sons, aged 14, 17 and 20, wear full niqabs, the black face coverings worn by conservative Muslim women, when Islamic State came looking.

"When we finally made it out to the security forces, we were so happy that we all cried because we never expected to make it out alive," Mr. Khidhir said.

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi declared victory over Islamic State in Mosul on Monday after nearly nine months of fighting to recapture Iraq's second-largest city, which Islamic State had held for three years.

Some fighting continued in subsequent days as Iraqi forces coordinated airstrikes with a U.S.-led military coalition on buildings in the Old City's narrow streets where Islamic State fighters were believed to be holed up.

But the fighting seemed to have died down to a large extent on Thursday. Streets in the Old City were strewn with rubble and the twisted metal of bombed-out cars.

Iraqi counterterrorism forces cleared the last buildings in their area of operations on Wednesday afternoon, commanders said, though the forces brought a gray-bearded man wrapped in a blanket on the hood of a Humvee to their headquarters west of the Old City on Thursday morning— newly captured Islamic State suspect, according to an Iraqi soldier.

The Iraqi army was also still battling groups of three or four Islamic State fighters in the Old City on Thursday, according to a commander with those forces who asked not to be named.

Iraqi forces recaptured eastern Mosul in January, and had cornered Islamic State fighters into a shrinking portion of the Old City in the west in recent months.

Surrounded by Iraqi forces, the militants recalled fighters from other areas of the Old City to defend their last patch of territory, said Lt. Col. Salam al-Obaidi, a top field commander in Iraq's counterterrorism forces.

The final push against the militants began on Saturday, at which point Iraqi forces had Islamic State fighters pinned in a long strip of territory in the Old City, running along the western bank of the Tigris River, according to commanders.

As the U.S.-trained counterterrorism forces tried to push from south to north, Islamic State fighters turned to desperate tactics, commanders said.

The militants wore suicide vests with the aim of detonating themselves if they encountered Iraqi forces in close combat, according to a high-ranking officer who asked not to be named. Around 60 suicide bombers were blowing themselves up every day at the end, he said.

Women, some carrying babies, also wore suicide vests and blew themselves up when they reached Iraqi forces, said Lt. Col. Obaidi.

"In this last small area, they weren't able to use their traditional weapons like car bombs, mortars and drones, so they used suicide bombers," he said Thursday in the Old City, smoking a cigarette and drinking Red Bull to stay alert after a grueling battle. "Many were women. More than 25 women detonated explosive vests targeting our troops in the last few days."

The extremists also piled up berms of dirt and rubble at the entrances of narrow alleyways, forcing Iraqi forces to go in on foot to clear buildings before bringing in armored bulldozers to plow paths for armored vehicles, according to Lt. Gen. Sami al-Aridhi, another counterterrorism commander.

"We had to give up all our vehicles and heavy weaponry," he said.

Islamic State fighters, most of them foreigners, had confined around 1,000 civilians to the area, commanders said. That meant Iraqi forces had to be tentative when calling in airstrikes.

On Sunday, when Mr. Abadi arrived in Mosul, there was still a pitched battle for control and the front lines had moved little from the previous day, Iraqi commanders said.

The counterterrorism forces adopted a new strategy, pushing through the middle of the unconquered territory. Separately, Iraqi army units pressed from the north and west, commanders said.

By Monday morning, that strategy was paying off as the forces drew closer to wresting the entire patch from Islamic State and most civilians were evacuated, they said.

Write to Asa Fitch at asa.fitch@wsj.com

More

* Iraq Faces Tough Task of Rebuilding Mosul (July 11)

* Iraq Marks End of Pivotal Battle Against \b ISIS\b0 (July 10)

* How Islamic State Lost Mosul

Document WSJO000020170713ed7d0086j



World
Iran's Stature Grows as Rivals Quarrel; Crisis in Qatar and advances by Shiite proxies against Islamic State boost Tehran's influence

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
895 words
13 July 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

It's been more than five months since President Donald Trump declared that he was putting Iran "on notice."

For the Iranian regime, that is turning out to be a rather comfortable place.

While the Trump administration is still formulating its Iran and Syria policies, a series of international events have combined to bolster Iran's influence, at least for now.

Top among them is the crisis over Qatar, which erupted days after Mr. Trump's high-profile trip to a summit in Riyadh in May. Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Egypt have shut their embassies in Qatar, closed borders and banned travel and trade with the emirate.

The conflict has already turned what used to be a two-way confrontation between the Saudi-led Sunni axis and the Iran-led Shiite camp into a three-way regional fracture that offers fresh strategic opportunities for Tehran.

"The Saudi effort to build a consensus against Iran in the region has hit the rocks with Qatar. This split is something that Iran is enjoying," said Hassan Ahmadian, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic Research think tank in Tehran. "Iran's ruling elite likes it and believes that the future stability of the region is better served by having more than two axes confronting one another."

In fact, the measures the Saudis and their allies have adopted against Qatar are sometimes harsher than their policies toward Iran. The U.A.E. and Iran, for example, maintain diplomatic and trade relations, and extensive air links.

With regional heavyweight Turkey taking Qatar's side, the collapse of the Sunni alliance isn't the only good news for Tehran. The growing alienation between the Trump administration and European nations, particularly Germany and France, is also making any new concerted international effort to pressure Iran increasingly unlikely.

Some Iranian leaders appreciate this trans-Atlantic discord "as giving Iran some short-term advantages and breathing space," said Brian Katulis, a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress, a think tank close to the Democrats, who recently participated in informal discussions with Iranian representatives. "America looks distracted and unfocused—nd besides the rhetoric of putting Iran 'on notice' and a few tactical policy shifts, Iran right now seems to see the gap between Trump's bluster and actions."

This month, France's Total SA said it would push ahead with a $1 billion investment into Iran's South Pars gas field, the first major injection of Western money since international sanctions against Iran were lifted as part of a nuclear agreement last year. Iran and Qatar share ownership of this gas field, the world's largest.

Iran's position has strengthened, too, in the Middle East's actual battlefields. In Iraq and Syria, advances by Iran's Shiite proxies against Islamic State and moderate Sunni rebels are making possible the establishment of an overland "resistance highway" that would link, through friendly territory, Tehran to Damascus and Beirut for the first time since the Syrian war began in 2011—a major geopolitical gain.

The war in Yemen remains at a stalemate, at great cost to Saudi Arabia and the U.A.E. The Iranian-backed Hezbollah Shiite militia keeps consolidating its influence over the Lebanese state. Even the low-grade Shiite insurgency in parts of eastern Saudi Arabia has flared up of late.

The Saudi-led campaign against Qatar, meanwhile, has allowed Tehran to improve its relationship with the embattled emirate—and with Qatar's main ally, Turkey. Both nations have long backed Sunni rebels fighting against Iranian allies in Syria, a support that could diminish as a result of the current Gulf crisis.

"In the recent past, each time Saudi Arabia has downsized or frozen its relations with an Arab country, such as Lebanon and Iraq, this has presented Iran an opportunity to strengthen its relations to the local actors at a detriment to Saudi Arabia," said Ellie Geranmayeh, senior policy fellow at the European Council on Foreign Relations.

While Iran and the Qatar-Turkey camp agree on some key regional issues, such as support for the Palestinian Islamist movement Hamas, their rapprochement can go only so far, of course. Turkey and Qatar remain military allies of the U.S., and Turkey in particular views itself as Iran's geopolitical rival and equal. The Sunni Islamist ideology of the Muslim Brotherhood, a Pan-Islamic group that is backed by Turkey and Qatar alike, is also fundamentally at odds with Iran's Shiite theocratic doctrine.

This means that Iran's overriding interest is for both sides of the Qatar crisis to get bruised by the dispute.

"In the long term, both the Muslim Brotherhood and Wahhabism, which is the basis of Saudi Arabia's kingdom, don't accept Shiites as Muslims," said Mohammad Eslami, an Iranian commentator and a fellow at Mofid University in Iran. "And both believe that they should control the power of Iran in the region."

Write to Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com

Related coverage

* Rex Tillerson, Mediating Gulf Dispute, Signs Antiterrorism Pact With Qatar

* Iran Poised to Gain as \b ISIS\b0  Falls in Mosul

* Syria's Newest Flashpoint Is Bringing U.S. and Iran Face to Face

Document WSJO000020170713ed7d00108



Politics
Timeline of Trump Family Comments on Russia Since June 2016; President and his associates have called the accusations that Russia meddled in election unfounded, 'a witch hunt'

By WSJ staff 
1,105 words
12 July 2017
15:15
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Donald Trump Jr . attended a meeting during the 2016 presidential campaign to discuss allegedly incriminating information about Hillary Clinton that he was told was being offered as part of the Russian government's support of his father's candidacy, according to emails he released Tuesday . Here is a look at comments regarding accusations that Russia meddled in the election dating back to last June from President Donald Trump , his sons and other campaign associates.

June 3-9, 2016: Donald Trump Jr. emails with publicist Rob Goldstone , who said his client, Emin Agalarov, had potentially damning information about Democrat Hillary Clinton . Mr. Trump Jr. eventually meets with Russian attorney Natalia Veselnitskaya; he later says no useful information came from this meeting.

July 22, 2016: WikiLeaks publishes a collection  of Democratic National Committee emails obtained during a hack of the committee's servers.

July 24, 2016: Paul Manafort , then Trump campaign manager, tells ABC  there are no connections between Donald Trump 's campaign and Russian President Vladimir Putin 's regime. Asked about any ties, he said: "No, there are not. It's absurd and there's no basis to it."

July 24, 2016:Donald Trump Jr. tells CNN claims that Russians hacked the DNC were "phony" and he couldn't "think of bigger lies."

July 25, 2016: Donald Trump tweets, "The new joke in town is that Russia leaked the disastrous DNC emails, which should never have been written (stupid), because Putin likes me."

July 26, 2016:U.S. government agencies tell the White House they are confident the Russian government orchestrated the DNC hack.

July 27, 2016: During a news conference in Florida, Donald Trump encourages Russia to hack Hillary Clinton 's technology to obtain emails. "Russia, if you're listening, I hope you're able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing," he says.

Sept. 26, 2016: Donald Trump says at the presidential debate with Mrs. Clinton: "I don't think anybody knows it was Russia that broke into the DNC. She's saying Russia Russia Russia, but I don't, maybe it was. It could be Russia, but it could also be China. It could be someone sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds, ok?"

Oct. 9, 2016: In a presidential debate against Mrs. Clinton, Donald Trump says he doesn't know Mr. Putin, but said, "I think it would be great if we got along with Russia because we could fight ISIS together, as an example."

Oct. 24, 2016: Donald Trump tells a rally in Florida: "I have nothing to do with Russia…ut they tie me into Russia all the time."

Nov. 11, 2016: Trump campaign spokesperson tells the Associated Press, "There was no communication between the campaign and any foreign entity during the campaign."

Dec. 9-11, 2016: Donald Trump questions the intelligence community's assessment that Russia interfered in the U.S. election in a statement released by his transition team and in an interview with Fox News.

Dec. 18, 2016: Kellyanne Conway, then Trump campaign manager, tells CBS News  that no one in the Trump campaign had contact with Russians attempting to meddle in the U.S. election. "I discussed that with the president-elect just last night. Those conversations never happened."

Jan. 11, 2017: Vice President Mike Pencetells CBS  no one in the Trump campaign had any contact with Russians who wanted to influence the U.S. election. "Of course not. And I think to suggest that is to give credence to some of these bizarre rumors that have swirled around the candidacy."

Jan. 13, 2017: Donald Trump in a tweet calls claims about his campaign's connections to Russia, "FAKE NEWS!"

Feb. 7, 2017: Donald Trump tweets, "I don't know Putin, have no deals in Russia, and the haters are going crazy."

Feb. 16, 2017: In response to questions at a news conference about contacts between his campaign members and Russia, Donald Trump says: "I guess one of the reasons I'm here today is to tell you the whole Russian thing, that's a ruse. That's a ruse. And by the way, it would be great if we could get along with Russia, just so you understand that." When asked if anyone besides former national security adviser Mike Flynn had contacts with Russia during the election, Mr. Trump responds: "No. Nobody that I know of." He adds: "I have nothing to do with Russia. To the best of my knowledge no person that I deal with does."

Feb. 17, 2017: White House Chief of Staff Reince Priebus says in a Fox News interview  that the Trump campaign had no connections to Russia.

Feb. 26, 2017: Donald Trump calls Russian connections claims fake news in a tweet. "Russia talk is FAKE NEWS put out by the Dems, and played up by the media, in order to mask the big election defeat and the illegal leaks!"

March 27, 2017: The president says in a tweet, the "Trump Russia story is a hoax."

April 11, 2017: Donald Trump 's second son, Eric Trump , tells The Daily Telegraph the president is not in league with Mr. Putin, citing Donald Trump 's decision to launch a missile attack on Syria.

May 8, 2017: Donald Trump says in a tweet the "Russia-Trump collusion story is a total hoax," and asks, "when will this taxpayer funded charade end?"

May 11, 2017: In an interview with NBC , the president says he had the 2013 Miss Universe pageant in Moscow "a long time ago. But other than that, I had nothing to do with Russia."

May 18, 2017: During a joint news conference with Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos, Donald Trump called the Russia investigation a "witch hunt."

June 16, 2017: The president uses the phrase "witch hunt" again to describe the events surrounding the Russia investigation.

July 8, 2017: The New York Timesreports Donald Trump Jr. met  with an attorney with connections to the Kremlin about information that could damage Mrs. Clinton's presidential candidacy.

July 10, 2017: Donald Trump Jr . says in a tweet the meeting "went nowhere but had to listen."

July 11, 2017: Donald Trump Jr . releases emails related to the meeting with the Russian attorney, in an attempt "to be totally transparent." The emails show he was told the allegedly damaging information about Mrs. Clinton was coming from the Russian government in an effort to help his father's presidential campaign.

Document WSJO000020170711ed7b0073m



U.S. News: U.S. Watch

443 words
12 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

DISCLOSURES

FBI Nominee Earned

$9.2 Million at Firm

President Donald Trump 's pick to run the FBI , Christopher Wray , is worth more than $23 million and will recuse himself from any investigation in which his law firm represents a party, according to ethics disclosures released on Monday.

Mr. Wray, a former senior Justice Department official, has spent the past decade as a private lawyer at the firm King & Spalding . He made $9.2 million there since January 2016, according to his financial-disclosure form.

Mr. Wray lists a total of 20 clients who paid him more than $5,000 each since January 2015, including Johnson & Johnson , Wells Fargo & Co ., Chevron , Fan Duel Inc. and Draft Kings Inc ., Alcatel-Lucent SA , Credit Suisse Group AG and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie.

An ethics letter signed by Justice Department official Lee Lofthus said that if confirmed, Mr. Wray would be barred from participating in any matter involving "specific parties in which he knows that a former client of his is a party or represents a party" for one year from the date of his last work for them.

-- Aruna Viswanatha

---

IMMIGRATION

Steps Taken to Scrap

'Startup Visa' Rule

The Trump administration took steps toward scrapping a regulation that would have helped more foreign-born entrepreneurs build startups in the U.S. without a traditional visa.

The Department of Homeland Security filed a notice that it will delay the effective date of the International Entrepreneur Rule, which would have let foreign entrepreneurs apply to work in the U.S., provided their startup raised $250,000 from established U.S. investors.

The rule, enacted in the final days of the Obama administration, had been set to go into effect next week. The DHS will delay that date by eight months, a period in which it will "obtain comments from the public regarding a proposal to rescind the rule," the agency said in a Federal Register filing. The move was met with rebuke from groups representing Silicon Valley tech firms.

-- Douglas MacMillan

---

HAWAII

Soldier Is Charged

With Helping ISIS

A U.S. soldier stationed in Hawaii was charged with providing material support to Islamic State, according to a criminal complaint filed Monday in U.S. District Court in Honolulu.

Sgt. First Class Ikaika Kang, 34 years old, allegedly tried to support the terror group by passing along classified military documents to undercover FBI agents who he believed would give them to ISIS. He is accused of making combat training videos to be used to train ISIS fighters.

An attorney representing Sgt. Kang didn't respond to requests to comment.

-- Zusha Elinson

Document AWSJ000020170711ed7c00018



Life
The Perils of Cultural Purity; Ban 'cultural appropriation? Successful societies borrow and exchange ideas all the time

By Amanda Foreman 
588 words
12 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

"Cultural appropriation" is a leading contender for the most overused phrase of 2017. Originally employed by academics in postcolonial studies to describe the adoption of one culture's creative expressions by another, the term has evolved to mean the theft or exploitation of an ethnic culture or history by persons of white European heritage.

The accusation of cultural appropriation is now having a chilling effect on cultural life itself. In Canada, editors of two different magazines resigned in recent months amid controversies for voicing their support of creative cultural borrowing. In the U.S., protests in Minnesota against the Walker Art Center led to the dismantling of "Scaffold," a sculpture by the white artist Sam Durant, which referenced, among other victims, the 1862 execution of 38 Native Americans of the Dakota people.

It's a lamentable trend. As history bountifully attests, all cultures have borrowed and exchanged ideas with one another. Sometimes the exchange has been between equal powers, and sometimes not. Either way—hether it's the Japanese adoption of Chinese literary culture in the ninth century, the American Transcendentalists' embrace of Hindu thought in the 19th century or the influence of African sculpture on Pablo Picasso—here's no getting away from the fact that one man's cultural appropriation is another man's appreciation.

The Romans still hold the world record for appropriating culture, enthusiastically basing their own, from law to literature, on the Greeks. In the 4th century A.D., Rome sealed its championship by appropriating the religion of a tiny minority culture in the Middle East—hus introducing Christianity to much of the world. The appropriation wasn't all one way, however. The image of Jesus as "the good shepherd" may have evolved from the Greco-Roman god Hermes/Mercury, who was often shown with a ram across his shoulders. Likewise, early Christian imagery of the Virgin Mary with the baby Jesus echoes ancient Egyptian depictions of the goddess Isis with the godchild Horus on her lap.

Both ancient Rome and early Christianity demonstrate how cultural appropriation produces growth and innovation. By contrast, the fate of societies that have embraced the ideology of cultural separatism offers up a cautionary tale of decline.

In 529, Justinian I—he Christian emperor of Byzantium, which had inherited the eastern part of the Roman Empire—losed down the Neoplatonic Academy in Athens, ending a 900-year-old tradition of philosophical inquiry. The blow to Western culture was immense. Only with the founding of the University of Bologna in 1088 did Christian Europe begin to rebuild higher education.

Almost 500 years later, Emperor Jiajing of China was guilty of similar folly when he ordered the destruction of all oceangoing ships. The edict effectively sealed his subjects inside China's borders. Instead of protecting the status quo against foreign ideas and money, as Jiajing had intended, his action helped to precipitate China's descent from being the world's richest and most powerful nation in the 15th century into a cultural and economic backwater by the 19th.

The same shortsightedness can be seen in the Ottoman Empire's 1515 ban on printing in Arabic, because the printed word would defile God's name, and in the Spanish Inquisition, which focused on religious purity at the expense of every other cultural good. Today's cultural-appropriation thought police might want to recall that some victories are worse than defeats.



Document WSJO000020170712ed7c0048t



Opinion
After Victory in Mosul; How the U.S. and Iraq can prevent  ISIS  from rising again.

By the Editorial Board 
631 words
12 July 2017
16:14
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi declared victory Monday over Islamic State in Mosul, and Americans can also take pride at the end of a bloody three-year campaign that would not have happened without U.S. leadership and arms. The triumph will be short-lived, however, if the Baghdad government and U.S. repeat the mistakes they made after the successful "surge" of 2007-2008.

The victory removes ISIS from the capital of the self-styled caliphate that Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi declared after routing the Iraqi army in Mosul in June 2014. It provides relief to tens of thousands of Iraqis living in fear of torture or death for even minor offenses against Shariah law, or for being a non-Muslim.

It is also a morale boost to the Iraqi military and Mr. Abadi, who has proven to be a major improvement over predecessor Nouri al-Maliki. Particular credit goes to the Kurdish peshmerga who were the main resistance to Islamic State in 2014 and prevented a larger rout.

The biggest problem with the Mosul campaign is that it took so long. Barack Obama never wanted to admit that his 2011 withdrawal of all U.S. forces was a blunder that required a U.S. military return to Iraq. He thus deployed a light footprint limited mainly to special forces and air power. New Defense Secretary Jim Mattis accelerated the pace of battle after January. But the ability of ISIS to survive in Mosul for so long gave it an elan in the Islamic world that helped recruit young radicals and spread its brand around the world.

Defeat in Mosul diminishes that appeal, a decline that will continue as the U.S. coalition closes in on Islamic State's Syrian stronghold in Raqqa. But the threat won't vanish, as the jihadists disperse into smaller cells in towns and cities across the Sunni heartland. The jihadists will return to their post-Saddam insurgent tactics and wait to exploit bad governance or more sectarian conflict.

"We have another mission ahead of us, to create stability, to build and clear Daesh [ISIS] cells, and that requires an intelligence and security effort, and the unity which enabled us to fight Daesh," Mr. Abadi said Monday, and we hope he means it.

He could start by declaring his support for local Sunni government and preventing Iran-backed Shiite militias from treating Sunnis like members of Islamic State as they go door to door in Mosul. He needs to rebuild Mosul rapidly and more effectively than his government has Fallujah and other former ISIS-run cities. (See Seth Jones nearby.)

The Trump Administration can help by negotiating a modest U.S. military presence that will remain in Iraq for the long run. Mr. Mattis told the Senate in June that such a force could serve "in a training role and mentoring role in Iraq if we work that out with the government." A U.S. presence will serve as a moderating voice among the Sunni, Shiite and Kurdish factions. And it may give Mr. Abadi more courage to resist becoming a de facto subsidiary of Iran and its Hezbollah-like militias in Iraq.

This will be crucial as September's Kurdish independence referendum approaches, which may threaten the Abadi government. Iran would love a fractured and diminished Baghdad to replace Mr. Abadi with an ally like Mr. Maliki. A politically stable and independent Iraq, by contrast, would improve the chances of stabilizing Syria after ISIS is swept from Raqqa. There are no permanent victories in the Middle East, but the liberation of Mosul is an important milestone in the war against radical Islam.

Document WSJO000020170711ed7b0073o



World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,136 words
12 July 2017
13:07
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Junior League

The pressure inside the Trump White House is rising to new and dangerous levels. The revelation that the president's eldest son and senior campaign aides attended a meeting last year with a Russian lawyer to discuss what they were told was incriminating information about Hillary Clinton being offered by the Kremlin to help Donald Trump's candidacy is among the most explosive yet in the long-running Russia investigation. Donald Trump Jr. released emails himself on Tuesday that detail an exchange with U.K. publicist Rob Goldstone, who arranged the meeting. The emails appear to contradict the president's repeated statements casting doubt on the U.S. intelligence community's conclusion that Russia sought to interfere in the election. They reveal that Mr. Trump Jr. knew he was meeting with a foreign national who he was told was essentially a messenger for the Russian government. This raises potential legal issues for the younger Trump, creates a long-term problem for his father's administration and, writes our columnist Gerald F. Seib, kills any prospect that talk of Russian meddling would fade.

It's Academic

Google operates a little-known program that harnesses the brain power of university researchers to sway opinion and public policy. Over the past decade, the search-and-advertising giant has helped finance hundreds of research papers to defend against regulatory challenges to its market dominance, paying $5,000 to $400,000 for the work, according to our findings. Paying for favorable academic research isn't new among food, drug and oil companies. But Google's program highlights a behind-the-scenes push in Silicon Valley to sway decision makers in Washington. Critics worry such funding, which professors don't always reveal, could undermine academic credibility. In some years, a former Google employee and a former Google lobbyist said, the company compiled wish lists of academic papers, then searched for willing authors. Conclusions of some Google-backed research: The company hasn't unfairly quashed competitors, and its consumer-data collection is a fair exchange for its free services.

Medical Leave

Ratcheting up the pressure on fellow Republicans, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell set a vote on the GOP health-care bill for next week and delayed the August recess, buying time to seek legislative wins even if the health plan stalls. Sen. McConnell has struggled for days to turn health-plan holdouts to his side. To corral support, Senate Republican leaders are expected to retain the Affordable Care Act's two taxes on high-income households—n unusual move for the tax-averse GOP, but good for $230 billion over 10 years that could go to address concerns of GOP senators wary of the bill as it stands. The revised bill is expected to be released Thursday. While efforts continue, the Trump administration granted Alaska a waiver Tuesday to use ACA money to reimburse insurers for their costliest customers— model the administration urges other states to embrace.

The Making of a Networker

Good news for those who see themselves as introverts: The art of networking can be learned, says our columnist Sue Shellenbarger. Take Pradeep Aradhya, a software engineer who rose through the ranks at several companies and now owns his own consulting firm. Like many people trained in technology who move into jobs that require selling or managing others, Mr. Aradhya had to sharpen his social skills. He made the shift by polishing his image and conversational skills, trading in his dark suits for bright shirts and studying how others use humor. Spending six to eight hours a week interacting with people, Mr. Aradhya has embraced a networking mantra: "entertain, enlighten or enrich."

Today's Video

Apple Juice

Summer isn't a good time to buy an iPhone, as new models often debut in the fall. But what if your phone suffers from battery drain, a cracked screen or slowing performance? Our personal-tech columnist Joanna Stern offers tips on keeping your iPhone alive for the season.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Marine Plane Crash in Mississippi Kills 16 People Aboard

West Virginia Airport Officials Await Big Infrastructure Takeoff

WORLD

Iraq Faces Tough Task of Rebuilding Mosul After \b ISIS\b0  Defeat

Europe Wary as U.S. Scrutinizes Iran Nuclear Deal

BUSINESS

Arkansas Bans Herbicide as Farmers Blame Neighbors for Crop Damage

The $3 Peanut-Butter Club? Startup Tests Power of Brands

MARKETS

Shifting Monetary-Policy Outlook Imperils Rally in Emerging Markets

Funds Miss Out on Banks' Dividend Party

Number of the Day

$230 billion

The approximate amount the government would retain over 10 years if the health-care bill keeps two ACA taxes on high-income households. That is money Republicans could spend to address concerns of GOP senators wary of the bill.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on the implications of Donald Trump Jr.'s releasing emails showing he took a meeting with a Russian lawyer last year? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Cynthia Lin

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on the U.S.'s raising pressure on China to halt North Korea's nuclear program, Thomas Snitch of Maryland shared: "Go back and read Sun Tzu's 'The Art of War'—he enemy of my enemy is my friend. It is not in China's national interest to effect change in Pyongyang. We all know that China always acts in their own best interest and thus it is foolish to expect them to lift a finger to help with North Korea." Adam Stickney of Ohio wrote: "Increased pressure on China is a patently smart move. If the military elite feel no direct confrontation is strategic, then indirect becomes a necessity. Putting pressure on China is a necessity." Mary Thompson of New Mexico weighed in: "I have zero confidence in China slowing or stopping North Korea's nuclear efforts. This is just another feel-good action, and North Korea will continue on its merry way."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170712ed7c00231



Corrections & Amplifications
Corrections & Amplifications

499 words
12 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A2
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Bill Miller and his fellow portfolio manager, Samantha McLemore, no longer have an affiliation with their former employer, Legg Mason. An Investing in Funds & ETFs report article Monday about the duo's Miller Opportunity Trust incorrectly said they still provide investment services to the firm. Also, the fund had a total return of 11.8% in the second quarter, and another fund in the article, Baron Discovery Fund, returned 11.6%. The article incorrectly said 6.43% and 10%, respectively, which are the annualized three-year returns.

(See: "Investing in Funds & ETFs: A Quarterly Analysis --- Winners' Circle: And the No. 1 Stock Fund Is . . . --- Miller Opportunity wins with a 48.55% gain for 12 months" -- WSJ July 10, 2017)

---

The expense ratio for iShares Core MSCI EAFE Index (IEFA) is 0.08%. The expense ratio was incorrectly stated as 0.8% in an article about choosing exchange-traded funds that appeared in Monday's Investing in Funds & ETFs report.

(See: "Investing in Funds & ETFs: A Quarterly Analysis --- A Smarter Approach to ETF Investing --- Exchange-traded funds turn 25 years old next year; Yet investors still make many mistakes; One thing to know: The time of day makes a difference" -- WSJ July 10, 2017)

---

Iraq is the largest Arab country with a Shiite majority. A World News article Tuesday about the fall of Mosul incorrectly stated that Iraq is the only Arab country with a Shiite majority.

(See: "World News: Iran Poised to Gain as ISIS Falls in Mosul --- Iraq declares victory over extremists in the city, as Tehran seeks to extend its influence" -- WSJ July 11, 2017)

---

Arconic Inc. was formerly part of Alcoa Inc. A U.S. News article on Tuesday about fire safety at a Marriott hotel in Baltimore incorrectly said Arconic was formerly part of Alcoa Corp., which is the name of a spinoff from Alcoa Inc.

(See: "U.S. News: Fire-Safety Issue At Marriott in Baltimore Arises " -- WSJ July 11, 2017)

---

In some editions Tuesday, North Korean leader Kim Jong Un's name was misspelled as Kim Jung Un in a Page One article about the U.S. response to North Korea.

---

The wholesale price of a Krugerrand gold coin on Friday was $1,259.86; the Maple Leaf price was $1,271.97; the American Eagle price was $1,271.97; the Mexican peso price was $1,468.58; the Austria crown price was $1,190.41; and the Austria Philharmonic price was $1,271.97. Because of incorrect data from Manfra, Tordella & Brookes, the prices of the gold coins incorrectly were given as $1,343.06; $1,355.97; $1,355.97; $1,565.04; $1,268.83; and $1,355.97, respectively, in the Cash Prices table in Saturday's Business & Finance section.

---

Readers can alert The Wall Street Journal to any errors in news articles by e-mailing wsjcontact@wsj.com or by calling 888-410-2667.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170712ed7c0001r



Iraq Declares Victory in Mosul, but the War Is Far From Over

By Seth G. Jones 
852 words
12 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A17
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi arrived in Mosul on Sunday, dressed in a black military uniform, and announced the "liberation" of the city where Islamic State declared its so-called caliphate in 2014. "The world did not imagine that Iraqis could eliminate Daesh," he remarked, using the Arabic acronym for the group.

But this war is far from over. A growing number of Iraq's Sunnis are disenchanted with the slow pace of reconstruction and frustrated with a Baghdad government they consider too friendly to Iran. The U.S. needs to shift its focus quickly from supporting military operations in cities such as Mosul to helping the Iraqi government better address political grievances. Failure risks sowing the seeds of ISIS's resurgence.

ISIS started strong in 2014, taking advantage of Sunni grievances against the Iraqi government. At its peak, according to a Rand Corp. analysis, ISIS controlled nearly 58,000 square kilometers of territory in Iraq, home to more than six million people. But beginning in 2016 the group lost significant territory in cities like Sinjar, Fallujah, Ramadi and now most of Mosul to a combination of U.S. and allied strikes, ground assaults by the Iraqi security forces, and Sunni, Shiite and Kurdish militia advances.

Despite these successes, there are troubling signs in Iraq, particularly within the Sunni Arab community. Take the western city of Fallujah. A year after Iraqi forces liberated the city, residents are disenchanted because of the slow pace of rebuilding, the absence of government services and skyrocketing unemployment. "This area was liberated in June, and it still looks the same now," Hussein Ahmed, a Fallujah resident, told a visiting journalist earlier this year. "I speak for thousands of people when I say the government has forgotten us."

Many Sunnis also look warily at growing Iranian influence. Tehran is committed to increasing its influence in Iraq through such organizations as the Popular Mobilization Units, militias that include as many as 150,000 Shiite fighters. To the consternation of many Sunnis, Iraq's parliament passed a law in December 2016 formally integrating the Popular Mobilization Units into Iraq's security forces. Today, such Shiite forces are nearly as large as the entire Iraqi army.

ISIS fighters are attempting to leverage these grievances in several ways. Its operatives have recruited new members who are unhappy about the pace of reconstruction in Sunni towns and cities, angry about friends or family members who have been abused by pro-government militias, and nervous about Iran's growing influence in the country. Iraq's security services have noted with alarm that ISIS cells are re-establishing intelligence networks in Ramadi and Fallujah. Even after last week's defeat in Mosul, ISIS still holds nearly 10,000 square kilometers of territory in Iraq with a total population of one million, including the western city of al Qa'im. It also boasts over 15,000 fighters across the Iraq-Syria battlefield and more than $500 million in annual revenue through the end of 2016, though ISIS's monthly revenues have declined in 2017.

ISIS is also shifting from conventional to guerrilla operations, including ambushes, raids, suicide attacks, car bombs and assassinations. The group is relocating its personnel and battlefield supplies to mountains, caves and desert areas around the Iraqi city of Haditha, Lake Tharthar, and the Iraq-Syria border region. ISIS has also used multi-rotor and fixed wing drones for surveillance and, occasionally, strike missions. In addition, the group is restructuring its wilayahs, or provinces, and decentralizing its organizational structure in Syria and Iraq to conduct more effective guerrilla operations.

In light of these developments, the U.S. should establish a more aggressive political strategy to prevent Islamic State's revitalization. U.S. diplomats and military leaders need to encourage Iraqi leaders to better address Sunni grievances. One step would be to cut in half the number of Shiite forces under the Popular Mobilization Units and transition militia fighters to civilian employment. U.S. officials might also press Baghdad to withdraw Shiite militias from the Iraq-Syria border, including in Nineveh, where they facilitate a regional pipeline of Shiite fighters from Iran all the way to Lebanon.

In addition, the U.S. should help coordinate international assistance coming into Iraq, with an emphasis on rapid repair of damaged infrastructure in urban centers like Mosul, Ramadi, Fallujah and Beiji. Reconstruction assistance should be openly associated with efforts to move the Iraqi government and Sunni Arabs closer together.

Islamic State's predecessor, al Qaeda in Iraq, began to reconstitute itself in 2011 in part because of Baghdad's failure to address Sunni grievances and Washington's decision to withdraw U.S. forces and inability to influence Iraqi politics. It would be doubly tragic to make the same mistake again today.

---

Mr. Jones is director of the International Security and Defense Policy Center at the Rand Corp. and author of "Waging Insurgent Warfare: Lessons from the Vietcong to the Islamic State" (Oxford).

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170712ed7c0000q



The G-20: Another Vacuous Meet-and-Greet

By Walter Russell Mead 
847 words
12 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A11
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

The captains and the kings depart, the flames in Hamburg gutter out, and the clouds of oily smoke and tear gas slowly disperse. Another Group of 20 summit has come and gone, and yet again the world has failed to change.

This should not come as a surprise; global summits are almost always empty exercises in public relations. They survive only to make politicians look good. Incumbent presidents and prime ministers strut before the cameras, hoping to look like leaders and statesmen in contrast to their political rivals back home. Egos in wannabe powers are stroked, as the world's great powers pretend to take them seriously for a few days. There are gassy dinners and gassier communiques that mean nothing and achieve nothing, yet are haggled over line by line before falling into the oblivion that will entomb them forever.

Will any country change its trade policy as a result of anything in the G-20 communique? Will any country change its environmental policies as a result of anything said there? Will any serious historian 50 years from now -- or even five -- have even the slightest interest in anything the summit produced? Will any of the leaders who signed the communique spend five minutes thinking about how to implement it back home?

The answer to all of these questions is, almost certainly, no. All other G-20 summits were forgotten before the last leader returned home; this one is no exception. The world is not governed, or even significantly influenced, by a committee of 20 presidents and prime ministers signing vaguely worded statements with no binding force; history is not made by communique.

Great powers, on the other hand, do make history, and even as the hollow rituals of G-20 summitry unrolled, the great and the near-great powers were busy. The rising tension over North Korea's missile program drove a flurry of Asia-centric diplomacy as the U.S., China, Russia, South Korea, India and Japan explored their options in closed bilateral sessions. Judging from its rhetoric, the Trump administration appears to believe its diplomatic options on this issue are rapidly disappearing. China so far refuses to impose the kind of isolation on North Korea that could threaten the regime's existence, and Russian missile specialists are reported to be helping North Korea's current efforts.

President Trump is looking at a set of bad options: capitulation or a bout of coercive diplomacy that involves the threat of war. Whether the Trump administration restrains North Korea or acquiesces in its nuclear and missile program for want of alternatives, Northeast Asia is moving toward its most important strategic realignment since the Communist conquest of China.

Forestalling a war between the U.S. and North Korea is not, unfortunately, the only major challenge the administration faces. Russia, China and Iran, the big three revisionist powers, spent the Obama administration chipping away at world order, and their efforts and those of their smaller sidekicks (like North Korea) have begun to pay off. From Ukraine to the Balkans, Europe has become less stable; the Middle East is a cauldron of conflict and hate. ISIS may be losing territory, but its violent ideology is gaining ground. We do not know where the challenges will come or what form they will take, but the Trump administration is likely to face much sterner international tests than anything President Obama saw.

This is not good news. Barring a Pearl Harbor or 9/11 type of attack -- and perhaps even under those circumstances -- the Trump administration would begin a conflict with a hostile, deeply skeptical press and with much of the public leaning toward blaming the U.S. rather than its opponents for the crisis. Potential enemies are well aware that American public opinion is the Achilles' heel of an otherwise nearly invincible American military machine.

Foreigners see a beleaguered American president, a press in full Watergate mode, and a public that is weary of engagement overseas. Across the globe, America's competitors are thinking about how they can use this moment to advance their own agendas. America's allies wonder whether they can continue to count on the U.S. for their security. America's adversaries and potential adversaries are mulling how U.S. weakness can best be exploited.

This combination of American disunity and growing world instability, not the language of the G-20 final communique, is driving world history today. This is what our politicians and our officials ought to be thinking about. This, not parsing the body language of world leaders at a vacuous meet-and-greet, is what the press should be covering. This is what could make the difference between peace and war. This is what anyone seriously interested in putting America first and making it great again needs to address.

---

Mr. Mead is a fellow at the Hudson Institute, a professor of foreign affairs at Bard College and editor at large of the American Interest.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170712ed7c0000e



World News: Militants Still Active In Iraq And Syria

By Gordon Lubold and Felicia Schwartz 
255 words
12 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The return of Mosul to Iraqi control represents a significant symbolic and strategic victory over Islamic State, but the group remains active in parts of Iraq and Syria and is far from defeated, U.S. military commanders and other American officials said as officials in Iraq claimed victory in the battle.

President Donald Trump congratulated Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi and Iraq's security forces, along with Kurdish Peshmerga fighters.

"The victory in Mosul, a city where ISIS once proclaimed its so-called 'caliphate,' signals that its days in Iraq and Syria are numbered," Mr. Trump said. "We will continue to seek the total destruction of ISIS," he said, using another name for the group.

"Mosul would have been a challenging fight for any army, and the coalition is proud to stand side by side with our Iraqi partners as they celebrate their hard-fought victory," said Lt. Gen. Stephen Townsend, the top U.S. commander in the region.

The fight against Islamic State isn't over, Gen. Townsend and other officials stressed. Gen. Townsend noted that while the victory in Mosul amounts to a "decisive blow," tough fighting remains.

"Now it is time for all Iraqis to unite to ensure ISIS is defeated across the rest of Iraq and that the conditions that led to the rise of ISIS in Iraq are not allowed to return again," he said.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170711ed7c0001l



World
Iraq Faces Tough Task of Rebuilding Mosul After  ISIS  Defeat; Swaths of the country's second-largest city were largely flattened by months of fighting

By Karen Leigh and Asa Fitch 
1,070 words
11 July 2017
19:55
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq—he day after announcing Islamic State's defeat in Mosul, Iraqis turned to the enormous challenges of rebuilding and resettling the country's second-largest city.

The municipal government worked Tuesday to repair and open roads in the western side of the city, where the terror group made its last stand in Mosul. Swaths of that half of the city were largely flattened in months of fighting, with streets impassable and basic services nonexistent.

"Our priority now is getting people home," said Abdulsattar Alhabbu, head of the Mosul municipality. "Our focus is on west Mosul, where most of the damage from the fight happened. Our priority is bringing back the water supply. There is no life without water."

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi proclaimed victory over Islamic State in Mosul on Monday. The government declared a holiday on Tuesday and a week of official celebrations. But even amid the festive atmosphere, Mr. Abadi referenced the tremendous economic and security challenges ahead. An Iraqi counterterrorism forces commander said the fight to clean up the last remaining pockets of Islamic State resistance in Mosul was continuing on Tuesday.

Nearly nine months of fighting to drive the extremist group from the city displaced more than 800,000 residents, according to the International Organization for Migration. Many say they won't return home until water and other basic services are restored— task that will take at least six weeks, according to Hussameldin al-Abbar, an official of Nineveh province, where Mosul is located.

"Nearly every building on the western side of Mosul was completely destroyed. With this level of devastation, it's very unlikely that the hundreds of thousands of displaced families will be going home anytime soon," said Arnaud Quemin, interim Iraq country director for aid group Mercy Corps. "This is a critical moment for Mosul."

That lack of basic services is keeping thousands of residents like Ahmed Suleiman Abdullah staying put in desert camps for displaced people near Mosul, even as scorching summer temperatures soar above 110 degrees. Mr. Abdullah fled in March with his two wives and nine children after his house in western Mosul was partly destroyed by fighting.

"One of the major problems is there is no water supply to the area and no electricity," he said recently. "How do you survive with kids with no water?"

Part of his house could be repaired quickly if he had money to do it, Mr. Abdullah said.

"We had no jobs for three years under Daesh," he said, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State. "We spent all our savings, and now there is no work and we have nothing."

Khalid Muhammed, 32, a stationery and cosmetics shop owner in western Mosul, said last week that he reopened last month as people started to return. But a lack of city-supplied water was limiting customers.

"We are getting water tankers from NGOs, but we need the state-supplied water to be back so all the people will come back to their homes," he said, referring to aid organizations.

Though government officials recently put forth a $100 billion, 10-year plan for reconstructing the country, they are short on funds. The International Monetary Fund in 2016 provided more than $5 billion in emergency loans to shore up Iraq's economy and to rebuild key cities destroyed by fighting. But it wasn't enough.

The government will need hundreds of millions of dollars to rebuild and compensate residents who lost their homes, businesses and factories in Mosul. But Iraq's economy has been badly battered in three years of war against Islamic State and the government has only a fraction of what it needs to repair the city.

"What we have now is nothing. We need an emergency budget for rebuilding Mosul, and international aid," said Mr. Abbar, the provincial official. "For 2017, Nineveh province's budget was $40 million. By my estimation what we need only for the restoration of infrastructure and basic services is more than $500 million."

A committee of local and federal government officials is organizing the massive task of cataloging and verifying damage to homes and businesses, but it is a preliminary step. A 2009 federal law promises Iraqis compensation for damage caused by terror attacks or military operations.

While life in Mosul's eastern half largely returned to normal after it was retaken by Iraqi forces in January, months of fierce fighting continued to dislodge entrenched militants from densely populated western neighborhoods, including stiff resistance this week during its last stand in the historic Old City.

Islamic State took control of Mosul in the summer of 2014, seizing about one-third of Iraq. The northern city, once home to some two million people, became its stronghold in Iraq. Even after its defeat in Mosul, the group still controls a few towns in Iraq, a stretch of the border with Syria and much of the oil-rich eastern Syrian province of Deir Ezzour.

Some Mosul residents had already begun returning to help in the cleanup and to begin to rebuild even before Mosul's full recapture this week.

In the Jadida neighborhood of western Mosul, Hassan Falah, 20, stacked broken blocks of concrete last week at his family's house, whose roof and third story were blown off. He and his extended family are hoping for government aid for rebuilding, but they aren't waiting for it to come. They built the multifamily structure themselves decades ago, and they can build it again, he said.

"After what we saw under Daesh, we never hoped to survive," he said, recounting how his family and neighbors hid out in the basement as the battle raged above them. "We were given a new life after liberation."

Ali A. Nabhan in Erbil, Iraq, and Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad contributed to this article.

Write to Karen Leigh at karen.leigh@wsj,com and Asa Fitch at asa.fitch@wsj.com

Related

* Iran Poised to Gain as \b ISIS\b0  Falls in Mosul

* Iraqi Prime Minister Praises Forces' Near-Ouster of Islamic State From Mosul

* With \b ISIS\b0  on the Run, an Unexpected Leader Emerges in Iraq

* Iraq's Dilemma: Who Will Lead the Next Big Fight Against \b ISIS\b0 ?

Document WSJO000020170711ed7b002xm



World News: Iran Poised to Gain as  ISIS  Falls in Mosul --- Iraq declares victory over extremists in the city, as Tehran seeks to extend its influence

By Maria Abi-Habib in Baghdad and Asa Fitch in Mosul, Iraq 
819 words
11 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A5
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

Iraq is the largest Arab country with a Shiite majority. A World News article Tuesday about the fall of Mosul incorrectly stated that Iraq is the only Arab country with a Shiite majority.

(WSJ July 12, 2017)

(END)

Iraq's U.S.-backed prime minister declared victory over Islamic State in Mosul on Monday, but Iran is shaping up to be one of the biggest winners in the struggle with Washington for influence in Baghdad and across the region.

Nouri al-Maliki, a former Iraqi prime minister supported by Iran, is campaigning to win back his old job in next year's Iraqi election against Haider al-Abadi, the incumbent favored by Washington.

Mr. Maliki has given much of the credit for the Mosul victory to an umbrella group of mostly Shiite militias, many supported by Iran, that he formed in 2014, just before his ouster as premier. The election could determine whether the country tilts toward Iran or the U.S.

Islamic State's losses in Mosul also are expected to make it easier for Shiite-majority Iran to ship weapons through northern Iraq and neighboring Syria to the Hezbollah militia Iran supports in Lebanon. Authorities in Tehran have been quick to hail the battle against the Sunni extremists in Mosul as a triumph for them and their regional allies.

"Today the resistance highway starts in Tehran and passes through Mosul and Beirut to the Mediterranean," Ali Akbar Velayati, a top adviser to Iran's Supreme Leader, said last week as he welcomed Islamic State's defeat in Mosul.

On Monday, Mr. Abadi declared victory over Islamic State in Mosul, formally ending a nearly nine-month battle to win back Iraq's second-largest city, which the extremists captured three years ago.

Mr. Abadi said Iraq still had to restore stability and eliminate sleeper cells, and the commander of the U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State, Lt. Gen. Stephen Townsend, pointed to tough battles ahead to eliminate Islamic State.

For Iran and Hezbollah, Islamic State's rise to power in 2014 became one of the biggest challenges to the alliance's regional influence, erecting a state along the Iraqi-Syrian border that broke the weapons pipeline from Tehran to Beirut and challenged Tehran's allies in Damascus. Iran has also shipped weapons to Hezbollah by using Iraqi airspace to fly equipment into Damascus, a less efficient route, according to Western and U.S. officials.

Now Islamic State's empire has been reduced to patchy zones of control, allowing Iran to slowly regain its arc of influence stretching from Tehran through Baghdad to Damascus and Beirut.

Tehran has longstanding cultural and political ties with Iraq, the only Arab country with a Shiite majority.

Although U.S. forces and the Shiite militias maintain an uneasy truce in Iraq, the militias have sought to check U.S. forces across the border in Syria, advancing on an American special forces base in the south. Washington responded by launching airstrikes on the Iraqi militias.

On Monday, Gen. Qassem Soleimani, the head of Iran's powerful Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, welcomed the victory in Mosul and taunted the U.S. for its waxing and waning support for Baghdad over the years.

"The Islamic Republic [of Iran] wasn't like other countries that closed weapon contracts with Iraq after receiving Iraq's money but refused to give support to Iraq when it's urgent," Gen. Soleimani said.

Mr. Maliki -- a favorite of Iran -- was blamed just a few years ago by the U.S. for stoking sectarian tensions that led to the rise of Islamic State in 2014. Washington supported Mr. Abadi to succeed him, and Mr. Maliki was pushed out of office that September.

Now Mr. Maliki is emerging as Mr. Abadi's biggest competitor in what is expected to be a tight race. Iran officially backs Mr. Abadi, but the relationship could fray once a figure who can unite Iraqi security forces against Islamic State is less crucial. Mr. Abadi has been more resistant to Iranian influence than other Shiite leaders, wary of being cast as an Iranian puppet.

On Sunday, with Mosul's last battles still raging, Mr. Abadi flew to the city to declare victory. But Mr. Maliki had already issued a congratulatory statement last week.

Instead of congratulating Mr. Abadi's government, Mr. Maliki praised Iraqi security forces and the Hashed al-Shaabi, or Popular Mobilization Forces, the umbrella group of mostly Shiite militias that Mr. Maliki formed in 2014. Iran trained many of those militias a decade ago to fight U.S. troops after the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

In Iraq, Iran's biggest military and social tool is the Shiite militias.

But Mr. Abadi sidelined them in the battle for Mosul, which was instead spearheaded by the country's military and police with help from U.S. special forces.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170711ed7b0000x



World
U.S. Hails Reclamation of Mosul; Military commanders, officials warn of tough fights yet ahead in clearing Iraq and Syria of Islamic State

By Gordon Lubold and Felicia Schwartz 
753 words
11 July 2017
03:19
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—he return of Mosul to Iraqi control represents a significant symbolic and strategic victory over Islamic State, but the group remains active in parts of Iraq and Syria and is far from defeated, U.S. military commanders and other American officials said as officials in Iraq claimed victory in the battle.

President Donald Trump congratulated Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi and Iraq's security forces, along with Kurdish Peshmerga fighters.

"The victory in Mosul, a city where ISIS once proclaimed its so-called 'caliphate,' signals that its days in Iraq and Syria are numbered," Mr. Trump said in a statement. "We will continue to seek the total destruction of ISIS," he said, using another name for the group.

U.S. officials praised Iraqi forces for

their defeating Islamic State in Mosul, following Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi's declaration Monday in that city that Mosul had been retaken.

"Mosul would have been a challenging fight for any army, and the coalition is proud to stand side by side with our Iraqi partners as they celebrate their hard-fought victory," said Lt. Gen. Steve Townsend, the top U.S. commander in the region, in a statement.

He congratulated Mr. Abadi and noted the victory cost the lives of many Iraqis, soldiers, police and civilians of all ethnicities and sects.

The fight against Islamic State isn't over, Gen. Townsend and other officials stressed. Gen. Townsend noted that while the defeat of Islamic State in Mosul amounts to a "decisive blow," tough fighting remains.

"Now it is time for all Iraqis to unite to ensure ISIS is defeated across the rest of Iraq and that the conditions that led to the rise of ISIS in Iraq are not allowed to return again," he said.

Analysts called it a victory for the U.S.-led coalition, but more so for Iraq and its forces.

"Prime Minister Abadi was seen as a weak leader just one year ago, but not anymore," said Andrew Exum, a former senior Middle East policy official at the Pentagon until January.

He added that the U.S. now faces the task of rebuilding the Iraqi military, "while vying for influence in Baghdad with Iran, with whom the United States shares very few interests now the threat from Daesh has receded," using another name for the extremist group.

Military officials said that hundreds or thousands of Islamic State fighters remain in nearby Tal Afar, al-Qaim and Hawija.

In Syria, where the fight is focused inside the de facto Islamic State capital of Raqqa, the group also is active in Deir Ezzour, Mayadin and al-Bukamal. ISIS is "operating with impunity" in Maydadin and al-Bukamal, a defense official said, while the U.S. has been conducting airstrikes in Deir Ezzour.

The White House on Monday said the liberation of Mosul ends its "longtime nightmare" and congratulated Mr. Abadi, Iraqi security forces and all Iraqis.

"We mourn the thousands of Iraqis brutally killed by ISIS and the millions of Iraqis who suffered at the hands of ISIS," Sarah Huckabee Sanders, a White House spokesperson, said in a statement. "We grieve with the Iraqi people for the loss of heroic soldiers who gave their lives to restore life to their country and we honor their sacrifice.

The current strategy in Iraq and Syria hasn't appreciably changed since Mr. Trump took office. Additional troops have been deployed and given more latitude in how they operate on the ground. At the same time, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis has been given additional authorities to conduct war operations on his own. Under the previous administration, many decisions were made by the White House. But the current strategy, using indigenous forces to conduct the fighting with American military personnel acting as advisers, hasn't changed.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson called the retaking of Mosul "a critical milestone in the global fight against ISIS."

He said the U.S. will work under Iraqi leadership and with the United Nations and coalition officials to help stabilize the area around Mosul and assist those returning home.

"There is still much work to be done to defeat this enemy. The global coalition will continue to stand with our Iraqi partners to ensure that ISIS is defeated wherever it remains in Iraq," he said.

Louise Radnofsky contributed to this article.

Document WSJO000020170711ed7b0008e



U.S. News: U.S. Watch

451 words
11 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A2
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

HAWAII

Soldier Is Charged

With Helping ISIS

A U.S. soldier stationed in Hawaii has been charged with providing material support to Islamic State, according to a criminal complaint filed Monday in U.S. District Court in Honolulu.

Sgt. First Class Ikaika Kang, 34 years old, allegedly tried to support the terror group by passing along classified military documents to undercover FBI agents who he believed would give them to ISIS. He is accused of making combat training videos to be used to train ISIS fighters. He also allegedly contributed to the purchase of a drone that he believed would be used by ISIS.

An attorney representing Sgt. Kang didn't respond to requests for comment.

Sgt. Kang served in Iraq from March 2010 to February 2011, and in Afghanistan from July 2013 to April 2014, according to the complaint. He was most recently stationed at Schofield Barracks in Hawaii.

-- Zusha Elinson

---

ST. LOUIS

Troopers Deployed

To Quell Violence

Missouri's governor is making a push to combat violent crime in St. Louis, calling the Gateway to the West "the most dangerous city in the United States of America."

Republican Gov. Eric Greitens, a former Navy SEAL, deployed a group of state troopers to the city Sunday night. The initiative, announced Monday, is part of a 90-day pilot program to contribute more state law-enforcement resources to monitor St. Louis's major highways and free up the city's police units.

St. Louis had a murder rate of 59.3 per 100,000 residents last year, the highest among the 35 largest American cities, including Chicago and Baltimore, according to data from the FBI. Homicides have continued at that pace so far in 2017.

-- Quint Forgey

---

FLORIDA

Death Is 12th in U.S.

Linked to Air Bags

A man attempting to repair an old Honda Accord died last year when a Takata Corp. air bag installed inside the car ruptured, bringing to a dozen the U.S. death toll stemming from the faulty safety devices.

The man was attempting "unknown repairs" with a hammer inside the 2001 Accord with the ignition switch in the "on" position, triggering activation of the air bag and the subsequent explosion, Honda Motor Co. said Monday. Honda notified the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration of the fatality, which occurred in Hialeah, Fla., the auto maker said.

The defective air bags have been linked to at least 17 deaths globally. In the U.S. alone, regulators have said 19 auto makers will eventually recall 42 million vehicles with as many as nearly 70 million of the faulty devices.

-- Mike Spector

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170711ed7b00028



Page One
What's News: World-Wide

185 words
11 July 2017
05:56
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

 The administration is moving toward unilaterally tightening sanctions on North Korea, targeting Chinese firms the U.S. says are funneling cash into Pyongyang's weapons program. 

 Trump's eldest son retained a private attorney and said he would work with congressional investigators who have sought his testimony as part of Russia probes. 

 Republicans said they hoped to produce a revised version of the Senate health bill later this week. 

 Iran is shaping up to be one of the biggest winners in the struggle for influence in Iraq, whose U.S.-backed premier declared victory over Islamic State in Mosul. 

 Tillerson arrived in the Persian Gulf region for a round of shuttle diplomacy aimed at resolving a conflict among U.S. allies. 

 Afghanistan and Pakistan agreed to work on a mechanism to jointly combat insurgents along their shared border. 

 Polling in Japan showed a sharp drop in public support for Abe's cabinet. 

 A Marine Corps plane crashed in Mississippi, killing at least 12 people. 

 A U.S. soldier in Hawaii was charged with providing material support to \b ISIS\b0 . 

Document WSJO000020170711ed7b000p1



World-Wide
What's News
World-Wide

190 words
11 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The administration is moving toward unilaterally tightening sanctions on North Korea, targeting Chinese firms the U.S. says are funneling cash into Pyongyang's weapons program.

---

Trump's eldest son retained a private attorney and said he would work with congressional investigators who have sought his testimony as part of Russia probes.

---

Republicans said they hoped to produce a revised version of the Senate health bill later this week.

---

Iran is shaping up to be one of the biggest winners in the struggle for influence in Iraq, whose U.S.-backed premier declared victory over Islamic State in Mosul.

---

Tillerson arrived in the Persian Gulf region for a round of shuttle diplomacy aimed at resolving a conflict among U.S. allies.

---

Afghanistan and Pakistan agreed to work on a mechanism to jointly combat insurgents along their border.

---

Polling in Japan showed a sharp drop in public support for Abe's cabinet.

---

A Marine Corps plane crashed in Mississippi, killing at least 12 people.

---

A U.S. soldier in Hawaii was charged with providing material support to ISIS.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170711ed7b0002b



The G-20: Another Vacuous Meet-and-Greet

By Walter Russell Mead 
847 words
11 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A13
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The captains and the kings depart, the flames in Hamburg gutter out, and the clouds of oily smoke and tear gas slowly disperse. Another Group of 20 summit has come and gone, and yet again the world has failed to change.

This should not come as a surprise; global summits are almost always empty exercises in public relations. They survive only to make politicians look good. Incumbent presidents and prime ministers strut before the cameras, hoping to look like leaders and statesmen in contrast to their political rivals back home. Egos in wannabe powers are stroked, as the world's great powers pretend to take them seriously for a few days. There are gassy dinners and gassier communiques that mean nothing and achieve nothing, yet are haggled over line by line before falling into the oblivion that will entomb them forever.

Will any country change its trade policy as a result of anything in the G-20 communique? Will any country change its environmental policies as a result of anything said there? Will any serious historian 50 years from now -- or even five -- have even the slightest interest in anything the summit produced? Will any of the leaders who signed the communique spend five minutes thinking about how to implement it back home?

The answer to all of these questions is, almost certainly, no. All other G-20 summits were forgotten before the last leader returned home; this one is no exception. The world is not governed, or even significantly influenced, by a committee of 20 presidents and prime ministers signing vaguely worded statements with no binding force; history is not made by communique.

Great powers, on the other hand, do make history, and even as the hollow rituals of G-20 summitry unrolled, the great and the near-great powers were busy. The rising tension over North Korea's missile program drove a flurry of Asia-centric diplomacy as the U.S., China, Russia, South Korea, India and Japan explored their options in closed bilateral sessions. Judging from its rhetoric, the Trump administration appears to believe its diplomatic options on this issue are rapidly disappearing. China so far refuses to impose the kind of isolation on North Korea that could threaten the regime's existence, and Russian missile specialists are reported to be helping North Korea's current efforts.

President Trump is looking at a set of bad options: capitulation or a bout of coercive diplomacy that involves the threat of war. Whether the Trump administration restrains North Korea or acquiesces in its nuclear and missile program for want of alternatives, Northeast Asia is moving toward its most important strategic realignment since the Communist conquest of China.

Forestalling a war between the U.S. and North Korea is not, unfortunately, the only major challenge the administration faces. Russia, China and Iran, the big three revisionist powers, spent the Obama administration chipping away at world order, and their efforts and those of their smaller sidekicks (like North Korea) have begun to pay off. From Ukraine to the Balkans, Europe has become less stable; the Middle East is a cauldron of conflict and hate. ISIS may be losing territory, but its violent ideology is gaining ground. We do not know where the challenges will come or what form they will take, but the Trump administration is likely to face much sterner international tests than anything President Obama saw.

This is not good news. Barring a Pearl Harbor or 9/11 type of attack -- and perhaps even under those circumstances -- the Trump administration would begin a conflict with a hostile, deeply skeptical press and with much of the public leaning toward blaming the U.S. rather than its opponents for the crisis. Potential enemies are well aware that American public opinion is the Achilles' heel of an otherwise nearly invincible American military machine.

Foreigners see a beleaguered American president, a press in full Watergate mode, and a public that is weary of engagement overseas. Across the globe, America's competitors are thinking about how they can use this moment to advance their own agendas. America's allies wonder whether they can continue to count on the U.S. for their security. America's adversaries and potential adversaries are mulling how U.S. weakness can best be exploited.

This combination of American disunity and growing world instability, not the language of the G-20 final communique, is driving world history today. This is what our politicians and our officials ought to be thinking about. This, not parsing the body language of world leaders at a vacuous meet-and-greet, is what the press should be covering. This is what could make the difference between peace and war. This is what anyone seriously interested in putting America first and making it great again needs to address.

---

Mr. Mead is a fellow at the Hudson Institute, a professor of foreign affairs at Bard College and editor at large of the American Interest.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170711ed7b0000d



US
Soldier in Hawaii Charged With Support of  ISIS ; Suspect, 34, allegedly tried to pass classified documents to terror group

By Zusha Elinson 
281 words
11 July 2017
03:27
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A U.S. soldier stationed in Hawaii has been charged with providing material support to ISIS, according to a criminal complaint filed Monday in the U.S. District Court in Honolulu.

Ikaika Kang, 34 years old, allegedly tried to support the terror group by passing along classified military documents to undercover FBI agents whom he believed would give them to ISIS. Mr. Kang is accused of making combat training videos to be used to train ISIS fighters. He also allegedly contributed to the purchase of a drone that he believed would be used by ISIS.

An attorney representing Mr. Kang didn't respond to requests for comment.

Mr. Kang came to the attention of investigators after an unnamed source reported that he was talking about ISIS, and "anti-government topics," according an affidavit filed with the complaint. The FBI launched an undercover investigation that culminated in his arrest Saturday by an FBI SWAT team.

The probe lasted more than a year, according to Paul Delacourt, special agent in charge of the FBI's Honolulu Division.

"FBI assets and Army investigative resources were continuously deployed to ensure the public's safety during the course of this investigation and Kang's eventual arrest," Mr. Delacourt said.

Mr. Kang served in Iraq from March 2010 to February 2011, and in Afghanistan from July 2013 to April 2014, according to the complaint. He was most recently stationed at Schofield Barracks in Hawaii.

A military spokesman didn't respond to requests seeking comment.

Write to Zusha Elinson at zusha.elinson@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170711ed7b0008f



World
Pakistan and Afghanistan Look to Coordinate on Counterterrorism; Proposed effort comes as the U.S. reviews its Afghanistan policy, considers increasing troops there

By Saeed Shah in Islamabad and Dion Nissenbaum in Washington 
1,065 words
10 July 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Kabul and Islamabad have agreed to work on a mechanism to jointly combat insurgents along their shared border, cooperating more closely than they have in years as the U.S. prepares to ramp up its troop numbers in Afghanistan, according to Pakistani and Afghan officials.

The move, seen as necessary to halting the flow of fighters fueling a Taliban insurgency , would be an important step in the struggle to stabilize Afghanistan.

Washington has long tried to get Pakistan and Afghanistan to work together to squeeze Taliban militants. A visiting U.S. Senate delegation led by John McCain (R., Ariz.) helped push the two nations into discussions last week.

The Pakistani offer to resurrect joint counterterrorism operations comes ahead of a review by the Trump administration of American policy toward Afghanistan , expected to be completed this month, that could be tough on Islamabad. The U.S.-Pakistan relationship  has come to be defined by the security situation in Afghanistan, and many in Washington blame Islamabad for havens along its border that have allowed the Taliban insurgency in Afghanistan to survive and strengthen. Both Islamabad and Kabul have accused each other of allowing hostile factions to operate in their territories.

Pakistan says it has cleared extremist sanctuaries on its soil and its security worries in Afghanistan have never been addressed by Kabul and Washington. Islamabad sees a failing U.S. and Afghan strategy at fault for what American commanders describe as a "stalemate" on the battlefield.

Washington and Kabul, meanwhile, accuse Islamabad of using the Taliban and the allied Haqqani network as its proxies in Afghanistan, to counter the influence of its foe India there. Pakistan denies the charge.

The new coordinated effort comes as President Donald Trump and his aides are considering new ways to push Islamabad into doing more to help the U.S., including punitive measures to limit aid to Pakistan and to strip the country of its status as a major non-NATO ally.

"U.S. achievements in Afghanistan have lot to do with support from and through Pakistan. Any unilateral U.S. action will be anti to our existing cooperation and disadvantageous for peace and stability in the region," said Maj. Gen. Asif Ghafoor, the spokesman of Pakistan's military. "Pakistan is part of the solution, not part of the problem."

The proposed cooperation, conveyed to Kabul in recent days via the visiting senators, would see Pakistan and Afghanistan forces coordinate operations on their respective territories to tackle militants who move back and forth across the border, known as the Durand Line, Maj. Gen. Ghafoor said. Border coordination centers would be established, with officers from the other country stationed there. Pakistan is already fencing parts of the border, on which it has deployed 200,000 soldiers.

"This is a shift in Pakistan's policy," a senior Afghan security official said. "We welcome it and look forward to some practical results."

The plan envisages the U.S. monitoring and verifying the coordinated border operations. A senior official at the U.S.-led Resolute Support military coalition said it was too early to comment on the idea but added: "We have the capacity to do this, if it comes to fruition."

But Pakistan's border-security proposals were met skeptically by some current and former U.S. officials, who view them as a sign that Islamabad isn't taking the depth of American concerns seriously.

"This does not look like a road into new territory," a former Trump administration official said. "There isn't anything new in the ideas of coordinated action and third-party verification. The former is Pakistani code for pointing to Afghan military failings, and the latter is Afghan code for 'We want the Americans to blame the Pakistanis.' "

The Trump administration's policy review for Afghanistan has been slowed by an internal debate over how to deal with Pakistan, according to current and former U.S. officials. There appears to be broad support in the administration for a tougher approach to Pakistan, though there has been no agreement on how far to press Islamabad. At least one faction is concerned that such steps could backfire.

"Too many sticks, too much pressure, could create a worse overall dynamic," a second former Trump administration official said.

Afghan officials said they would like China, seen as a country Islamabad listens to, to play a role in verifying the operations and prodding Pakistan to crack down on the Taliban . Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi last month shuttled between Islamabad and Kabul to encourage the two sides to collaborate on counterterrorism and to search for a peace settlement with the Taliban , according to a joint statement.

Until 2014, a tripartite arrangement coordinated operations along the border between Pakistan, Afghanistan and the U.S.-led coalition.

"There will be coordinated operations on both sides of the Durand Line, and the U.S. will supervise the operations. The Afghan military is working to develop a mechanism for the operation," said Dawa Khan Minapal, a spokesman for Afghan President Ashraf Ghani .

Capt. William Salvin, a spokesman for the Resolute Support coalition, said: "We are supportive of efforts to fight the scourge of terrorism on both sides of the border."

The U.S. embassy in Islamabad declined to comment. Mr. McCain's office didn't respond to requests for comment.

"Conversations with our friends in Pakistan were frank and candid, and we told them that in our view that the Haqqani having a safe zone in their country was not acceptable," Mr. McCain told a press conference in Kabul on Tuesday.

Habib Khan Totakhil and Jessica Donati in Kabul contributed to this article.

Write to Saeed Shah at saeed.shah@wsj.com  and Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com  and Dion Nissenbaum at

Related Reading

* White House Limits Pentagon on Afghan Troop Level  (July 6)

* Senators Criticize Tillerson Over Afghanistan Policy  (July 4)

* U.S. State Department to Eliminate Special Envoy to Afghanistan, Pakistan  (June 24)

* U.S. Pushes for More Troops, Leeway in Afghan Fight  (May 9)

* Taliban Broaden Their Reach in Villages Across Afghanistan  (May 8)

* In Afghanistan, Battle With \b ISIS\b0  Grinds On After 'Mother of All Bombs'  (April 17)

Document WSJO000020170710ed7a00108



REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
Putin Is Not America's Friend

681 words
10 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A16
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

We'll find out in the coming weeks how Vladimir Putin sized up Donald Trump in their first mano a mano meeting on Friday, but one bad sign is the Trump team's post-meeting resort to Obama-like rhetoric of cooperation and shared U.S.-Russia purposes.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson frequently lapses into this form of John Kerry-speak as he did trying to sell the new U.S.-Russia-brokered cease-fire in a corner of Syria. "I think this is our first indication of the U.S. and Russia being able to work together in Syria," Mr. Tillerson told reporters.

He added: "I would tell you that, by and large, our objectives are exactly the same. How we get there, we each have a view. But there's a lot more commonality to that than there are differences. So we want to build on the commonality, and we spent a lot of time talking about next steps. And then where there's differences, we have more work to get together and understand. Maybe they've got the right approach and we've got the wrong approach."

The same objectives? The Russians want to help their client Bashar Assad win back all of Syria while retaining their military bases. If they are now talking about a larger cease-fire, it's only because they think that can serve Mr. Assad's purposes. The Trump Administration doesn't seem to know what it wants in Syria after Islamic State is ousted from Raqqa, and we hope Mr. Tillerson isn't saying the U.S. shares the same post-ISIS goals as Russia.

As for the right or wrong "approach" to Syria, the Pentagon believes Russia knew in advance about Mr. Assad's use of chemical weapons this year. The U.S. fired cruise missiles in response and has since shot down an Assad airplane bombing U.S. allies on the ground, which drew a threat of Russian reprisal if the U.S. did it again. Somehow "approach" doesn't capture this moral and military difference.

Then there's Mr. Trump's Sunday tweet that "Putin & I discussed forming an impenetrable Cyber Security unit so that election hacking, & many other negative things, will be guarded." No doubt Mr. Putin, the KGB man, would love to get an insight into America's cyber secrets, though don't count on any of those secrets being "guarded," much less "impenetrable."

Republican Senator Marco Rubio had it right on Sunday when he tweeted that "partnering with Putin on a 'Cyber Security Unit' is akin to partnering with Assad on a 'Chemical Weapons Unit'." He added, in advice Mr. Trump could help himself by taking, that "while reality & pragmatism requires that we engage Vladimir Putin, he will never be a trusted ally or a reliable constructive partner."

Mr. Trump's actions toward Russia so far, such as bombing an Assad airfield and unleashing U.S. oil and gas production, have been far tougher than anything Barack Obama dared. But the U.S. President clearly wants a better relationship with Mr. Putin, and the comments by both Mr. Tillerson and Mr. Trump after their Friday meeting aren't exactly hardheaded. Next time they should invite national security adviser H.R. McMaster or U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley into the meeting. Those two seem less impressed by the Kremlin conniver.

Congress can play a fortifying role here by moving ahead with the bill toughening sanctions against Russia for its election meddling. The Senate passed the bill 98-2, and Republicans can move it quickly in the House with some fixes for oil investments. The White House objects that the bill takes away discretion from Mr. Trump to reduce sanctions unilaterally. But that discretion shouldn't be granted until Messrs. Trump and Tillerson show that they understand that Mr. Putin is not America's friend.

(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: Resetting Relations Need Not Imply Warm Friendship" -- WSJ July 18, 2017)

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170710ed7a0000r



Politics
Tillerson Starting Shuttle Diplomacy in Middle East, Hoping to Resolve Dispute Over Qatar; Washington fears conflict among U.S. allies will drag on for months

By Felicia Schwartz 
568 words
10 July 2017
19:33
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—ecretary of State Rex Tillerson arrived in the Persian Gulf region for a round of shuttle diplomacy aimed at resolving a conflict among U.S. allies that Washington fears will drag on for months.

The former Exxon Mobil Corp. chief executive, who has close ties to many Arab officials in the region and has attempted to mediate the dispute, is throwing himself more deeply into efforts to resolve differences between Qatar on one side and Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Egypt on the other.

The four countries accuse Qatar of funding terrorist groups and meddling in their domestic affairs, and severed diplomatic relations and imposed a transport ban on June 5. Qatar denies the allegations and accused the bloc of Arab nations of waging a smear campaign.

Top officials from the feuding nations have been passing through Washington in recent weeks, making their case to Mr. Tillerson and others.

The U.S. diplomat first traveled to Kuwait and later will head to Saudi Arabia and Qatar to try to bring the sides closer to a solution.

It is unclear if he will meet with Emirati and Bahraini officials this week.

"The purpose of the trip is to explore the art of the possible of where a resolution can be found," said R.C. Hammond, a communications adviser traveling with Mr. Tillerson. "Right now…e're months away from what we think would be an actual resolution and that's very discouraging."

Mr. Tillerson's trip to the Gulf follows stops in Ukraine and Turkey, where he headed after the summit leaders from the Group of 20 leading nations in Germany.

Last week, the foreign ministers of Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates met in Cairo to formally discuss Qatar's response to a list of demands that includes curbing diplomatic ties with Iran, severing links with the Muslim Brotherhood and closing the Al Jazeera television network.

"They did not accept [the responses], so after one round of exchange and dialogue, we are at an impasse," Mr. Hammond said.

Kuwait has been trying to mediate the conflict, and invited Mr. Tillerson to the region to lend a hand.

"The president has said—his is not a new instruction—Find a resolution,'" Mr. Hammond said. "Our job here is to keep people communicating and talking to each other."

The Trump administration has sent mixed messages about the dispute. Mr. Tillerson throughout has urged calm and moderation, calling on both sides to take steps to de-escalate tensions, while President Donald Trump at first hailed the severing of ties to Qatar as evidence of his own successful visit to the region and part of a push to crack down on terrorism financing.

But in a call last week with Egypt's President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, Mr. Trump urged "all parties to negotiate constructively to resolve the dispute."

The Trump administration's priority in the conflict is making sure that all parties cut off funds to terror groups, Mr. Hammond said.

Write to Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com

More

* Iraqi Leader Praises Near-Rout of \b ISIS\b0  From Mosul

* Five Things to Know About the Battle for Mosul

* Mosul Emerges From \b ISIS\b0  Siege

Document WSJO000020170710ed7a002gx



Opinion
The North Korea Threat; A transcript of the weekend's program on FOX News Channel.

7,807 words
10 July 2017
16:36
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

PAUL GIGOT : Welcome to the Journal Editorial Report. I'm Paul Gigot.

The Trump administration is weighing options for its response to North Korea's military action after the rogue nation launched an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of reaching Alaska.

United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley says the United States is also focusing on any nation that works with the North.

U.N. AMBASSADOR NIKKI HALEY: In order to move North Korea off its military escalation, we must do more. We will not look exclusively at North Korea. We will look at any country that chooses to do business with this outlaw regime. We will not have patience for stalling or talking our way down to a watered-down resolution.

GIGOT: John Bolton is a former U.S. ambassador to the United Nations and a FOX News contributor.

Ambassador, welcome back. Good to see you.

JOHN BOLTON: Glad to be with you.

GIGOT: Let's talk about North Korea. You have written this week that you think relying on China to help is a fool's errand. Why?

BOLTON: Right. I think the premise of efforts both to negotiate with and pressure North Korea over the years have been grounded on the notion that you could change the behavior of the regime. And adding pressure to China to increase their pressure on North Korea to change North Korean behavior falls for the same reason. The North Koreans see a deliverable nuclear weapons capability as essential to regime survival, the ability to project power and, quite frankly, to sell or rent that technology to countries like Iran and even terrorist groups.

GIGOT: Right, but China is basically North Korea's patron. I mean, if China weren't assisting in doing business and buying its minerals and buying its coal and selling it, you know, goods and needs, North Korea could not survive. So why not put pressure on China to say, look, this is not your national interest here. You don't want a nuclear North Korea on your border. That is not helping you.

BOLTON: China's economic connection to North Korea is unquestionably essential to the North's regime survival. That is why my approach would be to convince China it's in their interest to merge the two Koreas to reunite them.

But consider the arguments of that putting pressure on China to put pressure on North Korea. We are going to name a few Chinese banks, individuals. These pinprick sanctions never work because once you name the A, B, C Corporation to sanction it, amazingly, the X, Y and Z Corporation springs up to do business. So if you want to put pressure on China you have got to put big pressure on a big economy. Are we willing to cut off access to the American market to all Chinese banks to get their attention? That is where the idea breaks down.

GIGOT: You think that you have to be that extensive in your sanctions to be able to really put pressure on China.

But I'll say this. It looks to me like maybe Donald Trump could be willing to do that. He has obviously raised objections to Chinese trade and the trade deficit that we have with China. They are talking now about, at least beginning with tariffs on steel as early as next week, Chinese steel. What do you think -- how effective would that kind of economic pressure be on China?

BOLTON: I don't think it would be terribly effective as regards North Korea. I could see a Trump administration imposing those kinds of sanctions on China for purposes of trade negotiation leverage. I can easily see that. And I do think Donald Trump really, if you focus down on key issues for him, the nuclear weapons programs of North Korea and Iran are two issues very central to his administration. So I think he is fully prepared to be tougher than the Obama administration, the George W. Bush administration or the Bill Clinton administration. But the issue is how much pressure do you need to put on China? I don't think, when he listens to his economic advisors, it would be enough. That is why I think this premise that we are -- all of these actions are intended to change the behavior of the North Korean regime ultimately fail. I think you need to change the regime.

GIGOT: All right. You need to change the regime. How do you do that? Robert Joseph, who was a colleague of yours in the Bush administration, talked about a comprehensive strategy aimed at precisely that. So you would ramp up the members of proliferation initiative. You stop them from selling goods or being able to get goods in for the nuclear program. You start to spread the real truth to the North Korean people from the south and elsewhere to try to maybe develop some opposition inside North Korea. And you really squeeze their cash flow. Although, it is harder to do that entirely because of China. What else would you need to do?

BOLTON: Well, Bob's right. I would do all that. But what you need to do fundamentally is persuade China. Contrary to the policy that they pursued for many years, that it is in their best interest ultimately to reunite the two Koreas and eliminate the North Korean nuclear weapons program. The Chinese say they don't want North Korea with nuclear weapons. Why? Not because they are a potential target, but because, ultimately, they fear Japan will get nuclear weapons. And that is a real threat to China.

GIGOT: But then if China does not come around and see it that way, then you have to basic -- you have to do something as radical as saying, you know what, tell Japan maybe you do need your own nuclear deterrent?

BOLTON: I do not believe that is the way to go. I think that would simply encourage a much wider nuclear arms race worldwide. I think it really is —n China today, there is a debate among the older leadership and the younger leadership. Those are relative terms in China. The younger Chinese leaders, I think, by and large, see North Korea as a pretty ugly piece of baggage. There is a way to make a deal here. The Chinese historically have feared American troops on the river. We do not want to be on the river. We want to get the southern tip of the peninsula.

And here is the main point to China I think. At some stage, North Korea will be threatening enough that an American president will really have to consider the use of military force. And if that happens, there could be chaos on the peninsula. That has to be to China's disadvantage. So, China, you can do this the easy way or you can it the hard way.

GIGOT: But then you have to be able to show that you are willing to use military force, or otherwise, it will be -- we will end up with acquiescing to the North Korean nuclear threat.

BOLTON: That is right. And, look, if you read the media today, some academic publications in this country, people are already being prepared to accept a nuclear North Korea. I will not accept a nuclear North Korea. I understand the risk to military force. I understand the danger to the South Korean peninsula. But Donald Trump is not president of South Korea. He is president of the United States. And I am not willing to risk an erratic Communist dictatorship with nuclear weapons threatening our civilians or civilians in other countries in the hopes that they won't lose their way.

GIGOT: OK, thank you, Ambassador.

Ahead, we dig deeper into the diplomacy surrounding the North Korea troubles. What can the president do and what roles will his adversaries and allies play? Our panel joins us, next.

GIGOT: President Trump putting pressure on China to pull back its economic partnership with North Korea. The president tweeting, quote, "Trade between China and North Korea grew almost 40 percent in the first quarter. So much for China working with us. But we had to give it a try!"

So it is there room for negotiation?

Let's ask Wall Street Journal columnist and deputy editor, Dan Henninger; editorial board member, Mary Kissel; and columnist, Bill McGurn.

So, Dan, you heard Ambassador Bolton. Do you share his urgency here and what do you think Trump will do?

DAN HENNINGER : I do share his urgency, Paul. But, you know, the question is, how have we arrived at this point of urgency? I mean, you know, back during the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union, when we had that nuclear standoff, there was a lot of serious thinking around the idea about deterrence, nuclear deterrence.

GIGOT: Right.

HENNINGER: I'm afraid that after the Cold War ended, we stopped thinking about that subject. And we have gone through several presidencies watching North Korea build its nuclear capability without any serious thought about how we would deter it. And as John Bolton was suggesting, it is not just North Korea. The nuclear genie is out of the bottle. Iran now, almost assuredly, is pursuing nuclear capabilities. There is the possibility that terrorists could get their hands on a small nuclear weapon. And I think that the time has come to start recommissioning the sort of people who can think about gradually deterring this sort of thing u sing convention weapons, maybe even tactical nuclear weapons. But you run the risk here—

GIGOT: Wait a minute, Dan. Are you saying that as a first strike or just as a deterrent in the Korean peninsula?

HENNINGER: I'm saying—'m saying put everything on the table. I'm not going to sit here and say we should do it first strike against North Korea. But I think he should think about doing a first strike and try to game out how that would work.

GIGOT: So, Mary, you lived, worked in Asia. You heard John Bolton say that he did not think that we should pressure China, but more persuade them that a nuclear North Korea is not in their interest. Do you think -- do you see China coming around to that point of view?

MARY KISSEL: I think that is a very difficult thing to achieve unless you exert the kind of pressure that Ambassador Bolton talked about, truly hurting China's economy, putting sanctions on their five biggest banks, putting potentially trade restrictions on them. And the question is, is the Trump administration—

GIGOT: That would hurt us.

KISSEL: Yes, exactly. Is the Trump administration willing to exert that kind of damage on the U.S. economy? Look, Paul, there are not good options here. That might very well be a better option than the kind of first strike that Dan talked about.

GIGOT: Right.

Bill, I mean, you worked in Asia as well. You've seen China. I've been to I don't know how many meetings with these diplomats where you talk to them and you make the point about this not being, a nuclear North Korea, not in their interest and they always say, no, no, we can't have chaos there. You know, we cannot have a unified peninsula because it will be terrible. Perhaps China really wants us out of Northeast Asia and maybe they think that North Korea is the way to get us out.

BILL MCGURN: China, for all of its growth in the global economy, has never been a leader in the way we have been hoping, to be a force for stability and so forth. Look, I think all of these things have to be on the table. It is not either/or. It is not pressure to the banks or military strength. We have to be for all of them. I would add -

GIGOT: You would put even tariffs on China?

MCGURN: I don't know. I am actually more inclined -- I would like to revoke the student visas for the children of the Chinese Communist Party. You know that leader there, his daughter went to Harvard. That is something

GIGOT: You would put a lot of American colleges out of business!

MCGUR N: But we are talking about an ICBM that could reach Seattle or Chicago. And we have to communicate that we are serious.

Look, North Korea has always been a problem. In 1950, Dean Atchison gave a speech basically saying it is outside our perimeter --

GIGOT: Security perimeter.

MCGURN: Six months later, you know, North Korea invaded. And 67 years later, we are now being threatened with missiles. It is a serious problem.

And in addition to the nuclear problem that we have, we have a second problem. Kim is a guy, he is akin to the suicide bomber, willing to blow himself up in the process. That gives him, unfortunately, a lot of leverage. Because almost any real choice we pick, whether it's pressure on China or North Korea has pain or death on the other side.

GIGOT: Dan, what about this idea that is picking up steam that the ambassador mentioned? I have seen even somebody like Charles Krauthammer suggest that maybe we are moving towards acquiescence here. Look, you've got a weapon, OK, it's a fait accompli. The price of forcing you to get rid of it is too great. But if you ever decide to use it, you will be destroyed. That kind of deterrence from the Cold War.

HENNINGER: Yeah, that's right. It seems to be that's just unacceptable. And again, I point out the possibility of the Iranians getting nuclear capability. Now, if Iran were to, say, get close to what North Korea is able to do—nd they do have a very sophisticated missile program—oes anyone think that the Israelis are going to sit there and simply allow a situation of acceptance to exist? It is inconceivable. So I think the idea that we could acquiesce at this point is simply giving up and that we need a lot more intelligent thinking about what we can do to deter getting to the point where we have no option, as I was suggesting, other than a first strike. You don't want to get to that point. But we need a strategy now.

GIGOT: Quickly, Mary?

KISSEL: I think it's also important to understand what North Korea wants. North Korea wants to conquer South Korea. They want unilateral disarmament in the south and they want reunification on their terms. They think they are racially superior to the South Koreans. This is their goal, a unification of the peninsula on their terms. That's something we need also to think about.

GIGOT: All right. Thank you all.

When we come back, Congress sets its eye on a tax bill as health care stalls in the Senate. What this could mean for the larger prospect of tax reform.

GIGOT: With the Republican plan to repeal and replace Obamacare stalling in the Senate, Congress is now focusing its attention on tax reform. Something Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin and House Speaker Paul Ryan say will get done before years end.

TREASURY SECRETARY STEVE MNUCHIN: We are very committed to get tax reform done this year. It is one of the president's top priorities for economic growth. I think the people of America understand that, that we need economic growth and we are committed to doing that. I expect that health care, hopefully, will get done. But regardless, we are committed to getting tax reform done.

HOUSE SPEAKER PAUL RYAN: We are going to get this done in 2017. But we will not wait for a path free of obstacles. Guess what? It doesn't exist! And we will not cast about for quick fixes and half measures. Transformational tax reform can be done and we are moving ahead full speed ahead.

GIGOT: We are back with Daniel Henninger and Columnist Bill McGurn and Columnist Kimberly Strassel. Kim joins us as well.

So, Kim, it looks like—irst, before we get to the separate tax reform, let's talk about the tax portion of the health care bill. It looks like Republicans in the Senate are blinking on the repeal of a particular portion of the ObamaCare taxes, the 3.8 percent surtax on investment income.

KIM STRASSEL: Right. Running instead of blinking.

You have guys like Tennessee Senator Bob Corker who have already come out and said, look, I just think it is bad optics to be giving a tax break to the wealthiest in the country while we are cutting Medicaid for the poor. Of course, the problem here is that they said that they were going to repeal all the taxes.

GIGOT: Yeah, I don't remember him saying only some of the taxes we'll repeal.

STRASSEL: And this is considered one of the monster bad taxes because, of course, it is tax on investment income. So it is particularly bad.

GIGOT: Now tell me what that means. It's capital gains. It's dividends. It's interest income from your bank account, for example. And it hits couples at $250,000 worth of income. Now, a lot of people think that is a lot of money. I can tell you, for a two-income family in a lot of places, it isn't.

STRASSEL: Yes. For many people, this is a tax on the solidly middle class. And what you already seeing, though, I mean, this could be something actually derails the bill. I mean, the discussion.

GIGOT: How so?

STRASSEL: Well—

GIGOT: Because the Corkers and so on, if they say take it out, then some conservatives might block?

STRASSEL: Right. Because the moderates have been demanding, demanding, demanding. They wanted money for opioid addiction and they wanted more generosity in the Medicaid program, but this is a bridge too far. You had about 40 conservative groups come out this week, send a letter to Senator Orrin Hatch, who runs the Finance Committee, saying, no, this cannot happen.

GIGOT: Bill?

MCGURN: I agree. I think the Republicans have made a mistake from the beginning, which is not—

GIGOT: Only one?

MCGURN: Well, on this, it leaves them vulnerable to the same you're giving breaks to the wealthy and you're hurting the poor. I think the big mistake they have made is not explaining what we want to replace Medicaid. You know, we want to give people a better deal. We don't want to return it to the pre-ObamaCare status. We want to make it better. And we have failed to do that, to say why this isn't working for you. I mean, I think that -- we would see it later with the governors having flexibility to improve the program and so forth. But I think that has left them hostage because you see a slashing on one part and giving breaks to the other and it just fuels a very debilitating conversation.

GIGOT: OK, but, Dan, on the politics of this and the optics, if Republicans are basically routed on the class war argument, in this context, then do they think that they will get, oh, well, we'll do it in tax reform, the Democrats are going to make the same argument!

GIGOT: I mean, if you lose on this, what makes you think that you will win on the other one?

HENNINGER: It is very difficult to see how they would win on the other one, Paul, especially since they are making the Democrats' arguments for them. Let's face it, these Republicans moderates are talking like Democrats, right? You raise taxes on the wealthy, or at least these people with upper incomes to pay for other programs. That is what they did with the 3.8 percent tax originally. The idea that it is a tax cut for the rich simply jumps over the fact that when ObamaCare was passed they slapped this capital gains tax on people making $250,000 to pay for it. That same argument, just as you're suggesting, will roll forward into tax reform when the Republicans start talking about cutting the corporate income tax or going to immediate expensing for new investments.

GIGOT: Right.

HENNINGER: They will be vulnerable again.

MCGURN: Paul, I would say this is a role for the president, too. He's been absent on this in the health care bill. If President Trump had given an Oval Office address and explained what we are trying to do on Medicaid, to counter the Democratic claims, I think that would have gone a long way on how we are fixing it. I think he would have the same credibility as a businessman to give that address on, say, corporate tax cuts, to say, this is a way to make us more competitive and not give companies an incentive to go relocate in Ireland and so forth. But he hasn't used that. I mean, he's gone to rallies but he is not using on behalf of the two most important pieces of legislation.

GIGOT: But, realistically, Kim, I mean, this president— mean, I agree totally with Bill—e doesn't give speeches like that.

STRASSEL: No, he doesn't. But I think the Republicans also need to understand, too, what credit do they get if they actually are going to go down this route? Is not as if, suddenly, Democrats will say, oh, yes, this is a good health care bill.

GIGOT: If they were to abandon—

STRASSEL: If they were to abandon this and raise taxes, or even double the double the Medicare tax, at least they would get credit.

GIGOT: No, they might before it is over!

Still ahead, where the White House stands with the Kremlin following the highly anticipated meeting between President Trump and Vladimir Putin.

GIGOT: President Trump meeting the Russian President Vladimir Putin for the first time, face to face, at the G-20 meeting in Germany. The president had this message for Putin before the sit-down.

PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: We urge Russia to cease its destabilizing activities in Ukraine and elsewhere and its support for hostile regimes, including Syria and Iran. And to, instead, join the community of responsible nations in our fight against common enemies and in defense of civilization itself.

GIGOT: We are back with Columnist Bill McGurn, Editorial Board Member Mary Kissel, and Dan Henninger

So, Dan, these details about these events tend to dribble out in time. And we do not know exactly what happened. Two hours, 16 minutes. Long meeting. What you think the most important thing we should be watching for is?

HENNINGER: I think probably the most important thing is the atmospherics, the relationship between Donald Trump and Putin, because, you know, Vladimir Putin, a hard-nosed former KGB official, and he will be taking Donald Trump's measure in this. He'll be sizing him up to see what he can get out of Trump in the future. They're not going to solve the world's problems here.

Two things that Donald Trump mentioned, stop destabilizing Ukraine and stop supporting authoritarian regimes in Syria. I do not think that is going to happen anytime soon.

In so far as the Russian military buildup on the Ukrainian border, and as Putin has a clear idea of what he wants to achieve in the Middle East. I think what he has done here is try and figure how much he is going to be able to get over time out of Donald Trump.

GIGOT: And the atmospherics --you may think it is a small point, but the Russians wanted only two people in the room, Mary. They wanted Lavrov, the foreign minister, and Putin with Trump and Rex Tillerson. Where is H.R. McMaster, the national security advisor? Russians likes small meetings.

KISSEL: Yes. Or Fiona Hill, another Russia expert in the Trump administration. Look, it is savvy of Putin. When he sits down next to Donald Trump, looking like a world leader, acting like somebody who can, quote, unquote, "solve problems with the U.S. president," that is a propaganda victory --

GIGOT: For Putin, back home.

KISSEL:—or Putin, back home. And look, at the end of the day, Putin is great at solving problems that he himself created. Let's not forget what he did in Syria, bombing the U.S.-backed forces, carpet bombing civilians. He wants a port on the Mediterranean. He is propping up Assad. This is not a guy who you can trust in Syria to help solve anything.

GIGOT: What you think of the atmospherics, Bill? Trump didn't stand up to him like Emmanuel Macron, the French president, who dressed him down before he met him and said, look, you shouldn't interfere with our elections. I wish, as an American, that I had heard our president dress Vladimir Putin down.

MCGURN: Yes. I don't know. Look, the reality is the policy was decided before the meeting. The meeting is sort of the show, right? President Trump knew the shape of this deal.

GIGOT: You are talking about the Syrian cease-fire that has been announced in southwest Syria—

MCGURN: Right.

GIGOT:—hich is a modest deal, at most. It is a very small portion of Syria.

MCGURN: What I'm saying is the meetings, I don't think they matter too much. I think—

GIGOT: You don't?

MCGURN: No. I think that reality is what the policy is. Macron—et's look at what French policy is.

MCGURN: If French policy is serious, we'll take France seriously. I think the key is, this is a legacy of Barack Obama. The Russians have military foothold in the Middle East. They're not going to give it up for any deal going on. I think what we have to change the dynamic, the way to pressure them is to look for other places. We tend to deal with these things discreetly, North Korea, Ukraine, Syria. The bad guys are watching all of that. I think Donald Trump has to be serious about what he said in Poland. And he has to change the dynamics so that, instead of saying, how will Vladimir Putin react, it should be how will Donald Trump react?

GIGOT: Here's how you get Putin's attention on Syria— mean, on Ukraine, Mary. You sell lethal weapons to the Ukrainians.

KISSEL: Absolutely. And you keep the sanctions on. And you keep American energy pipes open and you start shipping LNG to Europe. That's—

GIGOT: And Donald Trump is doing that!

KISSEL: And that's true, and that's what he's doing. Look, I agree with Bill that Trump inherited a certain reality on the ground in Syria. Where I differ a little bit is you don't want to legitimize Russia's role in that conflict. We don't need to accept that Russia is going to help set our foreign policy when it comes to Assad. I think I'm a bit more hawkish here than my colleagues.

MCGURN: Well, I'm more hawkish. I want policy. Secretary Mattis said we don't deal in red lines, we deal with reality. Let's see what the policy is. I think, frankly, the press goes too crazy over these meetings. This is what the press covers.

GIGOT: But don't you think that there is— mean, there is a personal dynamic here. And Putin is an old, canny KGB guy. He's going to look at Donald Trump and say, can I take him? He looked of Barack Obama, and we know from people who had talked to Putin about Obama, he had contempt for Obama.

HENNINGER: Well—

GIGOT: And he rolled over him.

HENNINGER: That is true. But, you know, sure, and Trump has to stand his ground. But he's got some pretty good people. Rex Tillerson understands Vladimir Putin. He has done business with him. He knows how ruthless he is. And he is got McMaster. I think they've put in policies in place that are sending a signal to Putin.

To follow up on this liquified natural gas point, last month, there was a huge shipment of LNG from Louisiana to the Polish port on the Baltic Sea. The Pols—nd then in that speech that Trump gave, he talked specifically about Poland getting alternative sources of energy that would not make them rely—eliant on one supplier, meaning Russia. Putin understood that because that was gas that they had been selling—

MCGURN:—elling missiles to Poland, too.

GIGOT: Poland will—

MCGURN: Look, I think Vladimir Putin is going to be watching North Korea. Secretary Mattis said it's our biggest danger point, however, he has characterized it. And he's going to see, is Donald Trump serious about—

GIGOT: Yes, but Putin did not help on that front.

MCGURN: Of course not!

MCGURN: He's the bad guy. He is on the other side.

GIGOT: He joined with the Chinese to say, oh, why don't you guys stop—

MCGURN: My point is that, that is where he is going to take the measure of Donald Trump. Not just meeting him in person but seeing—ou know, you go back to— think you mentioned Khrushchev and Kennedy. Kennedy blinked almost everywhere in the world, whether it was Laos, Berlin, Cuba. He blinked!

KISSSEL: Yes. That is an important point. But how do you establish or reestablish, rather, reinforce U.S. deterrence after these past eight years? You see Trump doing that in the south, trying to see more freedom of navigation operation. You saw him bombing the chemical factory, chemical - look, the airport used to launch chemical weapons in Syria. But there will have to be a lot more than that.

GIGOT: And Article V. In that Warsaw speech, Trump said—

KISSEL: Exactly.

GIGOT:—e'll stand up for that, which means NATO, if one is attacked, we're all attacked.

All right. Still ahead, one group of immigrants facing deportation here in the U.S. could be a target of ISIS if they are sent back to their homeland. We look at the fate of Iraqi Christians under close watch by the feds.

GIGOT: While much of the president's immigration policy has put the focus on illegal immigrants from Mexico and Central America, another group of people facing deportation are at risk of death if they are sent back to their homeland. Fourteen hundred Iraqi Christians, some of them in the Detroit area, were recently detained by immigration agents. Their status is now in legal limbo.

DETAINED IRAQI IMMIGRANT: I have been here since 8:00 a.m. with a paid attorney and everything. Nobody is giving me answers.

How can you take my brother, these families to Iraq? None of them speak the language? And they will kill the Christians. They will kill our people!

GIGOT: Joining me now, Jillian Melchior. Jillian will join the Wall Street Journal this coming week as an editorial page writer.

Welcome to the program—

JILLIAN MELCHIOR: Thank you

GIGOT:—nd to the Journal.

So, Jillian, what is going on with these Christians and why are they at deportation risk?

MELCHIOR: In June, there was an immigration sweep in Detroit. It ended up catching a lot of Iraqi Christians who were living there. And what this really dates back to is, for years, Iraq wouldn't take people back. It wouldn't allow you to deport them. Under Donald Trump's travel ban, that changed. Iraq agreed to take them back. So you have people who committed petty crimes, in some cases, decades ago. Have built lives, have built families, who are now eligible for deportation back to Iraq.

GIGOT: Now was this immigration sweep focused only on people with criminal records?

MELCHIOR: It was. It was.

GIGOT: OK. So, but what kind of crimes are we talking about? I think the average viewer might say, well, wait a minute, you don't have a right to stay here if you're not a citizen and you commit a crime.

MELCHIOR: It kind of runs the gamut. So on one extreme end, you've got the head of a mafia, someone that had a murder conviction. On the opposite extreme, you have people who served probation for drug charges but have not committed crimes since. You have people that have committed misdemeanor fraud.

GIGOT: Even misdemeanors?

MELCHIOR: Even misdemeanors. What this means is you can come to the United States legally, but once you commit that crime, your immigration status is eligible for deportation. In a lot of cases, they had these decades since the crime occurred, have not committed repeat crimes, but they are now eligible for deportation.

GIGOT: But otherwise, they have green cards. They have visas. They're legal—hese people are not illegal immigrants. These are people here legally.

MELCHIOR: They came here legally. They're status is eligible for deportation now, which is kind of a legal gray area.

GIGOT: OK. And under U.S. immigration law, if you commit a crime and you have that status, even if you have legal status but you're not a citizen, then you are subject to deportation.

MELCHIOR: Yes. And this is where it gets complicated, I think, for both progressives and the Trump administration. So because these are Iraqi Christians, if they are sent back, they will face persecution. You've seen Mike Pence saying, for instance, that Christians are subject to genocide in Iraq.

GIGOT: In Iraq? Remember, these are—hey're not going back to Syria. Iraq has a functioning government. It has police and so on. But you're still saying the record is they will face persecution in Iraq?

MELCHIOR: Yes. And if you look at what happened to the Christian community there in the last 15 years, it was 1.5 million in 2003. Four- fifths of them have left. So the U.S. government has acknowledged that as a genocide. They view that threat as very real. There is also concern about where in Iraq they will be sent back to, places like Irbil would be less insecure for them.

GIGOT: Also, the Kurdish—

GIGOT:—he Kurdish territory.

MELCHIOR: Exactly. Places like Baghdad, that would be extraordinarily dangerous.

GIGOT: OK, so what is the legal recourse now? And the Trump administration said—Donald Trump has said that he pays particular attention to persecuted Christians in the Middle East. Does he have to step up and do something? Can he do something?

MELCHIOR: It's very tricky. Basically, the burden of proof is on the immigrants. They have three real options. They can apply for relief under the Convention of Torture at the U.N. They can look for a pardon for the original crime, either from the president or from the governor. Or they can argue that this is going to pose extreme hardship to their citizens, spouse or children. All of those are very difficult to prove. And there is also a jurisdictional question. So you have the Eastern District of Michigan saying, we're not even sure if we can answer this. It might have to be handled administratively. It is very complex right now.

GIGOT: And it almost does suggest that, given the challenge that these immigrants have, the government in the United States is going to have to say, you know what, we do think you will face persecution under the Geneva Convention on Torture and, therefore, we are going to make a special dispensation here. Is that, ultimately, what you think should happen?

MELCHIOR: It is. But I think it is a tricky one for progressives because they positioned themselves as the main defender of the immigrants. What this brings—

MELCHIOR:—s a religious question. In this case, the persecution is explicitly because of religion. But if you apply religion here, why not with the travel ban? Why not with prioritizing Christians for refugee status over Muslims from Iraq? It opens up a lot of questions both for the administration and for its progressive opponents.

GIGOT: But there is a special problem for Christians in the Middle East.

MELCHIOR: Absolutely.

GIGOT: You can argue also there is a problem in other places, so you might— see what you mean. It is a slippery slope argument that you would have to allow in a lot more people. What do you think will happen?

MELCHIOR: It is up for grabs right now. I think this is a case that is very politically charged and emotionally charged. I think, uniquely, American's have sympathy for Iraqi Christians. I think that may put some pressure on the administration.

GIGOT: All right. Thank you, Jillian.

MELCHIOR: Thank you.

GIGOT: When we come back, the life of a baby with a deadly genetic disorder in the hands of U.K. courts. But now the effort is on to meet his parents' wishes to get their son to the United States for treatment.

GIGOT: A baby with a rare genetic condition is in a fight for his life and it has caught the attention of President Trump and Pope Francis. 10-month- old Charlie Gard suffers from Mitochondrial Depletion Syndrome, which causes progressive muscle weakness and brain damage. Charlie's parents want to take him to the United States for experimental treatment. But the British courts are refusing, ruling his doctors in the U.K. should take him off life support and that Charlie should be allowed to die with dignity.

We are back with Dan Henninger, Kimberly Strassel and Bill McGurn.

A terrible case, Bill. but sometimes they eliminate moral issues.

MCGURN: Yes. This is monstrous, this case, because it is not a case of resources. The family has raised money. It wouldn't cost the state something to do this.

GIGOT: To bring him home.

MCGURN: To bring him. The wording of the European court about that the parents have rights, overriding control is vested in the court, exercising it's independent and objective background. I mean, this is just chilling. And this is what it comes down to when you have a government-run health care. These questions come down to not what is to be done. I don't know what treatment the child should get. But who gets to make that decision?

GIGOT: I don't understand. Why won't they let him go home, first of all? Even from the hospital, if the parents want him to. They won't even do that. And then, if it is not the states money, if it is money that the parents have raised, what is the argument for not letting them try some experimental the treatment in the United States?

STRASSEL: The argument is—nd I think this what Bill was saying is so scary—s that we control the state of this child. It's not really necessarily about the treatment or—

GIGOT: Is it power?

STRASSEL: It is about control. Believe it or not, they actually appointed this hospital, and the state, a guardian for the baby, who has argued actively against the parents in the court system. So—

GIGOT: But I don't understand this. Do they fear a precedent, that somehow—

MCGURN: They sure do! They fear a precedent of having individuals control their own health care destiny. I think Kim is especially right. I mean, it's telling that they wouldn't even let the child go home to die in the arms of his parents.

GIGOT: Explain this precedent. Are they saying that if Charlie Gard can go home, if his parents can say—r sent him to the U.S. for treatment, that somehow other parents want to take terrible cases, people on life support, people with diseases that are probably not going to recover, we can't let—veryone will want that kind of treatment then.

STRASSEL: They're not outright saying that. Rather they are saying—

GIGOT: That would be inhumane!

STRASSEL: And so the courts have been more careful than that. And in these decisions, what there are instead saying is it is better for Charlie to stay in the hospital. Better for Charlie to be taken off a ventilator. And we know what is best for Charlie. And that is what should scare people because it's setting precedent—

STRASSEL:—he other way.

GIGOT: I dare say, Dan, it sounds to me like maybe this court is a death panel.

HENNINGER: Yes, they do sound like a death panel.

But, look, Paul, there are a couple of things going on that are very European that Americans ought to be watching this. Euthanasia is much more popular in Europe than it is here. The Netherlands has an aggressive policy of euthanasia. And it applies generally to elderly people. But the argument is extend it as well to the mentally disabled and now to infants. I mean, it is a concept known as a duty to die.

And I think the other thing that we have to be aware of is that most of Europe have these nationalized health care systems that are under tremendous economic pressure. And cost-containment is an idea that sits beneath a lot of these decisions not to treat people. Because it is just too expensive. And that is the sort of thing United—ou know, that we should be aware of right now as we debate whether we want to go towards more of that kind of national-provided health care.

GIGOT: So this is the moral consequence, Dan, of single-payer health care? Government-run health care?

HENNINGER: Absolutely, it is one of those consequences, because you get to the point where your cost, especially among elderly people, are so high that you say, these people have a duty to die because we simply cannot afford to pay for them. And especially with Charlie Gard, that will be expensive treatment. But still, in the United States, where we do have the best neonatal care in the world, we can experiment and try to find a way towards helping infants like that. But under the cost-containment environment, you simply don't do that, Paul.

GIGOT: I guess they would respond and say, well, we don't—e doesn't have much chance of recovery.

MCGURN: Right.

GIGOT: They say you are just wasting money.

MCGURN: You're causing pain is what they are staying in this case. But, look, again, it gets back to who makes that decision. Do we really want a government bureaucracy making these decisions about our children? In this case, because they raised the money, as you say, we don't have the issue of someone claiming that the state should spend three or four million to keep someone alive at the end.

STRASSEL: Also, allowing the state to make that decision allows them to make future ones. Right now, it is Charlie Gard and this very rare disease. But who is to say somewhere down the line it is not the state saying a child with Down's syndrome don't have quality of life? We shouldn't help them either. We do not want it. It is terrifying.

GIGOT: All right. Thank you all.

We have to take one more break. When we come back, "Hits & Misses" of the week.

GIGOT: Time now for our "Hits & Misses" of the week.

Dan, first to you.

HENNINGER: I'm giving a miss to electric cars, Paul. I mean, we all know how electric cars are supposed to be so desirable for saving the planet that they are sold with huge tax breaks for buyers. Well, apparently, that generosity doesn't quite extend to saving the roads. Because a lot of states like California and Michigan are now imposing fees on electric cars, EVB's, to pay for the repair of roads and bridges. At least 13 states have these EVB's now. Obviously, what the state giveth with one hand, it taketh away with the other.

GIGOT: Always.

Mary?

KISSEL: I'm going to give a miss to New York City Major Bill de Blasio, quite possibly, the most inept mayor in American today, taking us straight back to the '70s. I don't mean that in a good way. We found out this week that homelessness in New York is up almost 40 percent, the highest rate in more than 12 years. So while our trains are derailing and we've got public urination in the streets and the homeless everywhere, where is Bill de Blasio? He's off to Germany to protest at the G-20.

GIGOT: All right. I hope he stays there.

Kim?

STRASSEL: So, Paul, as many people have watched, Europe has had this growing problem with sexual assault at a lot of its concerts that it is having. This is nonetheless a miss to Sweden that decided the organizers of its biggest music festival, have decided that the way to answer this is to have a man-free concert series going forward. Men will simply not be allowed to attend. There has to be some better way of dealing with sexual assault, maybe policing or something, than banning half of humanity from listening to good music.

GIGOT: All right.

Bill?

MCGURN: This may be a first, but a hit for Harvard Law School for announcing the new Antonin Scalia professorship of law. A spokesman for the Constantine (ph) family that endowed it said it was appropriate that his alma mater recognize him. Justice Scalia once said that he wrote for law students. So this is a great example of his legacy. The opinions are what really matters. But a tip of the hat to Harvard for honoring a son whose views weren't always popular on that campus.

GIGOT: And the new dean of the Harvard Law School, John Manning, is actually a conservative, believe it or not. So give him credit for that.

MCGURN: That's right.

GIGOT: All right. Remember if you have your own hit or miss, be sure to tweet it to us, @jeronfnc.

That's it for this week's show. Thanks to my panel. Thanks to you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. We hope to see you right here next week.

Document WSJO000020170710ed7a00337



Opinion
Putin Is Not America's Friend; Rex Tillerson sounds like John Kerry on Russia and Syria.

662 words
10 July 2017
00:26
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

We'll find out in the coming weeks how Vladimir Putin sized up Donald Trump in their first mano a mano meeting on Friday, but one bad sign is the Trump team's post-meeting resort to Obama-like rhetoric of cooperation and shared U.S.-Russia purposes.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson frequently lapses into this form of John Kerry-speak as he did trying to sell the new U.S.-Russia-brokered cease-fire in a corner of Syria. "I think this is our first indication of the U.S. and Russia being able to work together in Syria," Mr. Tillerson told reporters.

He added: "I would tell you that, by and large, our objectives are exactly the same. How we get there, we each have a view. But there's a lot more commonality to that than there are differences. So we want to build on the commonality, and we spent a lot of time talking about next steps. And then where there's differences, we have more work to get together and understand. Maybe they've got the right approach and we've got the wrong approach."

The same objectives? The Russians want to help their client Bashar Assad win back all of Syria while retaining their military bases. If they are now talking about a larger cease-fire, it's only because they think that can serve Mr. Assad's purposes. The Trump Administration doesn't seem to know what it wants in Syria after Islamic State is ousted from Raqqa, and we hope Mr. Tillerson isn't saying the U.S. shares the same post-ISIS goals as Russia.

As for the right or wrong "approach" to Syria, the Pentagon believes Russia knew in advance about Mr. Assad's use of chemical weapons this year. The U.S. fired cruise missiles in response and has since shot down an Assad airplane bombing U.S. allies on the ground, which drew a threat of Russian reprisal if the U.S. did it again. Somehow "approach" doesn't capture this moral and military difference.

Then there's Mr. Trump's Sunday tweet that "Putin & I discussed forming an impenetrable Cyber Security unit so that election hacking, & many other negative things, will be guarded." No doubt Mr. Putin, the KGB man, would love to get an insight into America's cyber secrets, though don't count on any of those secrets being "guarded," much less "impenetrable."

Republican Senator Marco Rubio had it right on Sunday when he tweeted that "partnering with Putin on a 'Cyber Security Unit' is akin to partnering with Assad on a 'Chemical Weapons Unit'." He added, in advice Mr. Trump could help himself by taking, that "while reality & pragmatism requires that we engage Vladimir Putin, he will never be a trusted ally or a reliable constructive partner."

Mr. Trump's actions toward Russia so far, such as bombing an Assad airfield and unleashing U.S. oil and gas production, have been far tougher than anything Barack Obama dared. But the U.S. President clearly wants a better relationship with Mr. Putin, and the comments by both Mr. Tillerson and Mr. Trump after their Friday meeting aren't exactly hardheaded. Next time they should invite national security adviser H.R. McMaster or U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley into the meeting. Those two seem less impressed by the Kremlin conniver.

Congress can play a fortifying role here by moving ahead with the bill toughening sanctions against Russia for its election meddling. The Senate passed the bill 98-2, and Republicans can move it quickly in the House with some fixes for oil investments. The White House objects that the bill takes away discretion from Mr. Trump to reduce sanctions unilaterally. But that discretion shouldn't be granted until Messrs. Trump and Tillerson show that they understand that Mr. Putin is not America's friend.

Document WSJO000020170709ed79003ju



US
NJ Transit Train Derails at New York Penn Station; No injuries reported; mishap follows two derailments at the station earlier this year

By Paul Berger and Charles Passy 
305 words
7 July 2017
04:48
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A train derailed at New York Penn Station Thursday night, just days before several tracks at the station are due to close for extensive repairs following two derailments earlier this year.

A spokeswoman for NJ Transit said a North Jersey Coast Line train carrying 180 passengers "experienced a minor derailment" as it approached Penn Station around 9 p.m.

A spokesman for the New York Fire Department said it had received a report that one car derailed. No injuries were reported, the spokesman said.

NJ Transit suspended service in and out of Penn Service.

NJ Transit's Midtown Direct trains were diverted to Hoboken. Rail passes and tickets were cross honored with PATH and on buses.

As she headed toward a nearby PATH station, Catherine Lisowski, a commuter from Union, N.J., said she had become accustomed to rail delays and problems. "I've just learned to go with it. Life could be worse. You could have this, or you could have ISIS."

Amtrak will close several tracks at Penn Station for eight weeks starting July 10 so that engineers can carry out extensive repairs to rails and switches at the western end of the station, which is used heavily by NJ Transit.

An NJ Transit train derailed at the station in April. In March, an Amtrak train derailed there.

Amtrak had instituted a temporary speed restriction at the station while engineers carried out track maintenance work and inspections in preparation for the repair work.

Amtrak lifted the speed restriction on Monday.

Corinne Ramey contributed to this article.

Write to Paul Berger at Paul.Berger@wsj.com and Charles Passy at cpassy@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170707ed77000jh



World
Tillerson Says U.S. Is Ready to Talk to Russia About No-Fly Zones in Syria; Chief U.S. diplomat sounds optimistic note on Moscow in advance of Trump meeting with Putin

By Felicia Schwartz 
928 words
6 July 2017
05:28
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—ecretary of State Rex Tillerson said the U.S. was prepared to hold discussions with Russia on setting up no-fly zones in Syria, describing prospects for cooperation with Moscow in markedly optimistic terms despite tense relations between the two countries.

Mr. Tillerson's comments, in a statement issued late Wednesday, come as he is leaving to meet President Donald Trump at a summit of leaders from the Group of 20 leading nations in Hamburg, Germany, where Mr. Trump and Russia's president Vladimir Putin will meet face-to-face for the first time.

The chief U.S. diplomat said Mr. Trump would tell Mr. Putin that the U.S. was prepared to cooperate with Moscow to end more than six years of civil war in Syria.

"The United States and Russia certainly have unresolved differences on a number of issues, but we have the potential to appropriately coordinate in Syria in order to produce stability and serve our mutual security interests," Mr. Tillerson said in a statement.

The Russian embassy in Washington, D.C., didn't respond to a request for comment.

Offering to discuss no-fly zones is a significant step by the Trump administration toward expanded cooperation with Russia. No-fly zones have long faced opposition from U.S. military officials, who see them as risky and expensive and could potentially drag U.S. forces further into the conflict.

But Mr. Tillerson cited progress in efforts between the U.S. and Russia on avoiding accidents between their militaries in Syria as evidence that they could collaborate further. Russia backs the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.

"This cooperation over deconfliction zones process is evidence that our two nations are capable of further progress," he said. "The United States is prepared to explore the possibility of establishing with Russia joint mechanisms for ensuring stability, including no-fly zones, on the ground cease-fire observers, and coordinated delivery of humanitarian assistance."

There are multiple "deconfliction zones" in Syria where U.S. and Russian militaries have been working to avoid mishaps, including one around a base near the Syrian town of Al Tanf close to the Iraqi border. U.S. forces and their allies are operating near the zone.

The U.S. has warned Mr. Assad and his forces to steer clear of the area and has alerted the Russian government that it seeks to avoid mishaps but will take defensive action as needed, and American forces have taken several actions against allies of the Syrian government.

The U.S. and Russia have been meeting secretly over the past several months to set up a "de-escalation zone" in southwest Syria, where Moscow and Washington would agree to keep their proxies away from each other. If that effort is successful, officials said that the U.S. would look to set up other such zones around Syria to try to wind down the conflict.

A no-fly zone would involve a commitment both to refrain from flights in a given area and to shoot down planes that enter secure areas. Officials have said no-fly zones would require increased military resources from the U.S.

Mr. Tillerson's olive branch to Russia on Syria comes amid a recent rise in battlefield confrontations between the Syrian regime and American forces battling Islamic State in Syria, which threaten to widen into a direct clash with the regime.

In recent weeks U.S. forces have shot down a Syrian regime warplane as well as two Iranian-made drones viewed as threatening to American forces and Syrian fighters they are working with. The U.S. also has carried out airstrikes on Syrian government forces and their Iranian-backed allies in southern Syria.

Mr. Tillerson said the U.S. is committed to fighting Islamic State in Syria but also wants to see stability in Syria once areas are liberated from the hold of the terrorist group.

"While there are no perfect options for guaranteeing stability, we must explore all possibilities for holding the line against the resurgence of ISIS or other terrorist groups," Mr. Tillerson said. "The United States believes Russia, as a guarantor of the Assad regime and an early entrant into the Syrian conflict, has a responsibility to ensure that the needs of the Syrian people are met and that no faction in Syria illegitimately retakes or occupies areas liberated from ISIS' or other terrorist groups' control."

Mr. Trump's scheduled meeting Friday with Mr. Putin has drawn international interest, given U.S. findings of Russian interference in the 2016 election on Mr. Trump's behalf and the president's longstanding reluctance to criticize Russia or Mr. Putin.

Speaking to reporters at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland on Wednesday before leaving to join Mr. Trump in Germany, Mr. Tillerson said the Trump administration hoped the meeting would be the start of broader cooperation between Moscow and Washington.

"We're at the very beginning...at this point it's difficult to say exactly what Russia's intentions are in this relationship," he said. "That's the most important part of this meeting, is to have a good exchange between President Trump and President Putin over what they both see as the nature of this relationship between our two countries."

Gordon Lubold contributed to this article.

Write to Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170706ed76000gp



The Unbreakable Polish-American Bond

By Piotr Wilczek 
553 words
6 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A13
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

President George H.W. Bush once said: "Poland should be strong and prosperous and independent and play its proper role as a great nation in the heart of Europe."

Poland has lived up to those words. On Thursday, as an active member of NATO and the European Union, Poland hosts President Trump on his second international trip.

This visit will demonstrate the unbreakable bonds between Poland and the U.S. and address the challenges facing our neighborhood and the broader Euro-Atlantic community.

Polish-American relations are thriving, and for good reason. Poland has been a reliable partner to the U.S. since our democratic transformation. In the Middle East we answered America's call for action, deploying more than 40,000 Polish military personnel to Afghanistan and Iraq.

With instability just beyond our borders, we welcome the deployment of U.S. and other NATO troops to our region. Thanks to the decisions made at the 2016 Warsaw NATO Summit and bipartisan support in Congress, Poland now hosts thousands of U.S. military personnel, as together we train to be ready to meet any threat.

Poland also continues to be a security provider. We understand that solidarity is our strength. From the 2% of gross domestic product we spend on defense to our contribution of F-16s to the fight against ISIS, Poland continues to approach NATO membership and our alliance with America not as a handout but a commitment that must be honored every day.

As President Trump declared recently, we must all take our defense and security obligations seriously. No one understands this better than Poland. That's why President Andrzej Duda announced that Poland will further increase its defense spending, to 2.2% of GDP by 2020 and 2.5% by 2030.

President Trump's visit indicates that the new U.S. administration is taking the challenges of our region and their global ramifications seriously, and is steadfastly committed to strengthening NATO's collective defense.

America's renewed interest in our region is also visible in last month's delivery of American liquefied natural gas to Poland. Central and Eastern Europe have long been dominated by an energy monopoly left over from the Cold War era. We no longer have to be victims of geopolitics. Thanks to the newly constructed LNG import terminals on the Baltic coast and a system of interconnected pipelines, LNG delivered by ship to Swinoujscie, Poland, can be transported throughout our region and beyond. These terminals allow us to exert greater energy independence, and we look toward our American partners for continued LNG gas exports.

The need to reassert our region's influence is the underpinning of the Three Seas Initiative, a forum that includes 12 countries from our neighborhood. President Duda and his Croatian counterpart, Kolinda Grabar-KitaroviÄ‡ have invited Mr. Trump to meet with leaders from the Adriatic, Baltic and Black Sea region.

America's commitment to liberty and democracy has captivated the Polish people for generations. Even more than four decades of forced Communist rule could not shake our appreciation of American values. We will see that appreciation manifested as the American president is welcomed in Warsaw.

---

Mr. Wilczek is Poland's ambassador to the U.S.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170706ed760000o



World
Qatar Lashes Back at Demands by Saudi-Led Group; Saudi Arabia says diplomatic, economic restrictions will continue until Doha revises its policies

By Sarah Kent in London and Dahlia Kholaif in Cairo 
940 words
5 July 2017
21:37
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Qatar and the four Arab nations seeking to isolate it exchanged bitter recriminations, with Doha accusing the Saudi Arabian-led bloc of waging a smear campaign and Cairo declaring that its energy-rich neighbor isn't serious about resolving the worst diplomatic crisis in the Persian Gulf in decades.

Meeting in Cairo on Wednesday, the foreign ministers of Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates discussed Qatar's latest response to their 13-point list of demands, which include curbing diplomatic ties with Iran, severing links with the Muslim Brotherhood and closing the Al Jazeera television network.

Egyptian Foreign Minister Sameh Shukri said after the gathering that Qatar's reply had been "negative," adding that it "reflects negligence and lack of seriousness in dealing with the origins of the problem as well as unawareness of the gravity of the situation."

Qatar is facing a potential volley of new punitive measures from the four nations after signaling its rejection of the demands.

Saudi Arabian Foreign Minister Adel al-Jubeir told reporters in Cairo that further measures against Qatar will be taken as needed. The "political and economic blockade will continue until Qatar revises its policies," he said.

Accusing Qatar of supporting extremist groups and meddling in their domestic affairs, the four Arab states severed diplomatic relations on June 5 and imposed a transport ban on the nation of 2.2 million people. Qatari officials have consistently denied the allegations.

On Wednesday, Qatar's foreign minister, Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman Al-Thani, lashed back, saying in London that the allegations by Saudi Arabia and its allies were "clearly designed to generate anti-Qatar sentiment in the West" and that their demands didn't represent "reasonable and actionable grievances."

"Qatar continues to call for dialogue despite the siege that is a clear aggression and an insult to all international treaties bodies and organizations," Mr. Al-Thani told a gathering at the London-based think tank Chatham House . He said his country is more progressive and open than are others in the region, and its principles have made it a target.

"Unlike many states in the Middle East, Qatar was not built on oppression, fear and censorship," Mr. Al-Thani said.

When they issued their demands to Qatar on June 22, the four Arab states boycotting Qatar gave it 10 days to comply. That deadline was extended on Sunday and expired early Wednesday. Doha has responded to the demands through Kuwait, but the details of its reply haven't been made public.

The steps under consideration  by the four nations at their gathering in Cairo on Wednesday weren't known. U.A.E. Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Anwar Gargash has said Qatar could be expelled from the Gulf Cooperation Council , a six-member political and economic bloc that includes Saudi Arabia, the U.A.E., Bahrain, Qatar, Kuwait and Oman. Mr. Al-Thani said Qatar's rivals in the group couldn't suspend it because such a decision would have to be taken by consensus.

Bahrain's foreign minister, Sheikh Khalid bin Ahmed al-Khalifa, said in Cairo that Qatar's future as part of the GCC would be reviewed by the council when its six members meet, but didn't say when. "Decisions are studied carefully," he said.

Mr. Al-Thani of Qatar said its rivals in the group couldn't suspend it because such a decision would have to be taken by consensus.

Doha is seeking help from the U.S. to resolve the dispute, while Abu Dhabi and Riyadh want the U.S. to back their efforts to isolate their neighbor. The response has been mixed, stoking fears of a prolonged diplomatic crisis.

President Donald Trump has taken up the allegations against Qatar's ties to terrorism funding. Meanwhile, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson has sought to defuse the standoff, urging the two sides to use the list of demands as a starting point for negotiations .

Mr. Tillerson​aid in June that the embargo on Qatar, which hosts 10,000 American troops at the largest U.S. military base in the region, was beginning to interfere in a U.S.-led military campaign against the jihadist group Islamic State.

"The blockade is hindering U.S. military actions in the region and the campaign against ISIS," Mr. Tillerson told reporters at the State Department.

Mr. al-Jubeir of Saudi Arabia said it is committed in its fight against terrorism but can't have Qatar as an ally that also "turns a blind eye towards terrorism financiers who operate openly [there]" and toward "extremists."

Qatar's economy has been resilient so far but could begin to suffer deeply if the transport ban remains in place and other economic sanctions are imposed.

Mr. Al-Thani said the country is paying 10 times its normal rate to ship food and other goods into the country via alternative routes. This week, Moody's Investors Service changed its outlook on Qatar's credit rating to negative, citing the likelihood of a "prolonged period of uncertainty."

A similar diplomatic standoff in 2014 over Qatar's alleged support for Islamist organizations that Saudi Arabia, the U.A.E. and Bahrain deemed terrorist organizations ended after eight months, with the three nations agreeing to return their ambassadors to Doha. Qatar said at the time that it made no concessions to resolve the dispute.

Write to Sarah Kent at sarah.kent@wsj.com 

Document WSJO000020170705ed750035x



World News: Islamic State's 'Capital' Is Breached --- U.S.-backed forces advance into heavily fortified city in Syria, dealing blow to  ISIS 

By Noam Raydan and Maria Abi-Habib 
645 words
5 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S.-backed Syrian forces breached the wall surrounding Raqqa's heavily fortified Old City, marking a significant advance in the battle to drive Islamic State out of a city it used to run its empire and plan attacks abroad, the American military said Tuesday.

The Syrian Democratic Forces made the breakthrough on Monday after the U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State conducted airstrikes on the wall, according to the U.S. Central Command.

The Kurdish-led SDF fighters came under heavy fire as they entered, Central Command said.

The advance is the SDF's deepest yet into Raqqa. If the city falls, it would be one of the biggest achievements in about four years of war against Islamic State led by the Pentagon and its coalition of Western and Arab allies.

Although coalition forces have now entered Raqqa's Old City, Islamic State is still putting up very tough resistance, a coalition spokesman said, portending a drawn-out battle for the city.

The spokesman declined to say when Raqqa city might be completely recaptured.

But as coalition forces advance toward the city's more urbanized core, the fighting will likely become more protracted as it has when Islamic State has been uprooted in U.S.-backed military campaigns from Libya to Iraq.

"There is still tough fighting to be done," the coalition spokesman said. "ISIS fighters are putting up stiff resistance," he added, saying the militants have booby trapped the city and surrounding areas with explosives, making it slow going.

Islamic State has suffered a series of defeats in both Syria and Iraq that have eaten away at its territorial foothold in its core caliphate, or religious empire.

The group is all but banished from Mosul, Iraq -- the largest city it had captured in the Middle East -- after more than eight months of battles.

Some of the last remaining residents streamed out of Mosul's old city on Tuesday as Iraqi troops, backed by U.S. Special Forces, continued to inch forward.

The SDF, a mixed Kurdish and Arab force, launched the long-awaited offensive to retake Raqqa in early June, more than three years after Islamic State took the city that became known as its de facto capital of its self-declared caliphate in Syria. The U.S. has said that the militants used the area as a staging ground for terrorist attacks on Europe and that the loss of it would be a major blow to Islamic State.

Across Syria and Iraq, hundreds of U.S. Special Forces are supporting local partners, advising them in battle and calling in airstrikes.

Islamic State's key leadership has already moved on farther east to Deir Ezzour province, specifically to Mayadeen, a small city there. Oil-rich Deir Ezzour is still mostly in Islamic State hands and the group is expected to put up a tough fight there after the Raqqa and Mosul offensives are over.

Damascus and its allies, namely Iran, Russia and the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah, are likely to take Islamic State's holdouts in Deir Ezzour, making the battle for Raqqa likely to be the last significant urban territory U.S.-allied forces will wrest away from Islamic State.

The extremist militants also still hold several strategically important towns in Iraq and a stretch of the Iraq-Syria border.

In Raqqa, Islamic State has used the Old City wall as a fighting position and planted mines and other explosives at several breaks in it, the U.S. military said. The military added that it was gauging airstrikes to try to preserve as much as possible of the historic 2,500-yard wall.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170705ed750000l



World News:  ISIS  'Capital' Is Breached --- U.S.-backed forces advance into heavily fortified city in Syria, in blow to Islamic State

By Noam Raydan and Maria Abi-Habib 
764 words
5 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

U.S.-backed Syrian forces breached the wall surrounding Raqqa's heavily fortified Old City, marking a significant advance in the battle to drive Islamic State out of a city it used to run its empire and plan attacks abroad, the American military said Tuesday.

The Syrian Democratic Forces made the breakthrough on Monday after the U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State conducted airstrikes on the wall, according to the U.S. Central Command. The Kurdish-led SDF fighters came under heavy fire as they entered, Central Command said.

The advance is the SDF's deepest yet into Raqqa. If the city falls, it would be one of the biggest achievements in about four years of war against Islamic State led by the Pentagon and its coalition of Western and Arab allies.

Although coalition forces have now entered Raqqa's Old City, Islamic State is still putting up very tough resistance, a coalition spokesman said, portending a drawn-out battle for the city.

The spokesman declined to say when Raqqa city might be completely recaptured.

But as coalition forces advance toward the city's more urbanized core, the fighting will likely become more protracted as it has when Islamic State has been uprooted in U.S.-backed military campaigns from Libya to Iraq.

"There is still tough fighting to be done," the coalition spokesman said. "ISIS fighters are putting up stiff resistance," he added, saying the militants have booby trapped the city and surrounding areas with explosives, making it slow going.

Islamic State has suffered a series of defeats in both Syria and Iraq that have eaten away at its territorial foothold in its core caliphate, or religious empire.

The group is all but banished from Mosul, Iraq -- the largest city it had captured in the Middle East -- after more than eight months of battles.

Some of the last remaining residents streamed out of Mosul's old city on Tuesday as Iraqi troops, backed by U.S. Special Forces, continued to inch forward.

The SDF, a mixed Kurdish and Arab force, launched the long-awaited offensive to retake Raqqa in early June, more than three years after Islamic State took the city that became known as its de facto capital of its self-declared caliphate in Syria. The U.S. has said that the militants used the area as a staging ground for terrorist attacks on Europe and that the loss of it would be a major blow to Islamic State.

Across Syria and Iraq, hundreds of U.S. Special Forces are supporting local partners, advising them in battle and calling in airstrikes.

Islamic State's key leadership has already moved on farther east to Deir Ezzour province, specifically to Mayadeen, a small city there. Oil-rich Deir Ezzour is still mostly in Islamic State hands and the group is expected to put up a tough fight there after the Raqqa and Mosul offensives are over.

Damascus and its allies, namely Iran, Russia and the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah, are likely to take Islamic State's holdouts in Deir Ezzour, making the battle for Raqqa likely to be the last significant urban territory U.S.-allied forces will wrest away from Islamic State.

The extremist militants also still hold several strategically important towns in Iraq and a stretch of the Iraq-Syria border.

In Raqqa, Islamic State has used the Old City wall as a fighting position and planted mines and other explosives at several breaks in it, the U.S. military said. The military added that it was gauging airstrikes to try to preserve as much as possible of the historic 2,500-yard wall.

The spokesman of the Manbij Military Council, which is fighting under the umbrella of the SDF in southern Raqqa, said this advance was "huge and a victory." He said the forces that entered the Old City seized a strategic outpost from Islamic State, an ancient, fortified palace known as Qasr al-Banat.

"We are certain of victory. It is inevitable, but we cannot give a specific time," Sharfan Darwish said. "ISIS is completely besieged."

The spokesman also claimed that some ISIS fighters have handed themselves over to the SDF.

"Their morale is collapsing," he said.

An estimated 200,000 people are trapped in Raqqa amid heavy bombardment, and civilian casualties will likely rise as street-to-street urban warfare intensifies.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170705ed750000t



Iraq's  ISIS  Gains Elevate Abadi --- Prime minister, who generated few expectations, stitched military alliance, damped sectarianism

By Ben Kesling 
1,664 words
4 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq -- Three years ago, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi proclaimed the existence of an Islamic State caliphate and proceeded to sweep his forces through northern Iraq and toward Baghdad, threatening the viability of the fragile country.

Today, the leader declaring an end to the caliphate is someone few would have imagined in the position, Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi. A man seen as the favorite of none but acceptable to all, the 65-year-old former electrical engineer has managed to turn that tepid sentiment into a defining strength.

Over nearly three years in office, Mr. Abadi has narrowed gaps between Iraq's warring Shiite and Sunni politicians. He balanced competing interests among geopolitical rivals Iran and the U.S., and spearheaded an overhaul of Iraqi security forces, who had fled advancing Islamic State fighters. Iraq is close to retaking Mosul, Islamic State's psychologically important stronghold.

"Abadi has magnificently shifted between leading and balancing," said Jon Alterman , director of the Middle East program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. "If he led too much then there'd be too many alienated people, and if he balanced too much there would be no forward progress."

Today, Iraq's security forces are on the verge of defeating Islamic State, the key requirement if the nation wants to enjoy a stable and cohesive future, despite daunting challenges that remain. Sectarian anger still simmers, and the country's economy and infrastructure have been devastated by years of fighting.

"Abadi is riding high," said one U.S. official in Washington. "But the government needs to show that it can act to make people's lives better, and probably the window for that is pretty limited. If it doesn't, all that goodwill Abadi built up will diminish."

There wasn't always such a sense of possibility in Iraq. Before Islamic State swept to power in 2014, the country was at its most-fractious since the fall of Saddam Hussein. Mr. Abadi's predecessor, Nouri al-Maliki, was a polarizing figure, accused of fueling sectarian conflict and packing ministries with loyalists.

Transparency International ranked the country near the bottom at 171 of 177 countries world-wide for corruption, with such pervasive problems that the country has only moved up a few positions after years of attempted overhauls. Mr. Maliki didn't respond to a request for comment, but Sunday released a public statement praising the military and militias.

When the festering Syrian civil war next door bled across the border, Iraq's military crumbled. In June of 2014, militants exploited Iraq's problems to blitz into Mosul -- grabbing nearby land, stores of weapons and oil fields. In Islamic State's advance, millions of civilians came to live under the Sunni extremist group's rule.

Some Sunnis initially welcomed the militants as an alternative to the predominantly Shiite government of Mr. Maliki. The implementation of Shariah law followed, where people could be jailed for smoking or executed for unauthorized use of a cellphone.

Amid the turmoil, the conciliatory Mr. Abadi was tapped to become prime minister, an antidote to Mr. Maliki's divisive rule. He faced growing alarm among Iraq's allies.

Iran, the world's biggest Shiite-majority country, couldn't countenance its neighbor falling to a Sunni extremist group. In 2014 Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the pre-eminent Shiite cleric in Iraq, called on fellow countrymen to rise up to help protect the country; Shiite militias formed that Mr. Abadi has both empowered and theoretically kept under central government control. Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps's elite Quds Force decided to fund and train many of them.

Ayatollah Sistani, who typically makes public statements via a representative at Friday prayers, didn't respond to a request for comment.

For Iran, forging such a partnership offered a way to cultivate a new proxy in Iraq and to nurture others. Iran could revive overland supply routes through Iraq and its other ally, Syria, to Lebanon, where the Shiite political and militant group Hezbollah is based.

For Mr. Abadi, the relationship provided a backstop to a buckling Iraqi military. It also offered a skilled battlefield partner in Qasem Soleimani, the commander of the Revolutionary Guards. Iran's heavy involvement in Iraq also exposed Mr. Abadi to accusations that he was turning his country into an Iranian pawn.

An official in the office of Iran's United Nations representative didn't return a request for comment on Iran's relationship with Mr. Abadi.

U.S. State Department officials mostly sidestep the thorny issue of Iran's involvement in Iraq's war against Islamic State, saying Baghdad was ultimately in charge of the powerful Shiite militias. As part of this balancing act, Mr. Abadi courted the U.S. military for assistance, too, just years after the Americans pulled troops out of the country.

In 2014, the U.S. military started a gradual increase of troops with the launch of Operation Inherent Resolve. By the end of Barack Obama's presidency, more than 5,000 Americans were deployed to Iraq with hundreds close to the front lines of combat. Support has increased under President Donald Trump .

Iraq has benefited from a more than billion-dollar investment by the U.S. to train and equip forces, and fund U.S. troops in the country. Mr. Abadi also fired generals from the Maliki era and demanded that top officers eschew sectarianism. Those steps brought increased assistance from the U.S., including advanced weapons and air support.

As the war with Islamic State heated up, Iraq became a tinderbox of crisscrossing rivalries and sectarian tensions.Christian and Sunni minorities in Iraq grew wary of Iran's growing influence, with those groups forming some of their own militias.

Some Iran-friendly Shiite forces, meanwhile, became openly hostile to U.S. troops. In late 2015, multiple militias pledged to fight U.S. troops if they deployed to Iraq and established bases in the country, harking back to their efforts against Americans during the Iraq war.

Mr. Abadi sought to keep everyone on the same side, largely by lauding the benefits of a unified Iraq, adding Kurdish and Sunni elements to his cabinet and reaching out to Sunni leaders for dialogue.

From the beginning of his tenure, the Iraqi prime minister reached out to Sunni Arab countries in the region while maintaining his ties with Iran.In 2015, the Saudi government reopened its embassy in Baghdad, which had been shuttered decades before in response to Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait.

Inside Iraq, Mr. Abadi begin to win over the country's minority Sunnis.

"This government led by Abadi hasn't met desired levels of ambitions, but if you compare it with the previous government, you will find a big difference," said Ahmed al-Masari, head of the Sunni political bloc in federal parliament. "Now there are reforms and progress, while during the previous government several provinces fell to terrorism."

Renad Mansour, a fellow at Chatham House , a London-based internationally focused think tank, said Sunni leaders came to realize a flexible Shiite leader may be their least bad option, especially if they hoped to exercise some power as a minority group in a democratic Iraq. "The Sunnis are past their denial of reality," he said. "They realize that they're going to be a minority."

Mr. Abadi didn't neglect the country's Shiite majority either. By 2015, Ayatollah Sistani, arguably the most revered figure in the country, voiced strong support for Mr. Abadi and worked to ensure the militias remained by law ultimately under Iraqi government control. Mr. Abadi in turn has praised the cleric, even this week saying his call to form militias was a crucial move to save the country from Islamic State dominance.

In marshaling foreign and domestic support, Mr. Abadi's government began racking up wins. In mid-2015 Iraqi forces took back Tikrit from Islamic State, their first major territorial victory. In November 2015, Kurdish Peshmerga forces pushed into the northern town of Sinjar, and the Iraqi military soon declared the Anbar hub of Ramadi free from militant control. The city of Fallujah fell months later.

In Mosul, where an offensive began last fall, Islamic State didn't retreat but dug in deeper. Even as Iraqi forces surrounded the city and advanced, the militants used hundreds of thousands of civilians as human shields while stockpiling munitions and setting up snipers' nests in the warrens of the old city.

Today, Iraqi forces are fighting scattered pockets of Islamic State fighters.

In east Mosul, shops selling mobile phones or fashionable jeans have reopened next to restaurants slicing up kebabs. Patrons smoked openly, even during the holy month of Ramadan -- a display unthinkable under Islamic State control.

Still, seeds of new conflicts are just below the surface.

Iraqi soldiers are accused of beating and summarily executing unarmed men and boys fleeing fighting in the heart of Mosul. The most recent allegations come from a Human Rights Watch report released Friday. Because the military is seen as a Shiite institution and Mosul is predominantly Sunni, such abuses, real or even rumored, threaten to fan sectarian tensions.

The Iraqi government will investigate any credible cases of abuse, according to Saad al-Hadithi, a spokesman for Mr. Abadi, but he said those allegations must be based on evidence and not hearsay.Mr. Abadi has said he wouldn't tolerate any human-rights abuses by troops.

In Anbar Province, tribal officials have exiled families of Islamic State members. In the city of Mosul, the city council recently passed a resolution declaring the same. Mr. Abadi has signaled he will use his federal authority to prevent the local government from taking such actions.

Mosul mobile-phone salesman Forat Latif said the environment is ripe for another antigovernment group to lure Sunnis into more fighting.

Document AWSJ000020170703ed740001g



World News: Iraq, Militias Duel Over Next Big Battle --- Baghdad says it will steer  ISIS  offensive, but Iran-backed Shiite fighters want that role

By Tamer El-Ghobashy and Ali A. Nabhan 
861 words
4 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq -- A political dispute threatens to complicate Iraq's next big battle against Islamic State as the extremists face imminent defeat in Mosul: Both the U.S.-backed Iraqi military and Shiite militias supported by Iran want to spearhead the fight.

The militias have surrounded Tal Afar, which has strategic and symbolic value to Islamic State, in a bid to choke off the terror group's supply lines between Iraq and neighboring Syria. The militias are eager to avenge the loss of Tal Afar to Islamic State in 2014, which was followed by mass executions of Shiites.

But the Iraqi government says the military will be in charge of the Tal Afar campaign. The military is currently fighting Islamic State in Mosul, a much larger city about 75 miles to the east. The extremist fighters are cornered in Mosul's Old City and expected to lose there within weeks.

"We are seeing the end of the fake Daesh state," Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi said late last week, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

Both the Iraqi military and the Shiite militias report to Mr. Abadi. The militias were legally incorporated into Iraq's security apparatus by parliament last year, though their top leaders have close ties to Tehran.

Tal Afar had a population of about 200,000 before Islamic State took over, but the town has outsize importance because of its proximity to Syria and Turkey. The U.S. and Turkey worry that Tehran wants its militia allies to take Tal Afar to help secure a land corridor by which Iran could move fighters and resources through Iraq into Syria, a longtime Iranian ally, and on to Lebanon, where Iran's Hezbollah proxy is based.

Maj. Gen. Joseph Martin, the commander of U.S. ground forces in Iraq, said that he expects the Iraqi military to lead the fight for Tal Afar and added that U.S. advisers "will be right there with them." The U.S. won't work with the Shiite militias, he said.

Turkey has threatened to send in its own troops if the Shiite militias lead the fight for Tal Afar, once part of the Ottoman Empire.

The jockeying for battlefield influence is taking place amid rising tension between the U.S. and Iran-backed forces seeking to buttress the Damascus regime. In recent weeks, U.S. forces have shot down a Syrian regime warplane and two Iranian-made drones viewed as threats to the U.S. and allied fighters in the campaign against Islamic State in Syria, and carried out airstrikes on Syrian government forces and their Iranian-backed allies in southern Syria.

Iraqi officials estimate between 1,000 and 1,500 Islamic State fighters remain in Tal Afar. The extremists have used the town as a way station between Mosul and Raqqa, the group's de facto capital in Syria. A handful of the group's leaders are natives of Tal Afar, and thousands of its foreign fighters came to the town for training.

The Shiite militias have had Tal Afar surrounded for at least six months, and the siege has weakened the remaining militants there. It has taken a heavy toll on civilians.

No regular Iraqi military units have yet been assigned the task of entering the town. Iraqi officials say forces will enter the town soon after Mosul is declared liberated. The U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State has been coordinating airstrikes in Tal Afar for about eight months with the Iraqi military, which is stationed outside the town.

The presence of the Shiite militias around Tal Afar is due to a political concession Mr. Abadi made to keep them out of the fight for Mosul, a majority Sunni city, where their participation would have risked deepening sectarian strife.

On one hand, the militias are credited with helping protect Baghdad during Islamic State's sweep through Iraq in 2014 that saw one-third of the country fall to the extremists, and later with helping win back important cities like Tikrit and Fallujah. But the militias have also been dogged by accusations of killing Sunnis they suspect of sympathizing with Islamic State, a Sunni-led group.

The militias have said that the abuses are isolated and that the militias have become more disciplined. The militias say their sacrifices in the fight to surround Tal Afar give them the right to lead the battle for the town itself.

The U.S. is opposed to that possibility. A senior U.S. official pointed to the issue of who would hold ground in Tal Afar recaptured from Islamic State. "We don't want those vacuums filled by Shiite militias," the official said.

Sunni tribal fighters from Tal Afar, armed and trained since last year by U.S. military advisers, say they have already been marginalized and, in some cases, abused by the Shiite militias.

---

Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170703ed740001e



Opinion
Holding Ranks on Health Care; A transcript of the weekend's program on FOX News Channel.

7,554 words
3 July 2017
17:10
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

SENATE MAJORITY LEADER MITCH MCCONNELL : It's a very complicated subject. I had hoped, as you know, that we could have gotten to the floor this week. But we're not quite there. But I think we've got a really good chance of getting there. It will just take us a little bit longer.

PAUL GIGOT : Welcome to "the Journal Editorial Report." I'm Paul Gigot.

That was Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell earlier this week following his announcement that the Senate would break for the July 4 recess without a vote on health care. Negotiations continue as the Republicans scramble to settle on a plan to repeal and replace ObamaCare. With the impatient President Trump tweeting Friday, "If Republican Senators are unable to pass what they are working on now, they should immediately repeal and then replace at a later date."

What are the main obstacles of an agreement and what are the consequences for the GOP if they fail to pass a bill?

Let's ask "Wall Street Journal" columnist and deputy editor, Dan Henninger; editorial board member, Joe Rago; and columnist, Bill McGurn.

Joe, you're fated to cover this for us. What are the divisions inside the Republican Party that are preventing an agreement?

JOE RAGO: Well, there are two camps. One it's the conservatives, people like Ted Cruz, Ron Johnson, who are kind of disappointed that it doesn't do enough on deregulation. I think they are amenable to a deal.

The real problem are the moderates. They --

GIGOT: Who are you talking about?

RAGO: I'm talking about Rob Portman.

GIGOT: Of Ohio.

RAGO: Shelley Moore Caputo of West Virginia, Bill Cassidy of Louisiana. I mean, there is a whole list of them. But --

GIGOT: All right. What's their beef?

RAGO: Their main problem is with Medicaid. They think the cuts -- this bill transitions to a block grant. They think the block grant is not generous enough. And then there is all kinds of cats and dogs. They don't want to cut taxes for the rich.

GIGOT: They don't want to repeal some of the Obamacare taxes that they campaigned to repeal.

RAGO: Right.

GIGOT: OK. So that's a problem.

RAGO: Their problem is when they said they wanted to repeal and replace Obamacare, they really didn't want to repeal all that much. So, the question is, where is the vin diagram between these two camps.

RAGO: We'll see it Mitch McConnell can find it.

GIGOT: That's what McConnell has been trying to negotiate.

The bigger problem you are saying though, politically, is the moderates, who want to do much less on Medicaid reform. Aren't some of these people the same people who said, you know, we can't -- oh, my god, the deficit is too large. We have to do something about health care entitlements?

RAGO: Right. They have run on repeal and replace across four elections for nearly a decade. They have -- all these guys have voted in 2015 to repeal the bill, to repeal ObamaCare.

GIGOT: Right.

RAGO: Now that it might actually happen, they are getting cold feet.

GIGOT: They are saying, oh, don't make me take a tough vote.

DAN HENNINGER: Look, Paul, it's clear, in retrospect, to me, that the most politically shrewd thing that Barack Obama and the architects of the Affordable Care Act did was expand Medicaid. Because there are states, like West Virginia, Ohio, Arizona, that took -- the states have always been desperate to fund their Medicaid.

GIGOT: And here is the key, Dan. Medicaid is typically, traditionally funded on a 50/50.

HENNINGER: Exactly.

GIGOT: This was a 90/10 deal.

HENNINGER: A 90/10 deal.

GIGOT: The feds give 90 percent of the cash to get new people on.

HENNINGER: And so you had - you had Republican governors, like John Kasich, who took the money, and now they are literally addicted to this Medicaid money. And the problem is that if the Medicaid reforms go, states who didn't take the money, say, like Florida, I think they are going to be obligated to buy into the Medicaid expansion and then it's game over.

GIGOT: The expansion of the Medicaid, it wasn't just more money at a 90/10 rate. It was also extended up to 138 percent of poverty.

BILL MCGURN: Right.

GIGOT: It came not just, Bill, for the disabled, not just for the truly needy and in poverty. It became, essentially, a slowly moving, gradually upward, middle-class entitlement.

MCGURN: Absolutely. It's a huge -- I mean, really, it's Obamacade. Right? When they talk about people who now have health coverage, it's mostly Medicaid.

Look, I think one of the issues, Medicaid is a great sort of crucible for this. And what's missing is the president on this. He has tweeted. I think he has done some good things. Had some Senators in. But what this really calls out for is like an Oval Office address where you address these myths. As this is happening, the Democrats are putting out that the Republicans are cutting Medicaid rather than cutting the growth and so forth. And it would be very helpful for the president to give an address on what the Republicans want to do, why they do, and explain it. That's supposed to be his strength.

GIGOT: All right.

There's this idea about, Joe, that if Republicans can't get a deal, somehow, they should go -- reach out to Schumer, the Democratic leader, and say let's come reason together and have a bipartisan support -- bipartisan deal. Possible?

RAGO: No. Well, in a limited sense. But the people calling for everybody to come together in a kumbaya circle, never say what that deal would look like. There is no substance there whatsoever. And that's because there is not a bipartisan compromise. What happens if this fails is that Mitch McConnell is forced to go to Chuck Schumer and say we have got to do something about the exchanges.

GIGOT: Because they are failing.

RAGO: They are failing. You have high and rising premiums and insurers leaving and tens of thousands of people in counties with zero insurers.

RAGO: So you will get a bailout of the exchanges that will be mainly Democrats, with a few Republicans, who are trying to prevent a crisis.

GIGOT: It will be a ratification of ObamaCare, essentially, with more dough. It will have none of the reform that's in this current bill. So you will get bipartisan, but it will be as if Hillary Clinton got elected.

RAGO: Yes. It will be worse than the deal Republicans probably would have cut if President Clinton was in office right now.

GIGOT: All right. What about this tweet by Donald Trump saying if the Senate Republicans fail, then let's just go to Plan B. Plan B being we are going to repeal it, you all promised to do it. We will repeal it first and then we will go work on replace. Ben Sasse, the Nebraska Senator, Republican, recommended the same thing to Donald Trump . Plausible?

HENNINGER: I don't see how that really works. I mean, it seems to me that, if you repeal it, whatever that may mean, the exchanges --

GIGOT: -- repealing it.

HENNINGER: Well, the exchanges are up and running out there, more or less, right? I think that throws the burden on Tom Price and Health and Human Services to start tinkering with the exchanges to keep them afloat until they get to replace. But that itself is going to be a mess.

GIGOT: The danger is it ruins health care markets --

MCGURN: Yes. Look, and the larger thing is the Republican Party is supposed to be offering solutions to the American people. And the real goal of Republican health care policy is not just to return it to the status quo before ObamaCare, which was not that good, but to improve it. That, to me, would be an abdication.

GIGOT: They would be responsible because they're running --

MCGURN: They'd be holding it in 2018. That's exactly what the Democrats want, to transfer ownership from the Democrats to the Republicans.

GIGOT: All right. Thank you, all.

When we come back, a victory for President Trump and the Constitution's separation of powers as the Supreme Court allows most of his travel ban to go into effect.

GIGOT: Parts of President Trump's controversial travel ban went into effect Thursday night after the Supreme Court ruled this week that nearly all of the president's directives could go forward. In a unanimous decision, the justices also agreed to review a series of lower court rulings blocking the implementation of the March executive order, which temporarily bars entry to the U.S. by nationals of six Muslim-majority nations. Oral arguments in the case are set for the fall, setting up a Supreme Court showdown over presidential power.

Attorney David Rifkin served in the White House and in the Justice Department under Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush.

Welcome, David. Good to see you.

DAVID RIFKIN: Good to be with you.

GIGOT: So I know that you wrote for us. And you believe that this decision was a victory for presidential power, as a legal matter, and was the right decision. Never mind the policy, but just as a legal matter, why?

RIFKIN: Because of the lower courts, district courts and two courts of appeal, the Fourth and the Ninth, have fundamentally deviated from the established Supreme Court case law that distinguishes between the extent of judicial engagement in domestic affairs, where the courts pay some deference to the executive but, basically, scrutinize, particularly, in situations where there's alleged violations of fundamental constitutional rights.

GIGOT: Right.

RIFKIN: Executive actions and in foreign affairs, where the deference is upmost, reflecting recognition that the two political branches possess the totality of foreign affairs power. Judiciary doesn't have the expertise nor the ability to really do very much there. So this basically pushes the pendulum back to where the law should be. Let me emphasize, this is way beyond this executive order, Paul. The framework that those lower courts have adopted would fundamentally destroy the ability of the presidency to carry out foreign policy.

GIGOT: I want to get -- OK, I want to get into that. But let's --this is a really interesting opinion because it was unanimous in order to reinstate the policy, at least until they can hear the merits in the autumn. Why do you think -- how much do you read in, how much significance do you read into the fact that it was unanimous?

RIFKIN: Quite a bit. Not too be too harsh, but what the courts of appeal have done is utterly aberrational. They have paid scant regard to the Supreme Court case. In a way, it was a challenge not only to the presidency, because, as you know, Paul, I believe there is a, quote, "resistance" portion of the federal judiciary, which is bad enough, politicized judicial making, but it also was an implicit challenge to the Supreme Court. Remember, Article III is a hierarchal entity. The Supreme Court sets the tune and the lower courts are supposed to follow the music, so to speak.

GIGOT: When you say Article III, you mean the article in the Constitution that applies to the Courts.

RIFKIN: Right.

GIGOT: And you're saying that there are plenty of Supreme Court precedents that have said that on matters of national security, courts must defer to the political branches, in particular, when those political branches, the Congress and the president, are united behind a policy. And you are saying that the lower branches here, the Fourth and the Ninth Circuit, the lower courts, really just ran roughshod over this, in part, because they don't like this president.

RIFKIN: They don't like this president. And they have done it in a way that was most disingenuous. As I said, they paid no attention to the Supreme Court precedent.

And it's just not a matter of deference. What's important here is this, and this transcends immigration. The same logic could be applied to the decision to use drones, the decision to impose economic sanctions, frankly, decisions to use military force. Once the executive indicates clearly and it's legitimate, bona fide reason why it's doing something, this is it. The judiciary takes it on board. There is no balancing type of analysis that you invariably see in domestic affairs.

GIGOT: OK. And you think that the lower courts were so out of line, that they should have reinstated -- the Supreme Court should have reinstated the whole injunction -- I mean, barred, rather, the whole injunction. Should have allowed it to proceed, the travel ban. Yet, they did say that the travel ban -- they did overrule the travel ban in certain narrow cases of individuals who have ties to American families, the families in America, or institutions, such as a college or university where you have been accepted for admission. And, yet, there was a dissent on that from three justices. What do you make of that disagreement?

RIFKIN: I, frankly, think, Paul, it's a slight disagreement. I think the chief justice has accepted this fairly narrow category of people who will come in.

Again, this is not about policy equity, Paul. This is about the Constitution at the highest level.

RIFKIN: Getting nine justices on board is perfectly fine. As far as the exceptions the Supreme Court exercised own equitable discretion.

What's important to underscore for the viewers, if the lower courts were right, nobody could be stopped under this executive order. The very fact that the vast majority of the people are going to be stopped now for a duration underscores how thoroughly they have taken this off the table. The legal theories. Again, what troubles me the most are not the policy consequences, frankly, of stopping this ban. But the legal consequences of eviscerating established case law, which says, again, in foreign affairs, political branches reign supreme.

GIGOT: You don't want justices meddling, making -- second guessing decisions on the executive. They don't have the expertise or knowledge to do so.

But I want to ask you about what to expect in the fall when the justices address this on the merits. You could go for a 9-0 decision. We know the chief justice likes those kinds of decisions. But would he have to make too many concessions to the get the liberals on board? And would you prefer a 5-4 split that makes a really thunderous ruling on behalf of presidential power?

RIFKIN: That latter, Paul. Because, again, the policy stakes here, in my opinion, are quite minor. I think speaking with a clear voice, some chastisement, in a measured fashion, and articulation of the proper paradigm for judicial engagement in this area is absolutely essential. This was a reasonable compromise to get nine on board for the stay. When we get to the merits, oral argument coming, I think the first week of October, look, I hope we're going to get nine perfect decision.

GIGOT: Right.

RIFKIN: But probably not. So, 6-3, 5-4 would be wonderful. This would not be the time to pull punches.

And by the way, as you point out in your editorial, I have no doubt that the left is going to put serious pressure on the chief justice, the way they have done with ObamaCare, for example. So it's very important to keep up the countervailing pressure as well.

GIGOT: All right. Thank you, David Rifkin.

When we come back, the Supreme Court wraps up its term with a big victory for religious liberty. We'll take a closer look at this week's ruling and what it says about the court's newest justice.

GIGOT: The Supreme Court wrapped up its term this week with a big win for religious liberty. In a closely watched case, the justices ruled, 7-2, that Missouri acted improperly when it denied public funds to a Lutheran church seeking assistance from a state program providing grants for playground improvements.

We're back with Dan Henninger. "Wall Street Journal" columnist, Bill McGurn; and editorial page features editor, James Taranto, also join us.

Bill, so how big a victory was this for religious freedom?

MCGURN: I think it's a big victory. I said before, in medieval times they debated angels on pinheads. Today, we debate whether a playground that's Lutheran can qualify for funds.

I will say I don't think these are the biggest religious liberty cases, because it's about funding or the previous case in the Supreme Court that was 9-0 about running their own business. Where it's really going to clash are the cases that they are going to take, like the cake baker case from Colorado.

GIGOT: Whether or not they can exercise conscience in relation to gay marriage

MCGURN: Lesbian and gay rights. That's where the real nasty clashes are going to occur.

GIGOT: James, really interesting dynamics here. Seven to two. Elena Kagan joined the majority.

JAMES TARANTO: Right, and Stephen Breyer.

GIGOT: Sonia Sotomayor 's descent was really tough. And so there's some division there even among the liberals on this.

TARANTO: Yes, that's true. Also there was a footnote in the case, which was the only part of the opinion of Justices Thomas and Gorsuch didn't join, which said we're only deciding the limited circumstances of this case. So the majority is leaving some wiggle room for future cases.

GIGOT: What do you make of this division between the liberals

TARANTO: This is a case in which it's a question of how absolute do you want to be about the separation of church and state. The argument here was the state had a policy of giving grants to organizations, and it was discriminating against religion, as opposed to supporting religion for the sake of religion.

GIGOT: That's where some liberals might say, OK, that's just not right.

TARANTO: Right.

GIGOT: OK.

HENNINGER: But interestingly, the next day, the Supreme Court then sent orders back to the Supreme Courts of Colorado and New Mexico, which had ruled against the public funding being used for religious purposes, religious school programs --

GIGOT: Schools?

HENNINGER: Schools.

GIGOT: Private school vouchers.

HENNINGER: And the Supreme Court told those two courts, reconsider your opinion. That's a big deal. Because there are these so-called Blaine Amendments all over the country that forbid using public money for religious schools.

TARANTO: By the way, when the court said, about 15 years ago, that states could, not must, but could extend voucher programs to parochial schools, that was a 5-4 decision.

GIGOT: That was a 5-4 decision. These Blaine amendments, Bill, go back to the 1880s, I think.

MCGURN: Right.

GIGOT: And they are basically -- they were aimed at a period where the Protestant majorities in this country were trying to say, no money for all these upstart Italian and Irish immigrant schools.

GIGOT: We don't want Catholic schools.

MCGURN: The way they did it was the public schools were Protestant schools, sectarian --

GIGOT: Right.

MCGURN: -- and Catholics. And we are stuck with this.

I would say, look, this is where Donald Trump gets credit for Neil Gorsuch . If you read his opinions, they are very subtle. And he also rejects kind of these distinctions. He talked about someone who says grace before a meal, is that a religious meal or a religious man or so forth.

I think this is far more important than, for example, the president's executive order on religious liberty, which I don't think amounts to as much.

GIGOT: Yes. Let's talk, fellows, about Gorsuch. Because we got our first glimpse of him as a justice this week or this term. And I don't think you can reach conclusions about any justice in a few weeks, maybe even in a couple of years. It takes a while to see how they do. But what do you think about his debut?

TARANTO: Well, the thing that strikes me most about it, is he is a wonderful writer. My job is finding good writers.

I've read -- I think he has only written three opinions so far. Most of them have been about boring subjects, like the regulation of debt collection agencies. But you read them and they are marvelously clear and just a pleasure to read. But the clarity is also important. I think that carries over to the way he thinks about the law.

GIGOT: Yes. And I would just elaborate on that, Dan. The clarity shows, to me, anyway, a justice who is very confident in his -- in what he thinks about the law. This is somebody who feels very comfortable with the text of statutes, knows that that that's how he interprets statutes. Goes to the text, and then is—o it's not, I'm going to make it up as I go. You know—e knows what he is doing in looking at these cases. And you can almost sense, you know, that he is going to be a force intellectually on the court.

HENNINGER: Well, it sounds like you are describing Justice Scalia without the doubts.

He did align himself several times --

GIGOT: Without the Scalia self-doubt?

HENNINGER: Without Scalia's self-doubts.

GIGOT: That's an ironic point, just for the record.

HENNINGER: For instance, he aligned himself with Justice Thomas where the court declined to hear a case on whether people could carry guns outside their home for their personal use. Justice Thomas and Justice Gorsuch wanted to take that case. And that is the kind of area in which Scalia might have had a little bit of doubt. He aligned himself with Justice Thomas, on what Bill was talking about, a more forceful, vigorous defense of the free expression of religion. So I think he is going to be solidly there with Justice Thomas and probably Justice Alito on everything.

GIGOT: This wasn't a big term in terms of—ecause it was 4-4 for much of it. But there was a big case on free speech, James.

TARANTO: Yes. This was the case involving the Slants, which is an Asian American rock band. They had been denied a trademark on the grounds that it was disparaging and they challenged this. And the Supreme Court struck down the Patent and Trademark's Office disparagement clause. Which means the Washington Redskins will continue to be around.

But what was really important about this case was the cultural statement the court made. Two decisions, two opinions, one by Justice Alito and one by Justice Kennedy, both affirmed, in very strong terms, that there's no such things as a separate category of hate speech that is not protected by the First Amendment. A common misunderstanding these days.

GIGOT: All right. Fascinating, gentlemen.

Still ahead, the White House issued a rare public warning for the Syrian government this week amid signs that they are planning another chemical attack. So did the warning save lives? And is there a long-term, serious strategy in the works?

PAUL GIGOT: The White House warned this week that Syrian forces would, quote, "pay a heavy price" amid signs that the Assad government may be planning another chemical attack on its people. The Pentagon on Tuesday said it detected active preparations for chemical weapons used at Shayrat Airfield, the site of April's U.S. cruise missile site.

But U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley told Congress Wednesday that the administration's warning may have averted the attack and saved innocent lives.

U.N. AMBASSADOR NIKKI HALEY: I think that by the president calling out Assad, I think by us continuing to remind Iran and Russia that while they choose to back Assad, that this was something we were not going to put up with. So I would like to think that the president saved many innocent men, women, and children.

GIGOT: Cliff May is the president of the Foundation for Defense of Democracies. He joins me now from Washington.

Welcome back, Cliff. Good to see you.

So you really think that the Assad regime would tempt fate again and try another chemical attack after what happened to them the first time?

CLIFF MAY: I certainly think the warning has given them pause. And it may be that they are not going to do that again, that they recognize that if they cross that red line, there is a president now who will take action and make them feel some pain. I certainly hope that's true for the sake of saving innocent lives.

I also think it's important that the U.S. show again, as it has in this instance, that it is a power to be reckoned with. The other ways that it's been done in recent days, shooting down a Syrian plane and shooting down some Iranian-made drones. Those are important signals, among other things.

GIGOT: So what you are seeing here is the resurrection, the revival of the U.S. deterrent effect against rogue behavior. And that was, of course, missing for many, many years under the previous administration. Is that how you see it?

MAY: Absolutely, I do. If the deterrent is credible, it means you probably don't have to take action. Having used missiles once against Assad, it may be that we don't have to do it another time in this instance. Although, there is plenty more we have to do. And that has to be done if this part of the world—f the fires in this part of the world are going to subside, much less be put out.

GIGOT: I want to talk about that. But let's talk about, you mentioned the drone and the airplane shootdown. Now, when that happened, the U.S. was—ttack was taking down aircraft that looked to be threatening American forces—orces allied with America on the ground in fighting Islamic State. Russia and Iran reacted and said, don't do it again. We're going to challenge your aircraft. And, yet, we haven't seen that at all since then. Was that just a false threat?

GIGOT: Well, I think it was a bit of game of chicken. I think the Russians and others have to decide whether they think they can make the current U.S. administration back down. As you inferred or implied, I don't think they had any fear whatsoever of the Obama administration. They knew that Obama would also back down, would always stay away from action. Now they have to say, do we want to escalate.

Now, there is a possibility of escalation. They have to decide, if they go out at high noon and draw their gun, are they going to be first and more accurate.

GIGOT: We know, we have heard this week that Mosel in Iraq is about to be liberated from Islamic State. Raqqa in Syria may not be far behind. Islamic State is going on the road to defeat, at least in its major enclaves. What happens then? Is there a strategy that you see here that the United States has?

MAY: Yes. This is a key question. Look, I think the defeat of the most ambitious and adventuristic jihadist expression, which is the reestablishment of the caliphate in the 21st century, if we defeat that, that's a good day. Let's celebrate that. But let's be careful because we have a big day-after problem. What do we do after? We do not want to be the expeditionary force for Iran and Russia and for Assad in Syria and others in Syria. And that's—hat could be the case.

As far as a policy or a strategy—

GIGOT: Yes. That's what I want to hear. What's the U.S. strategy?

MAY: I do not think we—f we have a strategy, it has not been clearly articulated yet. It's not going to be easy to come up with because, whatever strategy we have, is going to have some serious down sides. There are no good strategies. There are bad strategies, and worse. And it's going to take a bit of thought and consideration to figure out which is which. So I do think the day-after problem is enormous.

I think there are things that are—here are aspects of a strategy, such as safe zones, or I call them protection zones. There are enclaves that have been in place really since 2012 that we can fortify. But we do not want to do to do, essentially, what we did in Iraq, which is, we take the country away from a terrible ruler, such as Saddam Hussain, and end up giving the—aving that rebound to the benefit of Iran, which is trying to establish a new empire, a Shia crescent in the Middle East.

GIGOT: That's the point I wanted to ask you about. Because I think I know, after ISIS is defeated, what Iran and Syria and Russia want. OK? Syria wants—ssad wants to run all of Syria again. Iran wants a Shiite arch of power from Tehran all the way to the Mediterranean. And the Russians want an ally that they can say we helped survive, and you give us a couple of military bases and a port. But it isn't clear that any of that is in the United States' interest. And how do we stop that from happening. Because those forces on the ground are going to keep pressing that? And it seems to me that we are going to have to respond with some kind of military force, either enforcing the enclaves for the Kurds or for the Sunnis or maybe air power.

MAY: I think that's exactly right. And that's why it is so difficult, because we could win the battle today and lose the war tomorrow. And that's why we do need a policy and a strategy. And I think at the least part, some of its components are going to be to set up those enclaves, to have the Sunnis not feel threatened by the Shia, by the Iranians. Because if they do, they will look for any champion, including a champion like ISIS.

We haven't mentioned al Qaeda. Al Qaeda is very strong. It hasn't gotten media attention. It hasn't gotten military attention. There are various al Qaeda affiliates that are also looking to take advantage of the situation. Assad—nd he is supported—ost of his vector of fighting forces are Iranian proxies. He trying to now move east --

GIGOT: That's right.

MAY:—owards the Iraqi border. We have all of these problems. I have to think that Secretary Mattis and National Security Advisor McMaster need to be thinking about this very hard and saying, how do we at least frustrate—t least frustrate the ambitions of Iran and of Russia and of Assad and not allow this to become part of a knew Persian Empire.

GIGOT: All right. Cliff May, thanks for being here.

MAY: Thank you.

GIGOT: Still ahead, from independence to dominance. A look at President Trump's new energy strategy, next.

PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP : We're here to issue in new American policy, one that unlocks millions and millions of jobs and trillions of dollars in wealth.

My administration will seek not only the American energy independence that we have been looking so long, but American energy dominance.

GIGOT: From independence to dominance. That was President Trump Thursday unveiling his administration's new energy policy and vowing to reduce regulations and boost U.S. production of oil, natural gas and coal to export around the world. It's a move the White House says will create American jobs and help American allies.

We're back with Dan Henninger, Joe Rago and Bill McGurn.

So, it was supposed to be energy week, Dan. The president's tweets got in the way again of that. Instead of energy week, maybe energy hours

HENNINGER: Right.

GIGOT: Energy day. Nonetheless, a lot going on behind the scenes on policy. What's happening?

HENNINGER: Yes, that's right, Paul. That speech was given around 3:30, about the hour, the entire media was, you know, obsessing over the Mika Brzezinski tweet.

But nonetheless, the president announced some very serious things. He wants to—e is going to allow drilling for oil in the Artic and in the Atlantic. He is going to accelerate the creation of pipelines. He's going to have a re-think of nuclear policy, more permitting for new coal mines. He is going all out, full speed ahead on energy policy, which arguably at this point, Paul, is the strongest card Donald Trump has played since he has become president.

GIGOT: What do you mean the strongest card? You mean economically, strategically or both?

HENNINGER: Economically and strategically. Economically, because the United States is now beginning to export up to a million barrels of oil a day - unprecedented—ecause of the revolution in fracking. Strategically, because Energy Secretary Rick Perry was talking about energy dominance. And what he means by that with the United States now exporting all of this energy out there, we're going to establish new relationships with trading partners that we haven't had before. Probably, reducing the dominance of Russia. Because formerly, all the liquified natural gas would go through pipelines. Now we will be able to ship it directly to Europe --

GIGOT: Right.

HENNINGER:—nd OPEC and Saudi Arabia. So it's a big deal.

GIGOT: It is a big deal, Joe. And let's just kind of break that down a little bit. It's really got two big components. Let's leave coal aside. You've got this liquified natural gas, building these terminals. That gas is being produced through, you know, through the fracking revolution, this new way of tapping into—orizontal drilling, tapping into natural gas reservoirs underneath the ground. And also, oil exports. The Congress basically forced President Obama to lift the oil export ban. And that's paying big dividends.

RAGO: It is. Crude oil exports have doubled over the last six years. It's really a sea change. And it's an incremental policy win of the kind that pays dividends over time. A lot of conservatives said timed (ph) well. The export ban wasn't sufficient to justify a deal. But, we're really seeing the economic results of that right now.

GIGOT: That's helped American producers find new markets, Bill --

MCGURN: Right.

GIGOT:—hich is crucial because, with oil prices falling in half, a lot of them might have gone out of business, drillers, if we didn't have this new export market. And now we are also being able to displace some of the imports in oil that we otherwise would have had to buy.

MCGURN: Right. We're allowing markets to develop. Look, one of the problems we have had over the years is that the countries that had oil that we were dependent on were generally not great actors, Russia, Venezuela, the Arab countries, and we were very vulnerable. That's why the pitch to American energy independence was so strong for every president. You know, I'm a little skeptical of that because

MCGURN:—ou want a global market. Right.

GIGOT: Yes, you want a global market.

MCGURN: But now we have—s we say, we have new jobs everywhere because of this. And especially with Mr. Putin in Europe. It gives the Europeans some assurance that he is not going to use his energy to bully them into something. So it's a win all around for this. And a lot of this was— lot of reason it didn't develop was because of regulations. And that's where he—hat's really where is he going at it.

GIGOT: That's right. And that's really the difference, a huge difference between the Obama administration and Trump. The Obama administration just hostile to fossil fuels, generally. Even Obama couldn't stop the fracking revolution, it was so strong. But he could deter it, slow it down, make it harder. And what Trump is doing is unleashing it.

HENNINGER: Yes. It relates as well, as Bill was suggesting, to our foreign policy. We moved away from this kind of pointless argument about energy independence, there is never going to be any such a thing with global energy markets. Trump has recognized that energy markets are global. He is using our skills in energy to establish relationships both economically and strategically with allies out there in Europe. This has moved the energy conversation in an entirely more productive direction.

GIGOT: Thank you, all.

When we come back, "False Black Power," a provocative new book by the "Wall Street Journal's" own Jason Riley who argues that the political strategy of civil rights leaders has left many blacks behind. Jason joins us next.

GIGOT: "False Black Power," that's the title of "Wall Street Journal" Columnist and Manhattan Institute Senior Fellow Jason Riley's new book, out this week.

Jason joins us now.

Here we go. It's a spritely read, Jason, provocative. What do you mean by false black power?

JASON RILEY: Well, the book is really a critique of a civil rights strategy that's been in place since really the 1960's. That is to focus on gaining political power for blacks, electing more black officials in the hopes that that will bring along socioeconomic advancement. I thought Obama's presidency was sort of the culmination of this strategy.

GIGOT: In the White House.

RILEY: So let's look back and see how that strategy has fared.

GIGOT: What do you think? Where has it failed?

RILEY: It's failed for a number of reasons. But we should never have thought it would succeed based on how other groups have risen from poverty to prosperity.

GIGOT: But wait a minute.

RILEY: They haven't focused on—

GIGOT: The Irish, they put a premium, when they came here, on political power—

RILEY: Right.

GIGOT:—n Boston and New York.

RILEY: Yes.

GIGOT: You would think that has had some success.

RILEY: Well, they are an example of a group that has followed a similar path to what blacks are following. It turns out that the Irish were the slowest to grow economically of all the immigrant groups from Europe.

GIGOT: In contrast to the Germans --

RILEY: In contrast to the Germans, the Italians --

GIGOT: Japanese.

RILEY:—he Asians, and so forth. All of whom did not place their focus on attaining political clout first. They focused on building their human capitol: cultural development, skills and attitude and so forth. Politics came later.

GIGOT: Politics is not this promised land. It can help but—o what—here should the focus be?

RILEY: I think the focus should be on what it was before the civil rights establishment adopted this strategy. And so, a lot of people don't like comparisons between blacks and immigrant groups because of the history of slavery and so forth.

GIGOT: Of course.

RILEY: So I say compare blacks today to blacks in the first half of the 20th century. If you look back at that period, when focus was not on politics, when blacks had virtually no political clout, you saw racial gaps closing in income and educations attainment and lifting ourselves out of poverty and so forth. After the 1960s, after the switch in—he shift in the strategy to gaining political clout, a lot of those trends stalled, slowed, even retrogressed. And I think we need to get back to building that human capital, which is what blacks were more focused on before the attention turned to pursuing politics.

GIGOT: But the focus—ou are not saying that Jim Crow did not have to be destroyed. And that was a focus on political power?

RILEY: No. It was.

GIGOT: OK. And that had to happen.

RILEY: What I'm saying is that political power is neither necessary, nor sufficient for a group to rise.

And, by the way, this strategy has worked on its own terms. The number of black elected officials in this country grew from something like 1500, or less than 1500 in 1970, to more than 10,000 by 2010. Including a black president. But you look at how the black poor have fared in the wake of all this gaining of political power and it's not well. And we should have learned this lesson from what was happening in cities where blacks had been run, your Detroits, your Clevelands, your Philadelphia. You look at Coleman Young's detroit, Marion Barry's Washington, D.C., the black poor did not do well during those periods.

GIGOT: So was the break from a policy and intellectual point of view, in the 1960's, you had the great success of the civil rights movement. You had the smashing of Jim Crow. You had the Voting Rights Act. You had the Civil Rights Act. And the empowerment of millions, tens of millions of black Americans because of that. But then the focus shifted away from things where it should have shifted. The focus then become economic empowerment, economic growth, and things like education opportunities.

RILEY: Yes. Yes. And that's what was happening before, and that's what was working before in closing these racial gaps. When that strategy was abandoned, or when the emphasis shifted, that is when - again, we talk a lot about the legacy of slavery and Jim Crow, Paul. We don't talk a lot about the legacy of the welfare state.

GIGOT: That's where the focus shifted. Suddenly, the political power, they all said, oh, we are going to give, provide these benefits to you.

RILEY: Yes.

GIGOT: You are saying that's been destructive?

RILEY: It's been extremely destructive. And can you look at case studies in places like Atlanta where, in the 1970s and '80s, black mayors, like Maynard Jackson and Andrew Young, came in and they gave black city contractors special permissions and catered to affirmative action policies and set-asides for minority contractors and so forth. The black poor lost ground in this period. In this age of more black political empowerment, the black poor have lost ground economically, both in absolute terms and relative to the white poor. So the strategy is not working. We ought to revisit it.

GIGOT: All right. Jason Riley, thanks for being here.

We have to take one more break. When we come back, "Hits & Misses" of the week.

GIGOT: Time now for our "Hits & Misses" of the week.

Joe start us off.

RAGO: Paul, a miss this week to one of America's worst-governed states, Illinois. How bad is the tax-and-spend crisis? The state has $14.6 billion in unpaid bills. This is to hospitals, dentists, airports, universities. Governor Bruce Rauner and the Democratic legislator are locked in a battle over unfunded pension liabilities. But, boy, what a mess.

GIGOT: All right, Joe, thanks.

James?

TARANTO: This is a miss to the European Court of Human Rights , which this week order 10-month-old Charlie Gard to be taken off life support. Charlie was terminally ill, but this was not a question of resources. His parents had raised more than a million pounds, British pounds, to pay for experimental treatment in America. The court not only said that he couldn't go but they said his parents couldn't even take him home to die. The court said that's a decision for the government to make, not the parents.

GIGOT: Awful.

Bill?

MCGURN: Big hit for the Czech parliament. You know that, in Europe, gun control is an article of faith, never mind that it didn't stop these bloody attacks in Paris. The Czech parliament, the lower House, has passed a provision altering the constitution to allow for gun ownership. So they are going up against this. And it looks like it will pass their upper House. Good message to the terrorists: You attack someone in a Czech—n Prague.

GIGOT: Czech Republic, in Prague.

MCGURN:—nd someone might shoot back.

GIGOT: All right. Thank you all.

And remember, if you have your own hit or miss, be sure to tweet it to us, @JERonFNC.

That's it for this week's show. Thanks to my panel. Thanks to all of you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. We hope to see you right here next week.

Document WSJO000020170703ed73003e9



World
With  ISIS  on the Run, an Unexpected Leader Emerges in Iraq; Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, who generated few expectations, stitched together a military alliance and damped sectarianism

By Ben Kesling 
2,237 words
3 July 2017
01:16
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

An earlier version of this article incorrectly referred to Secretary of State Rex Tillerson as Defense Secretary. (July 2, 2017)

MOSUL, Iraq—hree years ago, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi proclaimed the existence of an Islamic State caliphate and proceeded to sweep his forces through northern Iraq and toward Baghdad, threatening the viability of the fragile country.

Today, the leader declaring an end to the caliphate  is someone few would have imagined  in the position, Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi. A man seen as the favorite of none but acceptable to all, the 65-year-old former electrical engineer has managed to turn that tepid sentiment into a defining strength.

Over nearly three years in office, Mr. Abadi has narrowed gaps between Iraq's warring Shiite and Sunni politicians . He balanced competing interests among geopolitical rivals Iran and the U.S., and spearheaded an overhaul of Iraqi security forces, who had fled advancing Islamic State fighters. Iraq is close to retaking Mosul , Islamic State's psychologically important stronghold.

"Abadi has magnificently shifted between leading and balancing," said Jon Alterman , director of the Middle East program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. "If he led too much then there'd be too many alienated people, and if he balanced too much there would be no forward progress."

Today, Iraq's security forces are on the verge of defeating Islamic State, the key requirement if the nation wants to enjoy a stable and cohesive future, despite daunting challenges that remain. Sectarian anger still simmers , and the country's economy and infrastructure have been devastated by years of fighting.

"Abadi is riding high," said one U.S. official in Washington. "But the government needs to show that it can act to make people's lives better, and probably the window for that is pretty limited. If it doesn't, all that goodwill Abadi built up will diminish."

There wasn't always such a sense of possibility in Iraq. Before Islamic State swept to power in 2014, the country was at its most-fractious since the fall of Saddam Hussein. Mr. Abadi's predecessor, Nouri al-Maliki, was a polarizing figure, accused of fueling sectarian conflict and packing ministries with loyalists.

Transparency International ranked the country near the bottom at 171 of 177 countries world-wide for corruption, with such pervasive problems that the country has only moved up a few positions after years of attempted overhauls. Mr. Maliki didn't respond to a request for comment, but Sunday released a public statement praising the military and militias.

When the festering Syrian civil war next door  bled across the border, Iraq's military crumbled. In June of 2014, militants exploited Iraq's problems to blitz into Mosul—rabbing nearby land, stores of weapons and oil fields. In Islamic State's advance, millions of civilians came to live under the Sunni extremist group's rule.

Some Sunnis initially welcomed the militants as an alternative to the predominantly Shiite government of Mr. Maliki. The implementation of Shariah law followed, where people could be jailed for smoking or executed for unauthorized use of a cellphone.

Amid the turmoil, the conciliatory Mr. Abadi was tapped to become prime minister, an antidote to Mr. Maliki's divisive rule. He faced growing alarm among Iraq's allies.

Iran, the world's biggest Shiite-majority country, couldn't countenance its neighbor falling to a Sunni extremist group. In 2014 Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the pre-eminent Shiite cleric in Iraq, called on fellow countrymen to rise up to help protect the country; Shiite militias formed that Mr. Abadi has both empowered and theoretically kept under central government control. Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps's elite Quds Force decided to fund and train many of them.

Ayatollah Sistani, who typically makes public statements via a representative at Friday prayers, didn't respond to a request for comment.

For Iran, forging such a partnership offered a way to cultivate a new proxy in Iraq and also to nurture others. Iran could revive overland supply routes through Iraq and its other ally, Syria, to Lebanon, where the Shiite political and militant group Hezbollah is based.

For Mr. Abadi, the relationship provided a backstop to a buckling Iraqi military. It also offered a skilled battlefield partner in Qasem Soleimani, the commander of the Revolutionary Guards. Iran's heavy involvement in Iraq also exposed Mr. Abadi to accusations that he was turning his country into an Iranian pawn.

An official in the office of Iran's United Nations representative didn't return a request for comment on Iran's relationship with Mr. Abadi.

U.S. State Department officials mostly sidestep the thorny issue of Iran's involvement in Iraq's war against Islamic State, saying Baghdad was ultimately in charge of the powerful Shiite militias. As part of this balancing act, Mr. Abadi courted the U.S. military for assistance, too, just years after the Americans pulled troops out of the country.

In 2014, the U.S. military started a gradual increase of troops with the launch of Operation Inherent Resolve. By the end of Barack Obama's presidency, more than 5,000 Americans were deployed to Iraq with hundreds close to the front lines of combat. Support has increased under President Donald Trump .

Iraq has benefited from a more than billion-dollar investment by the U.S. to train and equip conventional army troops and special operations forces, and fund U.S. troops in the country. Mr. Abadi also fired generals from the Maliki era and demanded that top officers eschew sectarianism. Those steps brought increased assistance from the U.S., including advanced weapons and air support.

Comparing the current force to that of just a decade ago, when U.S. forces were still leading many operations, Lt. Col. James Downing, a U.S. Army adviser who is near the front lines in Mosul, said, "they are infinitely more capable."

As the war with Islamic State heated up, Iraq became a tinderbox of crisscrossing rivalries and sectarian tensions. Christian and Sunni minorities in Iraq grew wary of Iran's growing influence, with those groups forming some of their own militias.

Some Iran-friendly Shiite forces, meanwhile, became openly hostile to U.S. troops. In late 2015, multiple militias pledged to fight U.S. troops if they deployed to Iraq and established bases in the country, harking back to their efforts against Americans during the Iraq war.

Mr. Abadi sought to keep everyone on the same side, largely by lauding the benefits of a unified Iraq, adding Kurdish and Sunni elements to his cabinet and reaching out to Sunni leaders for dialogue.

From the beginning of his tenure, the Iraqi prime minister reached out to Sunni Arab countries in the region while maintaining his ties with Iran. In 2015, the Saudi government reopened its embassy in Baghdad, which had been shuttered decades before in response to Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait.

Inside Iraq, Mr. Abadi begin to win over the country's minority Sunnis.

"This government led by Abadi has not met desired levels of ambitions, but if you compare it with the previous government, you will find a big difference," said Ahmed al-Masari, head of the Sunni political bloc in federal parliament. "Now there are reforms and progress, while during the previous government several provinces fell to terrorism."

Renad Mansour, a fellow at Chatham House , a London-based internationally focused think tank, said Sunni leaders came to realize a flexible Shiite leader may be their least bad option, especially if they hoped to exercise some power as a minority group in a democratic Iraq. "The Sunnis are past their denial of reality," he said. "They realize that they're going to be a minority."

Mr. Abadi didn't neglect the country's Shiite majority either. By 2015, Ayatollah Sistani, arguably the most revered figure in the country, voiced strong support for Mr. Abadi and worked to ensure the militias remained by law ultimately under Iraqi government control. Mr. Abadi in turn has praised the cleric, even this week saying his call to form militias was a crucial move to save the country from Islamic State dominance.

In marshaling foreign and domestic support, Mr. Abadi's government began racking up wins. In mid-2015 Iraqi forces took back Tikrit from Islamic State, their first major territorial victory. In November 2015, Kurdish Peshmerga forces pushed into the northern town of Sinjar, and the Iraqi military soon declared the Anbar hub of Ramadi free from militant control. The city of Fallujah fell months later.

In Mosul, where an offensive began last fall, Islamic State didn't retreat but dug in deeper. Even as Iraqi forces surrounded the city and advanced, the militants used hundreds of thousands of civilians as human shields while stockpiling munitions and setting up snipers' nests in the warrens of the old city.

Today, Iraqi forces are fighting scattered pockets of Islamic State fighters.

In east Mosul, shops selling mobile phones or fashionable jeans have reopened next to restaurants slicing up kebabs. Patrons smoked openly, even during the holy month of Ramadan— display unthinkable under Islamic State control.

Still, seeds of new conflicts are just below the surface.

Iraqi soldiers are accused of beating and summarily executing unarmed men and boys fleeing fighting in the heart of Mosul. The most recent allegations come from a Human Rights Watch report released Friday. Because the military is seen as a Shiite institution and Mosul is predominantly Sunni, such abuses, real or even rumored, threaten to fan sectarian tensions.

The Iraqi government will investigate any credible cases of abuse, according to Saad al-Hadithi, a spokesman for Mr. Abadi, but he said those allegations must be based on evidence and not hearsay. Mr. Abadi has said he wouldn't tolerate any human-rights abuses by troops.

In Anbar Province, tribal officials have exiled families of Islamic State members. In the city of Mosul, the city council recently passed a resolution declaring the same. Mr. Abadi has signaled he will use his federal authority to prevent the local government from taking such actions.

Mosul mobile-phone salesman Forat Latif said the environment is ripe for another antigovernment group to lure Sunnis into more fighting.

"We will go back to the same environment that created Daesh," he said. "It's the same cloud that brought all this rain."

Iraqi officials recently released a 10-year $100 billion reconstruction plan. The government doesn't have the money, and the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund haven't come forward with funds. Last year, the IMF provided a $5.3 billion dollar emergency loan to help stabilize the country— sizable contribution at the time but a fraction of what is needed now. Large sections of major cities like Ramadi and Mosul have been destroyed, with buildings, bridges and water mains turned to rubble.

During his tenure, Prime Minister Abadi has overseen an increase in oil production, which helped boost the country's GDP last year by 11%, according to the IMF . Yet low oil prices have complicated Iraq's efforts to pay government workers, who have sporadically taken to the streets to protest, and the non-oil sector of the economy is still reeling.

One of the biggest challenges for Mr. Abadi is the pressure from different Iraqi minorities for more autonomy. The Kurdish north, led by President Masoud Barzani, has been angling for independence for years, and last month announced it will hold a referendum on the issue in September.

Federal elections are scheduled for April, and Mr. Abadi may face rivals for his position. He has managed to remain on good terms with both Iran and the U.S.—ith U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson praising the prime minister publicly in March.

But as the relationship between the U.S. and Iran deteriorates, there is a risk that Iran will back a challenger to the prime minister more clearly in Tehran's camp. Mr. Maliki has remained a constant presence in the political realm.

Mr. Abadi may face his biggest test when Iraq and its foreign allies no longer share a common foe.

On Thursday, as he declared the end of the caliphate, Mr. Abadi stayed focused on defeating Islamic State. "We will continue to fight Daesh until every last one of them is killed or brought to justice."

On the same day, though, brownouts in Baghdad left millions without power, showing the government's limited capacity to provide public services to its people. Four improvised bombs, meanwhile, detonated in different areas of Baghdad, killing a handful of people. Such attacks are a reminder that the war against Islamic State is moving beyond the battlefield and into the daily lives of Iraqis, something they had hoped a prime minister would prevent.

Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad, Asa Fitch and Ali A. Nabhan in Erbil, Iraq, and Dion Nissenbaum in Washington contributed to this article.

Related

* Iraq's Dilemma: Who Will Lead the Next Big Fight Against \b ISIS\b0 ?  (June 30)

* Islamic State Is Near Defeat in Iraq, Prime Minister Says  (June 29)

* Torn by War on \b ISIS\b0 , Mosul Risks Lasting Divisions  (June 9)

* Iraqi Forces Close In on Militants in Mosul  (June 6)

* Splits Within Iraq's Three Communities Reshape Its Politics  (April 13)

Document WSJO000020170702ed72003e9



World
U.S., Philippines Conduct Naval Patrol in Southeast Asian Waters; Joint maritime operation came amid rising fears over militant extremism and piracy in the region

By Ben Otto 
459 words
1 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

The Philippine island of Mindanao has a Muslim minority population. An earlier version of this article incorrectly referred to Mindanao's population as predominantly Muslim. (July 4, 2017)

MANILA—he U.S. and the Philippine navies conducted a joint maritime patrol off the southern Philippines, as a battle with Islamic State-aligned militants raised fears that the conflict could spread to other parts of the region.

The U.S. Embassy in Manila said the patrol in the Sulu Sea, which it said came at the invitation of the Philippine government, aimed to combat piracy and other crime in the region.

The Sulu Sea is a largely lawless expanse of water between the southern Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia where piracy and kidnappings are common. The three nations last month started up joint patrols of the waters after the outbreak of fighting between Philippine troops and Islamic State-aligned militants on the island of Mindanao in the southern Philippines. The island is under martial law.

More than 400 people have been killed and 400,000 displaced in more than a month of fighting in the city of Marawi.

The Philippines says it is close to subduing around 100 militants holding hostages in the city, but authorities fear that foreign terrorists could join the fight via the porous southern border along the Sulu Sea.

The U.S. is a longtime ally of the Philippines, but signs of a pivot from the U.S. and toward China by President Rodrigo Duterte after he took office a year ago have raised questions about the state of the U.S.-Philippine alliance. Before Mr. Duterte came to power, the U.S. wound down a 13-year task force aimed at countering Muslim extremism in the region.

The U.S. embassy said in a statement that the patrol "further demonstrates U.S. commitment to the security of the Philippines and enduring U.S. interest in promoting stability and prosperity in the Indo-Asia-Pacific region.‎

"Our at-sea operations with the Philippine Navy demonstrate our commitment to the alliance and deter piracy and illegal activities," U.S. Rear Adm. Don Gabrielson said in the statement.

The activities Saturday included coordinating communication and movement between a Philippine frigate and a U.S. combat ship, ‎s well as discussion of boarding and searching vessels, the embassy said.

Write to Ben Otto at ben.otto@wsj.com

Read More

* Philippines' Combative Duterte Gets Opponent He Didn't Want: Islamic State (June 29)

* Jihadists Are Seeking Beachheads in Asia, U.S. Admiral Warns (June 28)

* Islamic State-Linked Militants Storm New Village in Philippines  (June 21)

* Philippines Struggles to Suppress \b ISIS\b0 -Linked Rebels as Foreign Fighters Found (June 1)

* Philippines Declares Martial Law on Southern Island (May 23)

Document WSJO000020170701ed71001gt



After Seizing Mosque, Iraqis Declare  ISIS  Close to Defeat

By Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad, Ben Kesling in Paris and Dion Nissenbaum in Washington 
900 words
30 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- Iraqi and U.S. officials said Islamic State is on the cusp of defeat in Mosul and close to being driven out of the country, after the military seized a mosque in the city where the extremist group's leader first proclaimed a caliphate.

"We are seeing the end of the fake Daesh state," Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi said on Twitter , using another name for Islamic State. "The liberation of Mosul proves that. We will not relent," he added.

Thursday's recapture of the ruined Nouri mosque came a week after Islamic State blew it up as Iraqi forces closed in, reducing to rubble the 12th-century building and its 150-foot minaret. The mosque gained fame when Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi spoke there three years ago and declared himself the head of a caliphate, or religious empire.

Col. Ryan Dillon, the Baghdad-based spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State in Iraq and Syria , said that Iraqi forces on Thursday cut a wedge in the middle of the area held by Islamic State, seizing the Nouri mosque and cornering the few hundred remaining fighters in half of Mosul's Old City on one side, and an area around a hospital that has been a stronghold for the group on the other side.

Col. Dillon predicted that the fighting would be over in a matter of days and that it would then take time to fully clear the areas the Islamic State holdouts.

"What comes next, where to defeat ISIS, is a decision that will be made in Iraq," he said.

Military officials have warned of tough fighting ahead. In recent days, Iraqi troops have faced counterattacks in the city, with Islamic State penetrating defensive lines and staging deadly attacks even in Iraqi-controlled areas. The warren of narrow streets in the Old City, where Islamic State fighters are holed up, has slowed the offensive.

But the progress in beating back Islamic State has been steady, both in Mosul and in the campaign to retake Raqqa, the group's de facto capital. Col. Dillon said the persistent military pressure in the two countries means Islamic State leadership has no effective capital left.

"There is no hub anymore," he said.

Islamic State leaders have abandoned fighters on the battlefield, morale is plummeting and inexperienced fighters are making rookie mistakes, he added.

"ISIS cannot stop the progress that Iraqis and Syrians have mounted in the last two years," he said. "They are on the run, and we will not allow them to regroup and catch their breath."

Even after Mosul is retaken, Islamic State won't be defeated in Iraq. The group remains in control of a number of other smaller Iraqi towns and a significant swath of territory in Syria, including eastern Deir Ezzour province and Raqqa. And while it has lost much of the territory it captured over the past few years, it has proven it is still capable of mounting deadly terrorist attacks in the West as well as in the heavily fortified Iraqi capital of Baghdad, where bombers get through daily.

To the northwest of Mosul lies militant-held Tal Afar, likely the next objective for the Iraqi military. However the battle for that town near the Syrian border is fraught before it has even begun, with Iran-backed Shiite militias insisting they lead the fight and the U.S. saying it won't work with those militias.

If the Shiite militias do take the lead, it will likely inflame sectarian tensions with Sunnis across the country.

The town of Hawija, south of Mosul, has also long been a Sunni extremist stronghold and poses a constant threat to the neighboring city of Kirkuk. In October, militants from Hawija launched a complex attack on downtown Kirkuk that took days to quell and left dozens dead.

If and when Islamic State is defeated, the Iraqi government will face enormous challenges in resettling hundreds of thousands of people displaced from Mosul and reconstructing the enormous ruin of three years of war. The government must also take steps to ameliorate the strife that has only deepened between the country's three main groups -- Shiite Arabs, Sunni Arabs and Kurds.

The government's goal in rebuilding Mosul and restoring its pre-Islamic State population of about is seen as critical to its effort to reunite the country. Islamic State launched a drive in 2014 that ended up with the militants in control of about one-third of Iraq, and with Mosul their de facto capital in the country.

Since the start of Iraq's Mosul campaign in October, more than 875,00 residents have fled the city, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .

Some return only to retrieve bodies from homes collapsed in the fighting. Those who remained line up for hours for clean water from tanker trucks.

Mosul policeman Azad Thiyab Jasim said recently that he has little hope that the city will remain peaceful after Islamic State is driven out.

He said the criminal justice system makes it far too easy for suspected sympathizers or even fighters to go free. That means vigilantism rules.

"Killing members of Daesh is much better than detaining them," he said.

Document J000000020170630ed6u0002h



America Needs a Post- ISIS  Strategy

By John Bolton 
1,038 words
30 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A13
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

The headlines out of Syria are eye-catching: There are signs the Assad government may be planning another chemical attack. American pilots have struck forces threatening U.S. allies and shot down a Syrian plane and Iranian-made drones. The probability of direct military confrontation between the U.S. and Russia has risen. Yet the coverage of these incidents and the tactical responses that have been suggested obscure the broader story: The slow-moving campaign against Islamic State is finally nearing its conclusion -- yet major, long-range strategic issues remain unresolved.

The real issue isn't tactical. It is instead the lack of American strategic thinking about the Middle East after Islamic State. Its defeat will leave a regional political vacuum that must be filled somehow.

Instead of reflexively repeating President Obama's errors, the Trump administration should undertake an "agonizing reappraisal," in the style of John Foster Dulles, to avoid squandering the victory on the ground.

First, the U.S. ought to abandon or substantially reduce its military support for Iraq's current government. Despite retaining a tripartite veneer of Kurds, Sunni Arabs and Shiite Arabs, the capital is dominated by Shiites loyal to Iran.

Today Iraq resembles Eastern Europe in the late 1940s, as the Soviet anaconda tightened its hold. Extending Baghdad's political and military control into areas retaken from Islamic State simply advances Tehran's power. This cannot be in America's interest.

Iraq's Kurds have de facto independence and are on the verge of declaring it de jure. They fight Islamic State to facilitate the creation of a greater Kurdistan. Nonetheless, the Kurds, especially in Syria and Turkey, are hardly monolithic.

Not all see the U.S. favorably. In Syria, Kurdish forces fighting Islamic State are linked to the Marxist PKK in Turkey. They pose a real threat to Turkey's territorial integrity, even if it may seem less troubling now that President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's plans have turned so profoundly contrary to the secular, Western-oriented vision of Kemal Ataturk.

Second, the U.S. should press Egypt, Jordan and the Gulf monarchies for more troops and material assistance in fighting Islamic State. America has carried too much of the burden for too long in trying to forge Syria's opposition into an effective force.

Yet even today the opposition could charitably be called "diverse." It includes undeniably terrorist elements that are often hard to distinguish from the "moderates" the U.S. supports. Getting fresh contributions from Arab allies would rebalance the opposition, which is especially critical if the U.S. turns away, as it should, from reliance on the Iraqi forces dominated by Tehran.

Third, the Trump administration must take a clear-eyed view of Russia's intervention. The Syrian mixing bowl is where confrontation between American and Russian forces looms.

Why is Russia active in this conflict? Because it is aiding its allies: Syria's President Bashar Assad and Iran's ayatollahs.

Undeniably, Russia is on the wrong side. But Mr. Obama, blind to reality, believed Washington and Moscow shared a common interest in easing the Assad regime out of power.

The Trump administration's new thinking should be oriented toward a clear objective: pushing back these Iranian and Russian gains.

Start with Iran. Tehran is trying to cement an arc of control from its own territory, through Baghdad-controlled Iraq and Mr. Assad's Syria, to Hezbollah-dominated Lebanon. This would set the stage for the region's next potential conflict: Iran's Shiite coalition versus a Saudi-led Sunni alliance.

The U.S.-led coalition, enhanced as suggested above, needs to thwart Iran's ambitions as Islamic State falls. Securing increased forces and financial backing from the regional Arab governments is essential. Their stakes are as high as ours -- despite the contretemps between Qatar and Saudi Arabia (and others) -- but their participation has lagged. The U.S. has mistakenly filled the gap with Iraqi government forces and Shiite militias.

Washington is kidding itself to think Sunnis will meekly accept rule by Iraq's Shiite-dominated government or Syria's Alawite regime. Simply restoring today's governments in Baghdad and Damascus to their post-World War I boundaries would guarantee renewed support for terrorism and future conflict.

I have previously suggested creating a new, secular, demographically Sunni state from territory in western Iraq and eastern Syria. There may well be other solutions, but pining for borders demarcated by Europeans nearly a century ago isn't one of them.

At the same time, the U.S. must begin rolling back Russia's renewed presence and influence in the Middle East. Russia has a new air base at Latakia, Syria; it's involved in combat operations; and issues diktats about where American warplanes in the region may fly. For all the allegations about Donald Trump and Russia, the president truly in thrall to Moscow seems to have been Mr. Obama.

Russia's interference, particularly its axis with Mr. Assad and Tehran's mullahs, critically threatens the interests of the U.S., Israel and our Arab friends. Mr. Assad almost certainly would have fallen by now without Russia's (and Iran's) assistance.

Further, Moscow's support for Tehran shatters any claim of its truly being a partner in fighting radical Islamic terrorism, which got its modern start in Iran's 1979 revolution. Both Iran and the Assad regime remain terror-sponsoring states, only now they are committing their violence under Russia's protective umbrella. There is no reason for the U.S. to pursue a strategy that enhances Russia's influence or that of its surrogates.

As incidents in Syria and Iraq increasingly put American forces at risk, Washington shouldn't get lost in deconfliction negotiations or modest changes in rules of engagement. Instead, the Trump administration should recraft the U.S.-led coalition to ensure that America's interests, rather than Russia's or Iran's, predominate once Islamic State is defeated.

---

Mr. Bolton is a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute and author of "Surrender Is Not an Option: Defending America at the United Nations and Abroad" (Simon & Schuster, 2007).

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170630ed6u0001c



World
After Defeating  ISIS  Together, Iraqi Kurds Seek Divorce From Baghdad; Kurdish referendum plan raises specter of aftershocks across Iraq

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
1,089 words
29 June 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The one thing that isn't in doubt in Iraqi Kurdistan's planned independence referendum is the result. It's virtually certain that an overwhelming majority will back the creation of the world's newest country.

The real question is what practical steps toward the breakup of Iraq will be taken, and how soon after the vote, which is scheduled for Sept. 25.

Will Kurdistan's bickering politicians finally put their differences aside? And will they, Iraq's federal authorities, and the region's meddling neighbors be able to prevent events spinning out of control in the referendum's inevitably contentious aftermath?

None of these neighbors—ran, Syria and Turkey—ant the Kurdish independence to succeed in Iraq, lest it inspires restless Kurdish minorities within their own borders. And, while some officials in President Donald Trump's administration privately cheer the Kurdish independence cause, maintaining the unity of Iraq remains the official policy of the U.S. and its Western allies.

The country's Western partners are concerned that the referendum—ven if it doesn't lead to independence anytime soon—ill change the political climate in the rest of the country. With Iraq's federal elections looming next year, that could bring to power radical Shiite forces hostile to the more inclusive approach of Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi.

It all adds up to a greater risk to regional stability just as Islamic State is finally being defeated in Iraq and Syria.

"We think the referendum is a bad idea, and the timing is a bad idea, first of all because the Kurds are not prepared for this," said a senior U.S. official. "If the Kurds go ahead with the referendum this year, it will strengthen the more polarizing and more sectarian figures [in Baghdad], and disadvantage those who are more moderate and who would reach across sectarian lines and form alliances."

Kurdistan officials retort that now is precisely the right time to tackle the historic Kurdish desire to form a separate nation, after Mr. Abadi's government and the Kurdish leadership established close cooperation fighting side-by-side to oust Islamic State from Mosul. Kurdistan plans detailed negotiations with Baghdad on how and when to implement the breakup, the officials said.

"To answer the question of why now: We can achieve through this positive relationship a mutual understanding because, after Abadi, who knows who will be responsible in Baghdad? We want to avoid future confrontation and future bloodshed by ending this unhealthy interdependence in relations with Baghdad," said Hemin Hawrami, senior assistant to Kurdistan President Masoud Barzani, who called the referendum, and head of political affairs at the Kurdistan presidency.

"The referendum is for independence, but it doesn't mean that on the 26th of September we are going to declare independence. It is the start of a long process," Mr. Hawrami added.

While Iraq's federal government views the vote as illegal because no legislation to conduct it exists, Baghdad is unlikely to do anything to oppose it. "Most Iraqis in federal areas right now are not supportive of the referendum, but to be frank they are not in a position to spend too much time worrying about it because there are so many other problems in the country," said Sajad Jiyad, managing director of the Al Bayan Center, a Baghdad think-tank.

Kurdish-populated areas of northern Iraq have enjoyed broad self-rule since 1991, an arrangement expanded and enshrined in the 2005 Iraqi constitution. Kurdistan, a region roughly the size of Ireland that is home to some 5.2 million people, already has its own security forces and immigration controls. Federal troops and police aren't allowed on its soil without special permission.

Complicating any move toward a breakup with Iraq is the issue of disputed territories—reas outside the recognized boundaries of the Kurdistan Regional Government, such as the city of Kirkuk and nearby oil fields, that are controlled by Kurdish forces and contain large Kurdish populations.

Kurdish Peshmerga troops took over many of these areas over the last three years, in the course of the war against Islamic State. Baghdad seeks to regain control of these contested territories and has condemned Kurdish plans to hold the referendum there, let alone to permanently annex them.

"If the referendum is held and a breakup is achieved, it will create more conflicts over issues such as disputed territories," warned Ammar Tuma, head of the Shiite Fadhila bloc in the Iraqi parliament. "There will be no benefit for the Kurds, and no benefit for the Iraqis."

The only other recent example of a non-Arab area seceding from an Arab-majority country to form a separate nation isn't all that encouraging. South Sudan became independent following a referendum in 2011 and two years later descended into a civil war that has displaced millions.

Iraqi Kurds had their own civil war in the 1990s. The Kurdistan region remains divided between western areas controlled by the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Mr. Barzani and eastern areas under the sway of the rival Patriotic Union of Kurdistan.

The self-ruled region's institutions have been paralyzed by a political crisis that erupted in 2015, after Mr. Barzani's mandate expired. Kurdistan's parliament, which had planned a session to elect a successor, has been unable to meet for nearly two years because KDP forces prevent the entry of its speaker to the region's capital. Kurdistan's presidential and parliamentary elections are slated for November, just weeks after the planned referendum.

Mr. Barzani has called the long-promised independence vote just as protests against the political deadlock and corruption spread throughout Kurdistan. By doing so, he deftly exploited the Kurdish nationalist sentiment to stave off domestic unrest, at least for now.

"The feeling of distrust was reaching a peak, and people were feeling that the Kurdish leadership was no longer entitled to lead the Kurdish national cause," said Maria Fantappie, a Kurdish-affairs specialist at the International Crisis Group. "But now the national feeling is prevailing, so far. The Kurdistan leaders have played this trick well."

Write to Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com

Related reading

* Battle for Mosul Resets Ties Between Kurds and Baghdad

* Trump Set to Arm Kurds in \b ISIS\b0  Fight, Angering Turkey

* Who Are the Kurds?

* Kurds Carve Out a Home in Syria, Testing U.S. Ties With Turkey

Document WSJO000020170629ed6t001s0



World
Canada Pledges to Remain in  ISIS  Fight Until 2019; Canadian Defense Minister Harjit Sajjan announces two-year extension of 'advise and assist' mission

By Paul Vieira 
491 words
29 June 2017
19:55
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

OTTAWA—anada said Thursday its military would remain in the Middle East to help in the U.S.-led fight Islamic State until the spring of 2019, as it looks to fulfill its pledge to take on a more prominent role in the global fight against terrorism.

Canada's Defense Minister Harjit Sajjan said troops would remain in an "advise and assist" mission until March 31, 2019. There are roughly 850 troops in the Middle East as part of Canadian mission.

Canada's mission is designed to focus on training and assisting Iraqi security forces, and helping regional military authorities to expand their capacity.

The nearly two-year extension comes on the heels of a seminal shift this month in Canadian defense and foreign policy, partly in response to the Trump administration's growing isolationism in global affairs. The renewed commitment was also made at a time when the Iraqi military says it is making significant gains against ISIS in the city of Mosul.

Canada pledged to ramp up defense spending over the next decade by more than 70%, and vowed to take on a greater role in battling global terrorism by deploying troops to the most dangerous parts of the world.

"Our new defence policy has made it very clear that Canada is ready and willing to do its part for the global community. This includes confronting security issues that threaten our shores and those of our allies and partners," Mr. Sajjan, a former lieutenant-colonel in the Canadian forces, said in a statement.

Canada first deployed forces to Iraq in mid-2014 to work alongside allies in the anti-ISIS mission and now has troops in Iraq and Syria. The Liberal government came to power in the fall of 2015 on a promise to end Canada's direct combat role in the fight against Islamic State, and last year withdrew six Canadian fighter jets used in bombings.

Mr. Trudeau has come under fire from some political opponents, who charge he has allowed Canadian troops to engage in a combat role in Iraq despite Liberal promises of a noncombat deployment. Criticism escalated after it was revealed last week that a sniper from the Canadian special forces unit shot and killed an ISIS fighter in Iraq.

Mr. Trudeau said this week Canada is expected at times to defend its partners in the anti-ISIS mission, adding the sharpshooter should be "celebrated" because it reflects a level of excellence in Canadian forces' training and expertise.

Write to Paul Vieira at paul.vieira@wsj.com

Related

* Canada to Shift Away From Combat Role in Fight Against Islamic State (Feb. 8, 2016)

* Canada PM Trudeau Reaffirms Withdrawal From Combat Role Against \b ISIS\b0  (Nov. 16, 2015)

* Iraqi Troops Press Into Mosul's Old City to Dislodge \b ISIS\b0  (June 18)

Document WSJO000020170629ed6t005pm



World News: U.S. Admiral Warns On Jihadists in Asia

By Rob Taylor 
388 words
29 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BRISBANE, Australia -- The onslaught by Islamic State-aligned militants in the southern Philippines should be a wake-up call to Asia that battle-hardened jihadists returning from the Middle East are seeking to open new fronts in the region, the commander of U.S. Pacific forces said.

Adm. Harry Harris, in a speech to the Australian Strategic Policy Institute on Wednesday, said Islamic State was a "nemesis to humanity" that threatened to spread as it loses ground in Syria and Iraq.

Philippine troops have been battling insurgents linked to Islamic State for a month in Marawi city on the southern island of Mindanao. The insurgents have been seeking to create a caliphate, and governments across Southeast Asia and Australia have been watching with concern as militants from Indonesia, Malaysia, Yemen and Saudi Arabia join the fight.

"Marawi is a wake-up call for every nation in the Indo-Asia Pacific," Adm. Harris said. "These terrorists are using combat tactics that we've seen in the Middle East to kill in the city of Marawi, in Mindanao, the first time ISIS-inspired forces have banded together to fight on this kind of scale."

Having traveled to Mindanao from Syria and Iraq, these militants are passing resources and Islamist ideology to homegrown radicals, Adm. Harris said, having used another name for the group. He called for closer cooperation among nations in the region, including those with large Muslim populations, to confront the threat.

"The Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia Bangladesh, New Zealand, Australia and the United States could be a natural partnership with this purpose in mind," he said. "We can counter violent extremists organizations like ISIS collaborating with regional allies and partners that may have elements in their countries sympathetic to ISIS's cause."

Adm. Harris, known for his hawkish views on Beijing's muscle-flexing in the South China Sea, urged China to end its militarization of disputed atolls, which in the past he has called a "great wall of sand." He said Beijing was using its military and economic power to erode international stability and rules.

Adm. Harris issued a fresh call for China to do more to rein in North Korea's nuclear-weapons and missile program.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170628ed6t00012



World News: U.S. Warns Syria Over Chemical Weapons --- American military prepares for possible strike if Assad regime launches attack

By Dion Nissenbaum and Thomas Grove 
623 words
28 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S. military stepped up preparations for a possible strike against the Syrian regime after Washington said it picked up signs that President Bashar al-Assad was preparing to use chemical weapons again.

The White House set the stage for a new showdown with Mr. Assad and his allies with an unusual warning late Monday that the Syrian regime would pay a "heavy price" if it launches another chemical-weapons attack on its own people.

The statement came after the U.S. learned Syria had armed a warplane with chemical weapons that could be used at any time, U.S. officials said Tuesday.

U.S. officials said they hoped the blunt public threat would deter Mr. Assad from using such weapons, but began devising military options if President Donald Trump decides to strike Syria again.

In April, Mr. Trump ordered a cruise-missile strike on a Syrian airfield after a chemical attack widely blamed on the Assad regime killed more than 80 people in Syria's Idlib province.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson raised the issue in a call with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov on Monday as the U.S. pressed Moscow to constrain its Syrian ally, according to a U.S. official.

On Tuesday, Nikki Haley, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, told a congressional hearing that the White House statement was meant to be a warning to Russia and Iran, Mr. Assad's two major allies in the six-year Syrian war.

Russia and Iran responded to the White House warning with their own criticisms of American involvement in the Middle East.

Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin spokesman, said Moscow considers "such threats to a lawful government unacceptable," according to Russian news agencies.

On Twitter, Iran's Foreign Minister Javad Zarif suggested that the U.S. threats would detract from the fight against Islamic State, also known as ISIS. "Another dangerous U.S. escalation in Syria on fake pretext will only serve ISIS, precisely when it's being wiped out by Iraqi & Syrian people," he tweeted.

In Syria, Mr. Assad visited a Russian air base on Tuesday, where he was filmed climbing into the cockpit of a Russian warplane. A Syrian government official denied that the regime has chemical weapons.

The U.S. warnings come amid a recent rise in battlefield confrontations between the Syrian regime and American forces battling Islamic State in Syria, and the confrontations threaten to widen into a more serious clash with the regime.

The new standoff was triggered by surveillance of the Shayrat airfield that the U.S. said was used in April to launch the earlier chemical-weapons attack. The strike Mr. Trump ordered in April targeted that airfield.

Images of dead and dying children as a result of that April attack spurred outrage at the time, and Mr. Trump cited the images in saying the attack had changed his view of the conflict and Mr. Assad.

For the first time since the April strike, U.S. officials said Tuesday they had new intelligence showing the Syrian regime had moved a warplane into a shelter associated with chemical weapons at the Shayrat airfield.

Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said the U.S. has seen "actions suggestive of intent to use chemical weapons."

The U.S. has been tracking developments at Shayrat for several days and indications that Syria is preparing to use chemical weapons have become "more compelling" in the last 24 hours, he said Tuesday morning.

---

Maria Abi-Habib and Asa Fitch contributed to this article.



License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170628ed6s0001y



World
U.S. Warns Syria Over Chemical Weapons; Pentagon prepares for possible strike if Assad launches attack

By Dion Nissenbaum and Thomas Grove 
997 words
28 June 2017
02:09
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S. military stepped up preparations on Tuesday for a possible strike against the Syrian regime after Washington said it picked up signs that President Bashar al-Assad was preparing to use chemical weapons again.

The White House set the stage for a new showdown with Mr. Assad and his allies with an unusual warning late Monday that the Syrian regime would pay a "heavy price" if it launches another chemical-weapons attack on its own people.

The statement came after the U.S. learned Syria had armed a warplane with chemical weapons that could be used at any time, U.S. officials said on Tuesday.

U.S. officials said they hoped the blunt public threat would deter Mr. Assad from using such weapons, but began devising military options if President Donald Trump decides to strike Syria again. In April, Mr. Trump ordered a cruise-missile strike on a Syrian airfield after a chemical attack widely blamed on the Assad regime killed more than 80 people in Syria's Idlib province.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson raised the issue in a call with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov on Monday as the U.S. pressed Moscow to constrain its Syrian ally, according to a U.S. official.

On Tuesday, Nikki Haley, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, told a congressional hearing that the White House statement was meant to be a warning to Russia and Iran, Mr. Assad's two major allies in the six-year-old Syrian war.

"I believe that the goal is at this point not just to send Assad a message, but to send Russia and Iran a message that if this happens again we are putting you on notice," Ms. Haley said.

Russia and Iran responded to the White House warning with their own criticisms of American involvement in the Middle East.

Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin spokesman, said Moscow considers "such threats to a lawful government unacceptable," according to Russian news agencies.

On Twitter, Iran's Foreign Minister Javad Zarif suggested that the U.S. threats would detract from the fight against Islamic State, also known as ISIS. "Another dangerous U.S. escalation in Syria on fake pretext will only serve ISIS, precisely when it's being wiped out by Iraqi & Syrian people," he tweeted.

In Syria, Mr. Assad visited a Russian air base on Tuesday, where he was filmed climbing into the cockpit of a Russian warplane. A Syrian government official denied that the regime has chemical weapons.

The U.S. warnings come amid a recent rise in battlefield confrontations between the Syrian regime and American forces battling Islamic State in Syria, and the confrontations threaten to widen into a more serious clash with the regime.

Over the past six weeks, U.S. forces have shot down a Syrian regime warplane, and two Iranian-made drones viewed as threats to American forces and Syrian fighters they are working with in the country. The U.S. also has carried out airstrikes on Syrian government forces and their Iranian-backed allies in southern Syria, drawing the U.S. military's firepower away from its focus on Islamic State.

The new standoff was triggered by surveillance of the Shayrat airfield that the U.S. said was used in April to launch the earlier chemical weapons attack. The strike Mr. Trump ordered in April targeted that airfield.

Images of dead and dying children as a result of that April attack spurred outrage at the time, and Mr. Trump cited the images in saying the attack had changed his view of the conflict and Mr. Assad.

For the first time since the April strike, U.S. officials said Tuesday they had new intelligence showing the Syrian regime had moved a warplane into a shelter associated with chemical weapons at the Shayrat airfield.

Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said the U.S. has seen "actions suggestive of intent to use chemical weapons." The U.S. has been tracking developments at Shayrat for several days and indications that Syria is preparing to use chemical weapons have become "more compelling" in the last 24 hours, he said Tuesday morning.

The U.S. cruise missile strike on Shayrat in April hit aircraft hangars, fuel depots, radar and ammunition bunkers. The U.S. said it destroyed about 20 planes in that attack, but the airfield was quickly back in operation.

The U.S. didn't target any suspected chemical weapons depots at the airfield in April because of fears that a strike could release the deadly weapons into the air. At the time, some outside analysts criticized the U.S. for not hitting the base harder.

Soon after the strike, Mr. Trump responded on Twitter to criticism that the U.S. didn't hit the runways more forcefully, writing, "The reason you don't generally hit runways is that they are easy and inexpensive to quickly fix (fill in and top)!"

Pentagon officials have said they have the ability to carry out a quick airstrike in the region if Mr. Trump orders another strike. But there were few indications on Tuesday that the U.S. was poised to launch a pre-emptive strike.

Mr. Trump is scheduled to travel next week to Europe to visit Poland and attend a meeting of the Group of 20 world powers in Hamburg, Germany, where he may also sit down separately with Russian President Vladimir Putin for the first time since taking office.

The Kremlin spokesman, Mr. Peskov, said Tuesday that a meeting on the sidelines of the Hamburg summit may take place but that full-fledged bilateral talks weren't yet planned, Interfax reported.

Felicia Schwartz, Maria Abi-Habib, Nour Alakraa and Asa Fitch contributed to this article.

Write to Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com and Thomas Grove at thomas.grove@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170627ed6r002xl



Iran Won in Lebanon; What About Iraq?

By Danielle Pletka 
883 words
27 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A15
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Beirut -- In the violent Middle East, Lebanon looks like a miracle. A mix of Christians and Sunni and Shiite Muslims who have fought a brutal civil war, and have weathered aggressive outside interference, Lebanon is still puttering along as a semifunctioning democracy. To encourage and strengthen the Lebanese Armed Forces, the U.S. has given more than $1 billion over the last decade.

But looks are deceiving. In Lebanon, despite America's help, Iran has won.

Step back a few decades and remember the pitched battles of the Lebanese civil war -- Sunni vs. Shiite vs. Christian. The kidnapping and killing of countless innocents; the murder of the CIA station chief in Beirut; and finally, the end of the civil war with the 1989 Taif Accords, a rare Arab-led initiative, which dictated terms that enabled weary Lebanese fighters to lay down their arms.

The many militias that had grown up as appendages of the Lebanese political process were disarmed, the army was successfully deconfessionalized, militias melted into the Lebanese Armed Forces, Shiites were reassigned to Sunni units, Christians to Shiite ones and so on. The fighting ground to a halt. Israelis, and eventually even Syrian occupying forces, withdrew.

Except for Hezbollah. This Shiite militia was created by Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps to be an Iranian proxy, nominally "resisting" Israel, but in fact resisting the normal governance of Lebanon by its people. After more than 30 years, Hezbollah is still in Lebanon, sacrificing lives, resisting democracy, dictating foreign policy and corrupting the true Lebanese Armed Forces. For the past six years, it has been fighting assiduously on behalf of Iran and the Assad regime in Syria.

On a recent visit, my first after a long lapse, I found a palpable change in tone: Lebanese officials once privately noted their hostility to Hezbollah and Iranian interference. No longer. Now Hezbollah is something to accommodate, part of the "fabric of Lebanese life," as one senior military official put it. Since the 2006 war with Israel, Hezbollah has rearmed dramatically, with an estimated 150,000 missiles, including short-range Katyusha-type rockets and thousands of medium-range missiles capable of striking Tel Aviv. Thousands of Lebanese have either volunteered or been forced to fight in Syria for Bashar al Assad.

Even the Lebanese Armed Forces, long considered a pillar of the state, is now cozy with Hezbollah, as the latter's leader, Hassan Nasrallah, affirmed in a recent speech. And contrary to the oft-expressed hopes of senior U.S. officials, not only has the army failed to limit Hezbollah's reach within Lebanon, but reports suggest it may also have shared weaponry. A recent Hezbollah military parade in Syria showed U.S.-sourced M113 armored personnel carriers of the kind supplied by Washington to Beirut. Senior Lebanese officials insist the APCs "could have come from anywhere."

Iran is pursuing a similar strategy in Iraq. As in Lebanon, irregular militias have been part of the political and military scene since Saddam Hussein ruled. But since the withdrawal of U.S. forces in 2011 and the rise of Islamic State, some militias have proved useful to the Iraqi government -- and to the U.S. -- in taking on ISIS, much as Hezbollah proved itself useful to Beirut in ousting Israel from southern Lebanon.

The Baghdad government has accommodated the so-called Hashd al Shaabi, or Popular Mobilization Forces; and Grand Ayatollah Ali Sistani, one of Shiite Islam's greatest eminences, has blessed their fight. The Iraqi legislature has approved the PMF's nominal incorporation into the Iraqi army, even as Iraqi government officials acknowledge that 30% of the PMF are under Iranian government control. Once the fight with ISIS ends, what will happen to these militias?

There's already a hint of how the future of the PMF will play out: Like Hezbollah, some units are fighting at Iran's behest in Syria on behalf of Mr. Assad. Iraqi leaders, as their Lebanese counterparts once did, are fretting about the future of Iran's proxies. The Iraqis rightly see the militias as instrumental in the counter-ISIS battle, and also rightly judge them a danger when that fight is done. Perhaps, with the help of Ayatollah Sistani, some of the PMF will be legitimately incorporated into the Iraqi army -- subsidized by U.S. taxpayers to the tune of $715 million in the last fiscal year alone -- and answerable in its chain of command. But Iraqi leaders know full well that some will not.

That is why more must be done soon to ensure that the Iraqi leadership understands, as the Lebanese government does not, that the continued existence of Iranian proxy forces within and working alongside its military is incompatible with long-term assistance from the United States.

Congress can predicate assistance and weapons transfers on clear assurances that Iran and its proxies are not indirect beneficiaries. If it does not, Iraq, like Lebanon before it and others to come, will become yet another pawn in Iran's Middle East game.

---

Ms. Pletka is a senior vice president at the American Enterprise Institute.

(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Iran to Regret Lebanon Win" -- WSJ June 30, 2017)

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170627ed6r0000b



World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,065 words
27 June 2017
13:08
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

A 'Bona Fide' Decision

The Supreme Court on Monday allowed President Trump's administration to implement part of his temporary ban on travelers from six Muslim-majority countries. The court said it would give full consideration to whether the president's actions were lawful when it hears the case in October. The Supreme Court's action is a significant reversal of fortune for Mr. Trump, who had been on the losing end of several lower-court decisions that blocked his March 6 executive order. The justices, in an unsigned 13-page opinion, narrowed the scope of the ban for now, ruling that the president couldn't enforce it against travelers "who have a credible claim of a bona fide relationship" with a person or organization in the U.S. The court allowed a similarly limited version of a ban on refugees to take effect. Monday was also a landmark day for religious-expression issues at the Supreme Court.

Bill of Health

The Senate Republican health-care overhaul would swell the ranks of the uninsured by about 22 million and cut the cumulative federal deficit by $321 billion over the next decade compared with the current Affordable Care Act, according to an estimate released Monday by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office. That assessment threw into doubt whether the bill would make it past an initial procedural hurdle. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell was engaged in last-minute negotiations with more than a half-dozen GOP lawmakers wavering in their support of the legislation. Sen. Susan Collins said she would vote against the bill, citing the CBO's report. The American Medical Association also declared its opposition. However, insurer Anthem said it believed the legislation would bring stability to the individual insurance market.

Mobile Networking

Sprint has entered into exclusive talks with Charter Communications and Comcast as the cable companies explore a deal that could bolster their plans to offer wireless service. Sprint Chairman Masayoshi Son and the cable providers have entered into a two-month, exclusive agreement for discussions through late July, putting merger talks between Sprint and T-Mobile on hold. One possible arrangement would have Charter and Comcast invest in improving Sprint's network in exchange for favorable terms to offer wireless service using the carrier's network. Such a deal could provide much better terms than the cable companies' existing network-resale agreement with Verizon. The arrangement could involve Charter and Comcast taking an equity stake in Sprint or jointly acquiring the company, though the latter scenario is thought to be much less likely.

Arrivederci, Tourists

Tourism is an important revenue source in Italy, but many residents would prefer that visitors—t least some of them—tay away. The number of tourists arriving in Italy topped 52 million in 2016, up nearly 30% since 2000. Each year, Venice sees 15 million day trippers pour into an area five times the size of New York's Central Park. The Cinque Terre, the tiny fishing villages on the Italian Riviera, drew 2.5 million visitors last year, 500 times the local population. Recent incidents, such as two tourists swimming nude in Rome's Trevi Fountain and another diving off the Rialto Bridge in Venice, have only strengthened officials' determination to find ways to keep the hordes at bay. However, efforts to limit incoming visitors are colliding with legal, business and practical challenges.

Today's Video

Big Brother

Once the stuff of science fiction, facial-scanning cameras are becoming a part of daily life in China, where they are used for marketing, surveillance and social control.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

When the Mailman Unwittingly Becomes a Drug Dealer

Democrats' Broad Challenge: Middle-Class Appeal

WORLD

Trump Administration Warns Assad Would Pay 'Heavy Price' for Another Chemical Attack

Trump, Indian Prime Minister Modi Move to Bridge Divisions

BUSINESS

Air-Bag Maker Takata Has Plenty of Work to Do After Bankruptcy Filing 

Amazon's Grocery Ambitions Spell Trouble for Big Food Brands

MARKETS

For Sale: Puerto Rico

Why Apple and J.P. Morgan Are Chasing Venmo

Number of the Day

$2.7 billion

The amount that the European Union's antitrust regulator fined Google for favoring its own comparison-shopping service in search results. The company was ordered to apply the same methods to the services of rivals as it does to its own when displaying them in its search results.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on yesterday's Supreme Court decisions? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on the evolving terror threat in Europe, Massimo Piras of Belgium said: "The more frequent and random attacks across Europe are clearly affecting people's moods. With heavily-armed soldiers more and more visible on the streets of Europe, how could it be otherwise? The near impossibility of stopping random, amateurish attacks, combined with the battle-hardened and well-trained militants flowing back into Europe as ISIS loses its twin capitals, will only worsen an already bleak situation." Jeff Templeton of Pennsylvania wrote: "One of the best reasons yet why the administration's policies on immigration need to be implemented. If it's difficult to track them, then stop them, if possible, at the gate." And Bob Jones of New Jersey commented: "With ISIS on the run, these lone-wolf attacks are the death throes of a lost cause. It will be intense for a while, but will soon end, along with any remaining lupine dreams of an Islamic caliphate."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170627ed6r001rx



World News: World Watch

835 words
27 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

IRAQ

Military Says ISIS

Near Defeat in Mosul

The battle to wrest full control of the Iraqi city of Mosul from Islamic State will be over in a few days, the Iraqi military said on Monday, as elite counterterrorism units fought militants among the narrow alleyways of the historic Old City.

An attempted fight-back by militants failed on Sunday night and Islamic State's grip on the city, once its de facto capital in Iraq, was weakened, a senior commander said.

"Only a small part [of the militants] remains in the city, specifically the Old City," said Lt. Gen. Abdul Ghani al-Assadi, commander of the counterterrorism Service in Mosul.

"From a military perspective, Daesh [Islamic State] is finished," Gen. Assadi said. "It has lost its fighting spirit and its balance. We are making calls to them to surrender or die."

As CTS units battled militants in the densely populated maze of tiny streets of the Old City, which lies by the western bank of the Tigris River, Gen. Assadi said the area under Islamic State control in Mosul was now less than 2 square kilometers.

Mosul will fall "in very few days, God willing," he added.

Up to 350 militants are estimated by the military to be besieged in the Old City, dug in among civilians in crumbling houses and making extensive use of booby traps, suicide bombers and sniper fire to slow the advance of Iraqi troops.

More than 50,000 civilians, about half of the Old City's population, remain trapped behind Islamic State lines with little food, water or medicines, according to those who escaped.

-- Reuters

---

SOUTHEAST ASIA

Drug Haul Burned

In Myanmar, Thailand

Officials in Myanmar and Thailand burned narcotics worth more than $800 million on Monday to mark the U.N. day against drug abuse and trafficking.

The move came as authorities struggle to stem the flood of illicit drugs in the region, with Thailand's justice minister last year saying the country's war on drugs was failing.

In Thailand's Ayutthaya province, more than 9 tons of drugs with a street value of more than 20 billion baht ($590 million) went up in smoke including methamphetamines, known locally as "yaba" or "crazy drug," according to police.

"Currently, we are able to take down a lot of networks, including . . . transnational networks bringing drugs into Thailand . . . to be shipped to Malaysia and other countries," Sirinya Sitthichai, secretary-general of the Office of Narcotics Control Board, told reporters in Ayutthaya.

In neighboring Myanmar, the police said they destroyed confiscated drugs worth around $217 million. Myanmar remains one of the world's largest producers of illicit drugs, including opium, heroin and methamphetamines. Those narcotics are often smuggled into China.

Last year, Myanmar lawmakers voiced disappointment over efforts to tackle the drug problem. The market for methamphetamines has been growing in Southeast Asia, the United Nations has said. It estimates that Southeast Asia's trade in heroin and methamphetamine was worth $31 billion in 2013.

-- Reuters

---

COLOMBIA

Tour Boat Sinks;

6 Drown, 15 Missing

Scuba divers on Monday searched for bodies in a reservoir near the Colombian city of Medellin where a tourist boat packed with more than 150 passengers for the holiday weekend capsized, leaving at least six people dead and 15 missing.

Rescuers including firefighters and air force pilots in helicopters searched for survivors at the Guatape reservoir where El Almirante ferry sank.

A flotilla of recreational boats and jet skis had rushed to the scene, pulling people from the boat as it went down and avoiding an even deadlier accident.

Videos circulating on social media show the turquoise-and-yellow-trimmed party boat rocking back and forth as people crawled down from a fourth-deck roof as it sank in a matter of minutes.

Survivors described hearing a loud explosion near the men's bathroom that knocked out power a few minutes after the boat began its cruise around the giant lake. As water flooded on board, pressure built and people were sucked under by the sinking ship.

"Those on the first and second decks sank immediately," survivor Lorena Salazar told local media. "All we could do was scream and call for help. . . . It was completely chaotic."

-- Associated Press

---

MONGOLIA

Ruling Party Loses

Vote for Presidency

The Mongolian ruling party's candidate lost in presidential elections to a populist business tycoon and a nationalist wanting the country to benefit more from its mineral wealth, preliminary results early Tuesday showed. The election was headed for a runoff.

The Mongolian People's Party's Miyegombo Enkhbold, speaker of the parliament and a horse dealer, garnered 30% of about 1.3 million votes cast Monday, according to the General Election Commission.

Business tycoon Khaltmaa Battulga of the Democratic Party won 39%, while nationalist Sainkhuu Ganbaatar of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party, a vocal critic of mining giant Rio Tinto's operations in the country, garnered 32%.

-- Associated Press

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170627ed6r0001l



World News: World Watch

697 words
27 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A5
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

JAPAN

BOJ Officials Call for

More Transparency

Some Bank of Japan officials called on the central bank to communicate clearly about its thinking on monetary policy, as speculation grows over whether and when it would tighten monetary policy, opinions submitted by board members earlier in June showed.

In the summary of board members' opinions submitted for a June 15-16 policy meeting, officials generally backed the bank's sticking with aggressive easing because the Japanese economy remains far from hitting the bank's 2% inflation target. Core inflation in April was 0.3%.

The expanding asset size of the central bank and an improving economy have triggered interest in its exit from aggressive easing, one official said.

"The bank needs to be accountable for its thinking on monetary-policy management, in order not to raise concern among market participants," the official said. The summary doesn't identify speakers by name.

Another official said the fundamental problem regarding the central bank's exit from aggressive easing is that "its timing cannot be foreseen," given that it is still far from hitting its 2% inflation target.

The expectation that the bank could raise rates this year continues to gain traction as the Federal Reserve raises rates and offers specifics on how it plans to trim its balance sheet.

In the June meeting, the Bank of Japan left interest rates unchanged and kept its promise to buy about 80 trillion yen ($720 billion) in Japanese government bonds each year. One official called for the 80 trillion yen annual target to be cut to 45 trillion yen, given that purchases of debt have fallen below the promised pace.

Gov. Haruhiko Kuroda, in a news conference following the June meeting, has rejected the idea that he should follow the Fed's steps and detail how the central bank might trim its assets.

-- Yoko Kubota

---

IRAQ

ISIS Pushing Back in

Mosul, Military Says

Iraq's Ministry of Defense says Islamic State fighters have launched a string of counterattacks in a western Mosul neighborhood that was previously declared free of IS.

The attacks come as Iraqi forces continue to move in on the last pocket of territory the militants hold in the Old City.

Army spokesman Brig. Gen. Mohammed al-Khodari says IS sleeper cells set fire to houses and cars on Sunday afternoon. Fighting lasted into the night in the Tanak neighborhood on Mosul's far western edge.

He says by Monday morning the situation was under control.

Iraqi forces launched an operation to retake the Old City -- the IS group's last stronghold in Mosul -- just over a week ago, more than eight months after the fight to retake Iraq's second-largest city officially began.

-- Associated Press

SOUTHEAST ASIA

Drug Haul Burned in

Myanmar, Thailand

Officials in Myanmar and Thailand burned illegal narcotics worth more than $800 million on Monday to mark the U.N. day against drug abuse and trafficking.

The move came as authorities struggle to stem the flood of illicit drugs in the region, with Thailand's justice minister last year saying the country's war on drugs was failing.

In Thailand's Ayutthaya province, more than 9 tons of drugs with a street value of more than 20 billion baht ($590 million) went up in smoke including methamphetamines, known locally as "yaba" or "crazy drug," according to police.

"Currently, we are able to take down a lot of networks, including. . .transnational networks bringing drugs into Thailand. . .to be shipped to Malaysia and other countries," Sirinya Sitthichai, secretary-general of the Office of Narcotics Control Board, told reporters in Ayutthaya.

In neighboring Myanmar, the police said they destroyed confiscated drugs worth around $217 million.

Myanmar remains one of the world's largest producers of illicit drugs, including opium, heroin and methamphetamines. Those narcotics are often smuggled into China.

Last year, lawmakers in Myanmar voiced disappointment over lackluster efforts to tackle the drug problem.

The market for methamphetamines has been growing in Southeast Asia, the United Nations has said. It estimates that Southeast Asia's trade in heroin and methamphetamine was worth $31 billion in 2013.

-- Reuters

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170626ed6r00010



Opinion
The GOP Stand in Georgia; A transcript of the weekend's program on FOX News Channel.

7,751 words
26 June 2017
18:06
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

PRESIDENT TRUMP: I want to also extend our congratulations this evening to Karen Handel of Georgia.

And we can't forget Ralph Norman in South Carolina.

If Karen Handel had lost, they would have blamed it on me, which is fine. But if she had lost, they would have been there for weeks talking about this. This would have been the greatest defeat of American politics.

DAVID ASMAN : Hello, everybody. Welcome to the "Journal Editorial Report." I'm David Asman, in this week for Paul Gigot.

That was President Trump taking a victory lap on Wednesday night at a rally in Cedar Rapids, Iowa following two big special elections wins this week for Republicans. Karen Handel staved off a strong challenge from Democrat Jon Ossoff in a closed watched race for HHS Secretary Tom Price's seat in Georgia. And in South Carolina, Ralph Norman held on to White House Budget Director Mick Mulvaney's seat for the GOOP.

Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, under fire from a lot of fellow Democrats, downplaying this week's losses as well as special election defeats earlier this year in Montana and Kansas. Take a listen.

HOUSE MINIORITY LEADER NANCY PELOSI:By all accounts, if you're a Republican, this is not good news to you, tonight's pyrrhic victory, two pyrrhic victories, because it shows where the vulnerability is on the Republican side.

ASMAN: Joining the panel this week, "Wall Street Journal" columnist and deputy editor, Dan Henninger; columnist, Bill McGurn; editorial board member, Mary Kissell; and assistant editorial page editor, James Freeman.

Dan, a lot of fun stuff to talk about. But I love Nancy Pelosi saying it was a pyrrhic victory. Oh, wait, it was four pyrrhic victories. Maybe you can have one pyrrhic victory, but four in a row, that's kind of hard to take.

DAN HENNINGER: Yeah, the old saying goes, David, four more victories like this and we are undone.

Why is Nancy Pelosi, a savvy politician, saying such ridiculous things? And I think the reason is because she has nothing else to offer. What they have been doing in all of these elections is teeing it up on a national election, a referendum on Donald Trump. And since the election, the Democrats, whether in Washington or anywhere else, have been running solely against Donald J. Trump. What we discovered in Georgia, that's not working. The Democrats have to come up with something else, and at the moment, it is well known, they don't have much of anything else in terms of substance or policy.

ASMAN: And, Bill, the question is whether they need somebody else, and particularly somebody other than Nancy Pelosi. Donald Trump is having a field day. He came out with a tweet about Nancy Pelosi, kind of pleading with her to stay. Let's put up the tweet if we can. Essentially, please let -- "I certainly hope the Democrats do not force Nancy P. out, that would be very bad for the Republican Party. Please let 'Cryin' Chucky; stay!"

BILL MCGURN: He set up a race as special election. The arrogance of the Democrats running a guy who didn't even live in the district and so forth, you're going to get Donald Trump gloating when he's vindicated. He's going to fun with this.

In fairness, I say Nancy Pelosi herself isn't the problem. And if you look at how they played her in the election, the Republicans, it was San Francisco values. So the problem, I think, the Democrats have so twofold. On the one hand, they have liberal values that are not the values of most Americans. America is a center-right country. So it doesn't play outside San Francisco.

Second, what's their strategy? Resistance. It's just not -- it's not a persuasive thing. I don't think there's anyone, maybe -- well, Jon Ossoff doesn't live in the district --

I was going to say, whether there's anybody who cares about the Russian investigation of Trump. And if you look at the -- if you take Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton and Nancy Pelosi out of the equation, the Democrats lost a thousand seats.

That's not because Republicans are geniuses. It's because people saying what you're offering is not for me.

ASMAN: There is also the attack on the brand of Trump. They thought that was a winning thing even though that brand, by the way, the Trump name has made billions of dollars for the Trump family over the years. It was part of the reason he was elected. But now some Democrats are having second thoughts about beating up on the brand itself. Democrat Tim Ryan, who, we should mention, is looking for Nancy Pelosi's job, came out with an interesting comment saying that, essentially, the Democratic Party is now more toxic than Donald Trump, to which you say?

MARY KISSEL: To which I say, again, it's not just the brand. It's the ideas that are behind the brand. And essentially, the Democratic Party is a party of coastal liberal elites. A third of the House delegation is from New York, California and Massachusetts. And I'm waiting personally for the Democratic Party to rediscover its inner Bill Clinton, you know, the pragmatist, the guy who doesn't just resist, who is genial, who identifies with average Americans, who doesn't just want to spend money all of the time, who could get on board with something like welfare reform or a pragmatic fix to Obamacare. I just don't see those people in the Democratic Party anymore. Jon Ossoff tried to go there late in the campaign in Georgia --and nobody believed him.

ASMAN: Well, where do there go? By the way, the four losses they've had, James, two of those candidates, the Democratic candidates, where on the left of the spectrum, two were trying to convince people they were moderates, so they don't succeed no matter which ideology they try to use.

JAMES FREEMAN: I think they do want to rebrand. They want a more moderate image. But they do have the challenge. And the reason Nancy Pelosi is still the leader and the public face is she's the greatest fundraiser in political history outside of presidential candidates.

ASMAN: That's true.

FREEMAN: More than 500 million bucks over the years. She has pulled money out cities like this, L.A. and San Francisco. So are they really going to turn away from that funding constituency more towards a voting constituency? And that's not an easy thing to do.

Well, Dan, one point is this may stop the obstructionism. At least the Democrats seem to realize that just being obstructionist, having no message, just being anti-Trump doesn't win elections.

HENNINGER: Yeah, it might at the Senate level. I think they are pretty dug in over in the House. But at the Senate, you know, moving forward to tax bill, it's possible that some of the Democrats that are on the bubble, like Manchin in West Virginia, Heidi Heitkamp, in North Dakota, Joe Donnelly in Indiana, may decide they have to move towards the center. The difficulty there is, the economy is strengthening, and if the Republicans do pass the tax bill, give another booster shot to the economy, the Democrats, unless we have been saying here in the past five minutes, come up with something stronger, they could have a really difficult time in 2018.

ASMAN: Bill, very quickly, incentives matter, whether you're talking economics or politics, and the one incentive that politicians have above all others is getting reelected.

MCGURN: Right.

ASMAN: If they try obstructionism and it doesn't get them elected or reelected, they are going to turn to something else.

MCGURN: Yeah, although I think, look, something like 95 percent of guys get elected. Now we have been so polarized that a lot of people are in semi-safe seats and so forth. Mrs. Pelosi, she doesn't have to change. Her seat is safe. It's just not going to play in Iowa. They freaked out over a guy running in the mayoral primary who was pro-life in Omaha. This is not a party that is open to diversity.

ASMAN: Very interesting task.

When we come back, as the GOP tries to push ahead with its agenda, Senate Republicans releasing their health care bill. Details coming next.

SENATE MAJORITY LEADER MITCH MCCONNELL : Republicans believe we have a responsibility to act, and we are, for our constituents, for our states and for our country.

ASMAN: Senate Republicans released a much-anticipated discussion draft of the health care plan on Thursday seven weeks after the House passed their own plan to repeal and replace Obamacare. So what's inside the Senate's bill and how does it differ from the House's version?

Let's ask Tevi Troy. He is the president of American Health Policy Institute and the former deputy secretary and health and Human Services under President G.W. Bush.

Tevi, first of all, how would it change Obamacare?

FORMER HHS SECTRETARY TEVI TROY: David, thanks for having me on. In contrast to Nancy Pelosi, as you say, what they want is not any anything less. They want an actual victory. How this would change in contrast to Obamacare is it would reduce taxes and reduce spending and reduce mandates and reduce the overall size of the deficit and, hopefully, reduce premiums, thereby, requiring the government to subsidize less. That's the overall big picture of the bill. Let's hope it works out once they start to release details.

ASMAN: One thing it would not reduce, and some it's critics have pointed to this, some conservative critics, is money for insurance companies. There's an extra $50 billion, by my account, over next five years help for insurers that are going to be forced to continue to pay for folks with preexisting conditions, right?

TROY: Yeah, I think you're talking about the Stabilization Fund.

ASMAN: Yeah.

TROY: The fear is that the insurers will continue to exit the market as they have been doing in the Affordable Care Act. We just saw Anthem recently. So the problem is that the insurers are very nervous about the markets remaining stable and so they are putting this money into make sure the insurers stay in the game for now.

ASMAN: Is it fair for critics, whether on the left or right, to call this aa bail-out of insurers?

TROY: You know, politics being politics, you're definitely going to get some of that. But I think the overall goal, if you can get the markets stabilized, then over time, you won't need to provide any additional money for insurers, but they can get their money through premiums or reduced that so people are incentivized to purchase them on their own again without subsidies.

ASMAN: The dirty little secret about Obamacare, among others, was the fact that Medicaid was used, an expanded version of Medicaid, to ensure people who couldn't be insured directly within the Obamacare system. What's happening with Medicaid in the Senate bill?

TROY: That's a really good point. We've had a little bit of a game where we've had people in Medicaid and expanded Medicaid be cynical, kind of gets rid of that fiction, if you're in Medicaid or you're in Medicaid as it is, and other people are supposed to get tax credits to get them into the individual market. Also, the big changes in Medicaid are coming a little later, so governors can deal with it. And you're having a little more experimentation by governors so governors can be innovative in having to design the system as they see fit and not necessary what the federal government wants to do.

ASMAN: Then there are things that are not that big in terms of money, but have a lot of significance for social conservatives, things like eliminate at least for one year, the money for Planned Parenthood, right?

TROY: Yeah. It's only for one year, so it's a symbolic victory for Republicans, but there's divisions within Republicans. Again, the game is to get to 50 Republican votes. They have no Democrats working with them. They've got to make sure they get 50 Republicans on board, and I think the Planned Parenthood compromises a way of getting the symbolic support that they want, but it's not necessarily going to change the game long-term for Planned Parenthood.

ASMAN: The key political factor in what they want to do is lower premiums. That's the thing that hurts Americans most. In fact, premiums have gone up, deductions, Medicaid has gone up more percentage-wise, but will this do anything to get premiums and deductions down?

TROY: The theory is that it will. We have some evidence in that the CMS Actuary, part of HHS, but a non-political part of HHS, scored the House bill, which is similar but not the same, and said that would reduce the growth size of premiums, reduce the amount of premiums, and so that is a good thing. If you reduce premiums, you don't have to subsidize as much. But you never know how these things are going to play out until the legislation is actually written and signed by the president and implemented.

ASMAN: There's another thing. Since a lot of doctors tell me that they are thinking of quitting being doctors because of malpractice laws are so generous in this country. England has ways to prevent that, loser pays and stuff, that maybe won't be a part of this. Anything in the Senate bill that would adjust frivolous lawsuits brought as malpractice suits?

TROY: You're talking about malpractice reform, which is a part of the Republican plank overall. It's not something they could get in this bill because of the 60-vote threshold. It's not something that would fit with the so-called budget reconciliation rules, or as I call them, the budget reconciliation limitations. That's something that Republicans are going to continue to pursue, but it's a very heavy lift as the trial lawyers are big funders as the Democratic Party and so they're not going to give up on that easily.

ASMAN: Democrat and Republican, they own the Beltway, let's be honest about it. It's a tough haul.

All right, selling insurance across state lines, on the House side, they said is going to have to wait for another -- another version of an Obamacare clean-up before we get it done. Does the Senate address this at all?

TROY: It's the same problem, David. It's the budget reconciliation limitation that don't allow them to do something that's not within the budget context. That's not going to be in there.

However, I think that's something that could be attached to a piece of legislation down the road, a must-pass piece of legislation, and put it up for a vote and see if you can get it that way. So, I think, "The Journal" editorial said this is not a free market utopia, but I think this is a step and then they can do additional steps down the road, given the regulatory powers they have, in trying to do it.

ASMAN: So this is not the end, but it's the beginning of the end, right?

TROY: Perhaps the end of the beginning.

ASMAN: Tevi Troy, great to see you. Thank you very much for coming in. I appreciate it.

TROY: Thank you.

ASMAN: When we come back, Republicans are facing a long, hot summer as they try to deliver on some key campaign promises. So from the health care overhaul to tax reform, can they count on members of their own party to move their agenda forward?

HOUSE SPEAKER PAUL RYAN: It's not enough just to pass a bill that has Obamacare repeal in the title. We've got to actually have legislation that fixes the underlying problem.

SEN. RAND PAUL : I just didn't run on Obamacare lite. I didn't run on replacing it with more government programs. I didn't run on allowing the death spiral of Obamacare to continue just to subsidize with taxpayer money. I think we can do better than this. And my hope is not to defeat the bill but to make the bill better.

ASMAN: That was Kentucky Senator Rand Paul, just one of the Republicans opposing the health care plan that was released this week. As the GOP tries to move forward this summer on two campaign promises, repealing and replacing Obamacare and overhauling the tax system, can they count on support from their own members?

We are back with Dan Henninger, Bill McGurn, Mary Kissel and James Freeman.

Mary, it's not going to be a slam-dunk?

KISSEL: It's a do-or-die moment for the Republican Party. Either they are going to repeal or replace Obamacare with something better or they're going to have to prop up Obamacare because the exchanges are failing and, politically, you cannot afford that millions of people in American without access to insurance.

Look, Donald Trump is going to do a deal. If he doesn't do a deal with the right, he is going to do the deal with the left.

ASMAN: That's right.

KISSEL: And health care is going to be key to the tax reform.

ASMAN: And, Bill, the president has already begun to sell the plan and he's talking nice about some of his Republican critics, which he hasn't always done. Let's play a little snipped of an interview he had an "FOX & Friends" on Friday.

PRESIDENT TRUMP: They are also four good guys, and four friends of mine, I think they will probably get there. We will have to see. But I think we will get there. We have four very good people that -- it's not that they are opposed. They'd like to get certain changes and we will see if we can take care of that.

ASMAN: We are going to take care of that, we can make a deal.

MCGURN: Look, he's the deal-maker and you don't get a deal by trashing the people that you want to persuade to support you.

I think Republicans have to realize this is an Irish choice, not perfect -- verses something that is probably going to be a lot worse, like -- the alternative is not a better bill. It's not a better bill. I think that relates to the elections later.

You know, we talk about the symbolism or the politics of the moments. At the end of the day, the Republican's fortunes are going to be made on whether ordinary people, who are now struggling in this economy, feel more opportunity and better about the future, and that means lower premiums for a lot of people, and it means tax cuts, you know, that help revive the economy. And that's the reality. It's not just the legislation. We need to do something to do this. And I hope President Trump realizes that this legislation is not just something Congress is doing. At the end of the day, he's going to be judged by this, by whether he can produce.

ASMAN: James, Bill just talked about taxes. Paul Ryan came out this week and talked about, you know, really pushing forward on taxes, in a way that I haven't heard from anybody except from people in the Trump administration. That was great to hear. He did not mention the border tax. Is that --

FREEMAN: Right.

ASMAN: Did they finally weak up to the fact that people don't want another tax?

FREEMAN: I think they are waking up to the idea that they are going to jump this Beltway custom that, if you're going to cut some taxes, you to raise other taxes over here. I think that's what you're hearing from Paul Ryan, from the Freedom Caucus, not just tax reform, but tax cuts. And I think that ought to be their focus. If he's --

ASMAN: Not creating a whole new tax that didn't exist before, like the border tax.

FREEMAN: Right, right. And I think they have to focus on their political futures. We've been talking about what these special elections mean, what's going to happen next year. They have got to get the economic reform, the economic revival program going if they want to get reelected next year, if they want to keep control of the Congress, and that starts with a big tax cut.

ASMAN: Dan, it is across the board. Paul Ryan was saying it's going to be corporate, it's also going to be individual. He mentioned the fact that eight of 10 companies in America are not incorporated. They pay taxes as individuals. So it's a real sort of Reagan-esqe plan across-the-board tax plan.

HENNINGER: Yeah. It's across the board. They try to extend it out as far as they can. We have to point out that in the health care bill, they have taken a start. They have eliminated Obamacare's taxes. They also eliminated the 3.8 percent surcharge on investment income for higher-income people. That will help the economy. So I think between the two bills, they are headed in the right direction.

I have to say, Senator Rand Paul sounds like a man from Mars, as though he wants to just start all over again, that there's no Congress to deal with. They have got an opportunity to show that they can get something. If they don't, the Democrats are sitting there with universal health care, which they will propose immediately.

ASMAN: But, Mary, interestingly, there were some Democrats -- we use today call them blue dogs -- the more moderate Democrats who, this week, announced that they were meeting with the Trump team. In fact, they met with Treasury Secretary Mnuchin and some others on tax cuts. So is it conceivable, particularly in light of the Georgia election, that they may get some Democrats coming on their side?

KISSEL: Well, I would hope so. What has been lacking, of course, is bipartisanship, and it's not on the Republican side. I think the Republicans are very happy to do deals with Democrats, for instance, on the tax plan, getting tax cuts in exchange for more infrastructure spending.

ASMAN: There's a deal.

KISSEL: Look, Democrats want to get reelected. They are not going to get reelected on the platform of Barack Obama. We have seen that in the last several races. There's an opportunity for them to step forward and say, look, we want to have policy victories to take to our voters, too, to run on next year.

ASMAN: Very quickly, Bill, I think it's likely that they're going to get some Democrats on taxes, but it doesn't seem that they'll get any on health care, right?

MCGURN: Probably not. Look, to me this is a scene from "On the Waterfront" with Marlon Brando and Karl Malden.

ASMAN: One of my favorites.

MCGURN: Marlon Brando is all upset and he wants to shoot the gangster, and Karl Malden says, "You want to get even, you really want to get even? Testify in court." That's what they have to do to President Trump. This is key not just to the Republicans in Congress but to the president. He wants to get even, stop worrying about Russia, stop worrying about James Comey. Gets these two bills through and they can --

ASMAN: Well, Russia's not getting Democrats anywhere.

So maybe it's smart on that one.

Still ahead, tensions between former Cold-War rivals are heating up, with Russia saying they're going to target U.S. war planes in Syria. Former U.N. Ambassador John BOLTON joining us next.

DAVID ASMAN: The long-simmering tensions between the U.S. and Russia erupting this week following the American military's downing of a Syrian war plane. Moscow is now threatening to target aircraft flown by the U.S. and its allies west of the Euphrates River.

John Bolton is the former U.S. ambassador to the United Nations and a FOX News contributor.

First of all, Ambassador, what happened to the narrative of the Trump administration and Russia being hand in glove?

AMBASSADOR JOHN BOLTON: Well, I don't think it ever was hand in glove. I think Vladimir Putin pursues, with absolute clarity, what he sees as Russia national interest, and the only appropriate American response to that is to do the same on our side. And right now, I think, in the context of the war against ISIS and in the region more broadly, I think the Defense Department, the State Department are still basically on auto pilot from the Obama administration. There is not a new administration strategy, and we need one, not one that's dictated by the tactics of Russian or American planes in the sky over the region, but by a notion on how we want to defeat ISIS and what's going to come after it.

ASMAN: Right. Well, ISIS -- as I mentioned, Russia now created this new rule that no U.S. or NATO planes can fly south of Euphrates. That's essentially Assad territory, the guy who controls Syria, the guy who they're allied with. Is it possible, can we just stay north of the Euphrates and avoid any conflict with Russia?

BOLTON: It's not for Russia to tell us where to fly.

ASMAN: Absolutely.

BOLTON: And this is one of the legacies of Barack Obama. He allowed a Russian air base to be built at Latakia. John Kerry famously said, when asked, what's that base for, he said, oh, for force protection. What, to protect the Russian forces that ought to be in Russia and not Syria? We are not looking for military action, let's be clear, but I think we want to build up an American presence that says to the Russians, we will fly where we want to fly. And the people you ought to worry about de-conflicting are Syrian and Russia pilots. But again, this has to be a piece of a larger post-ISIS strategy to prevent Russia's key allies, the Assad regime in Syria, and the Iranians, from building an arch of control through the Baghdad government in Iraq, through Assad's control in Syria, and Hezbollah in Lebanon, to set the stage for the next conflict in the region. I'm afraid that's where they are going. I don't think we have a response.

ASMAN: Well, we have taken out a Syrian plane, in air. We don't know what happened to the pilot. We've taken out many planes on the ground when they used chemical weapons. What happens if, somehow, a Russian gets in the mix and there's a Russian death? What happens between our two nations?

BOLTON: Well, again, we are not looking for it, but rule number one is we will protect American forces. We will protect them against Syrian military, against Syrian planes, Syrian drones, or anybody else's planes or drones that we deem threatening to them. But to me, this is one argument why we have to have a better understanding of what exactly the forces we are using to help desTROY ISIS, the Kurds. Yes, some have their own trouble but, by in large, the Kurds are with us. Helping the Baghdad government is equivalent, sad to say, to helping the ayatollahs in Iran. I think we need more Arab forces from the gulf states, from Egypt, from Jordan, and less reliance on some of the dubious Syrian groups. But that strategy has not yet emerged from State or Defense.

ASMAN: By the way, it's not just in the Middle East. There was confrontation over the Baltic Sea in which a Russian fighter jet came within five feet of a U.S. plane. That's pretty damn close.

BOLTON: It's extraordinarily dangerous. And they have done this in numerous instances both with respect to plane and our ships in the Baltics. The Russians are still pushing for -- let's not mistake Vladimir Putin here for somebody warm and fuzzy. He's tough as iron. He's totally cynical. He's still pushing to see how far he can get. As of yet, he is still to see any material pushback from the administration.

ASMAN: Meanwhile, the shake-up in the Middle East, to kind of realignment, continues with the Saudi king appointing his 31-year-old son as the crown prince, kind of taking out an older guy, a cousin that was in there before. I'm just wondering, any connection between the Trump visit a few weeks ago and this move?

BOLTON: Well, it's possible, but I think this has also been in the making for a while. I have to say, I am worried about it, not because I disagree with the modernizing agenda of the king and the new crown prince. There's a lot to be said for what they want to do. But the balance of power within the extraordinarily large Saudi royal family has been negotiated out for a long period of time. I don't think we've seen the end of this succession struggle. And while I certainly welcome modernization in Saudi Arabia, let's be clear, the Salafist clerics, the Wahhabis still hold enormous power. And I very much fear that if the modernization is not done carefully, we are going face a shah-of-Iran situation in Saudi Arabia. And to see that project collapse and to see a religious extremist regime take power would wreak havoc with the global economy.

ASMAN: I want to put a little more optimistic spin on this, and maybe it's not political spin, but the fact is the realignment does bring together former enemies. I mean, Israel and Saudi Arabia have never been closer, because they have this common enemy of Iran. And, of course, the United States is much stronger in the mix, not only because of what we did, what we proved we would do in Syria, but because of our commitment to our Arab allies in the Middle East. This realignment could be the beginning of something extremely positive, no?

BOLTON: Well, if it continues. There's nothing like a religious extremist with nuclear weapons to concentrate your attention in Saudi, in the other members of the Gulf Cooperation Council and Israel. But if the Saudi regime, through personal ambition or family ambition, ends up destabilizing, everybody in the gulf on the Arab side could be trouble, and the opportunity for both Sunni extremists and the ayatollahs in Tehran could be formidable.

ASMAN: I try to give you an out so you could end on a positive note. You didn't take it.

But, Ambassador, it's good to see you anyway. Thank you very much for coming in. I appreciate it.

BOLTON: Thank you, David.

ASMAN: Still ahead, the horrific death of Otto Warmbier just the latest reminder of North Korea's brutal ways. So what's the next step in reigning in that rogue regime? Can we count on China at all to help?

PRESIDENT TRUMP: You look at North Korea, what's going - look at Otto, beautiful Otto. Went over there a healthy, wonderful boy, and you see how he came back. You see how he came back. So we've been given a bad hand but we will take that bad hand and it'll all be good.

ASMAN: President Trump reacting this week to the tragic death of Otto Warmbier, the 22-year-old student who was held in a North Korean prison for 17 months, who died on Monday, just less than a week after he was released and returned home to Cincinnati. Just the latest reminder of the brutal nature of that rogue regime and the urgent need to stop its nuclear ambitions. So can the Trump administration count on China for help?

We are back with Dan Henninger, Mary Kissel and Bill McGurn.

Mary, first of all, the focus on Otto Warmbier, sometimes when you focus on one American, who has been terribly mistreated, as he was, to the point of death, it's personal. We got to know the family. We got to know Otto. We were pulling for him to pull through, which, of course, he didn't. The significance of that?

KISSEL: Well, North Korea is a closed regime and foreign journalists who go to North Korea are not allowed to go deeply into the country, so we are not shown the reality of the life in North Korea today. What happened to Otto is happening to tens of thousands of North Koreans. And you said in the introduction, David, that we have to stop their nuclear ambitions. Let's remember, too, that there are working on biological, chemical weapon. We saw the chemical weapons used in Kuala Lumpur to kill Kim's brother. And, look, they have the delivery systems now, too. They are working on ballistic missile programs. They could take balloons and send them over Seoul and drop chemical weapons all over Seoul. This shows the kind of individual, the kind of regime that wants those nuclear weapons.

ASMAN: You can't negotiate with these people. I mean, Otto Warmbier's father, Bill, was very clear about the fact -- I mean, he pulled no punches in saying that he had no respect for the Obama method of dealing with then with kid gloves. It was only when Trump got tough with them that they got anything --

MCGURN: Two points. One is, absolutely right. This is more than an individual strategy. It also illustrates the world is a more dangerous place when regimes like this think they can molest Americans. When you look at countries like Iran, taking hostages, releases them and take more, it's not a coincidence that the most belligerent guy in Asia, is a guy that has brutalized Americans.

Second, Donald Trump also had a statement about China not being helpful. And a friend of mine, Mark Simon, from Hong Kong, suggested, you know what might be a good measure for China? Revoke the student visas for all those children of --

MCGURN: -- Chinese leaders coming to the United States. That might get their attention.

ASMAN: Dan, the president did take this very personally, as we all did, as I think all Americans did. When he takes things personally, he does act on them. So the chances there will be some change in our relations with China, no?

HENNINGER: You just showed meeting with President Xi of China and he tweeted earlier this week that it hasn't worked out in getting China to help with North Korea. The next day, however, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said we are still working the problem. What they mean is they are working on imposing sanctions on about 10 companies, Chinese companies that do business with the North Koreans. This is not a large problem.

ASMAN: No.

HENNINGER: The issue is whether the Chinese will help us with that and, if not, whether we should unilaterally impose sanctions on Chinese companies.

ASMAN: You know, Mary, no American, after what happened, has any doubt of the horrible nature of this regime. It might be Otto Warmbier's legacy. He might actually have left behind a legacy that will allow an American president to deal with North Korea in a way other American presidents haven't.

KISSEL: I agree with Dan that we need to increase sanctions on companies or banks that do business with North Korea. There's a lot more we can do. North Korea gets tens of millions of dollars from its slave labor income all over the world. We can stop the kids of North Korean elites from studying abroad. We could stop and search their ships. We've had ships stopped by, for instance, the Panamanian authorities. They found two disassembled MIG fighters in the belly of a North Korean ship. There's a lot we can do, short of an attack, or what Obama did, nothing.

ASMAN: And, Bill, the fact is that Americans use to care, it seems to me, or at least politicians used to care more about what happens to a single American than they do now. This may have changed this week.

MCGURN: Let's be clear, when we look out for American citizens -- it's a dangerous world. I spent more than 12 years of my life overseas. Those ex-pat Americans are very exposed. But when we go after regimes that go after our people -- you know, like Roman citizens, don't touch them -- other people are safer, too. It's not just the Americans who benefit.

ASMAN: When we come back, Amazon ruffling feathers in the retail community with its acquisition of Whole Foods. So is this move good for consumers or is the online giant betting too big? Our panel weighing in, next.

ASMAN: Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos looking to extend his already vast empire, announcing last week that the online giant would like to buy Whole Foods for $13.7 billion. The acquisition could have a huge impact on eCommerce as well as brick-and-mortar retailers.

But Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross told FOX Business Network's Stuart Varney this week he didn't see any anti-trust issues with the deal. Take a listen

COMMERCE SECRETARY WILBUR ROSS: I think it's a very clear move to marry together a very good, high-quality niche retailer with the very broad-brush approach of marketing everything that Amazon has done so well, but I surely don't see any anti-trust implications in that.

ASMAN: Sounds like a green light to me.

We are back with Dan Henninger, Bill McGurn and James Freeman.

James, Silicon Valley did not greet the Trump administration with open arms. But did they finally realize that maybe they have a friend in the White House?

FREEMAN: It is nice to see a change in tone, where businesses, kind of look at generally as a helpful productive thing, instead of --

ASMAN: Shock.

FREEMAN: -- something that needs to be controlled and really diminished. So I think in any administration, there's really no anti-trust case here, because although Whole Foods takes a lot of your paycheck when you shop there, it doesn't have a huge market share. You're talking about still Amazon and Whole Foods together, single-digit percentage of the U.S. grocer market. But really interesting to think about what Amazon is going to learn from all the consumer data that they can get out of these affluent, often, liberal customers at Whole Foods.

ASMAN: Dan, the Obama administration killed off dozens of deals. There were tens if not hundreds of billions of dollars just in kill fees alone that these corporations and we, stockholders, had to pay for that. This administration, it's day and night, is it not?

HENNINGER: Well, it is day and night, David, for sure. But the Obama administration was basically attacking banks and airlines and things like that.

I am really intrigued by the fact that you've got three massive companies, like Amazon, Google, Facebook, absorbing all of the business in their space, and nobody on the left is screaming about the robber baron this time, the way they did about 125 years ago when we were building steel and auto industries.

ASMAN: Yeah.

HENNINGER: And I think that's because everyone sort of feels these companies are doing something good in their lives. And mainly, with Amazon is doing is giving us the seeming idea that we have more time. Instead of having to go out shopping, you click. And everyone who sort of feel like tum is rushing upon them these days think that Amazon is creating time for them. And the big goal here is to do that with shopping for food as well.

ASMAN: Well, Bill, Dan brings up a great point, the fact is that the profit margins of Apple have always been 20 or 30 times bigger than the oil companies who got nothing but disdain heaped upon them for decades, and they don't care about profit if it's so-called green company, right?

MCGURN: We'll see. I think, sooner or later, if they're successful and innovative, you become an enemy of the people.

ASMAN: Even Bezos and Amazon?

MCGURN: Maybe. We will see. What we have is not just about food. I'm old enough to remember Amazon when it first started, and it was just books. And now so much my family's life is geared -- I hardly -- I go --

ASMAN: Even if you want to buy a pack of chewing gum --

MCGURN: Yeah.

ASMAN: -- you're Amazon Prime, you order from Amazon.

MCGURN: I have a Whole Foods two blocks away from me, so it may not change that. But we don't know where this is going to lead, where the innovation is going to lead and where you find certain things that can be adaptive to other areas as well. So it's exciting. That's what innovation is. You see the competition is no longer between two people in the industry. It's a cross industry. It's just changing everything.

ASMAN: James, bringing it back to the top of Silicon Valley and their initial disdain for the Trump administration, they still have problems with the social views of the -- the conservative social views. But will that be trumped, if you pardon the pun, by the focus on allowing Silicon Valley to do whatever they want?

FREEMAN: I would think they would -- when they look at it, they would see a lot to like in the Trump administration. When you think about tax reform, lowering that corporate rate, inviting to bring cash back from overseas to invest in the U.S., the biggest names on the list in terms of cash, stuff overseas, is Apple, Microsoft. These are companies who really would benefits and could invest a lot more in the U.S. with tax reform. And then on the immigration stuff, Trump really is no worse than Obama on letting the high-skilled workers come here. I wish he was a lot better, but it's really status quo, basically.

ASMAN: The last word from James.

We have to take one more break. When we come back, "Hits & Misses" of the week.

ASMAN: And it's time now for our "Hits & Misses" of the week.

James, first you. Hit or a miss?

FREEMAN: This is a hit, David, to the president of the United States for his tweeting. I know we often criticize him, saying the tweets are a little maybe misguided, impulsive, but we've got to give him credit. Five years ago, this week, he said now's the time to buy housing before values are fully recovered.

ASMAN: Wow.

FREEMAN: Remember, I told you so. He was right on the money.

ASMAN: Unbelievable.

ASMAN: I wish I had followed his advice.

Mary, you've got a surprising hit.

KISSEL: Yeah. Surprise, I'm giving a big hit to New York Governor Andrew Cuomo for bringing in a man named Joe Lhota to fix that seventh level of hell known as the New York City subway.

ASMAN: Which both of us use every day.

KISSEL: Yes. Every day, I'm strap hanging every day, and Penn Station. We're going to have a summer of hell here in New York as they try to fix both of these messes. Joe Lhota kept the trains running after Superstorm Sandy. He says he's going to do it again. Again, as a strap- hanger, I hope he's successful.

ASMAN: He wasn't a great candidate for mayor. He didn't win --

ASMAN: All right, Bill, hit or miss?

MCGURN: Big hit to John Cass, "The Chicago Tribune" columnist. This week, he wrote a piece on how to solve the problem of a bankrupt Illinois, which he calls the Venezuela of the Midwest.

His answer is very simple. Dissolve it and let the surrounding states, you know, Iowa, Kentucky --

ASMAN: Oh, my gosh, actually, we have a graphic on it, don't we?

MCGURN: It's a great solution.

ASMAN: Have it melt away into the adjoining states.

MCGURN: He leaves little carveouts, like Romania, named for Rahm Emanuel.

I think he envisions a country where he could be the --

MCGURN: Anyway, great column.

ASMAN: Our sympathies, by the way, to the taxpayers in Illinois. They are suffering.

Dan, you've got a hit or a miss?

HENNINGER: Well, I have a miss for Mary Jane, also known as marijuana. And everyone has been wondering, since legalization, how that was going to work out. Well, the Highway Loss Data Institute has been looking into it, and they have studied the states of Washington, Colorado and Oregon, where marijuana has been legalized, to see what the collision rates look like. Well, they've gone up about 3 percent compared to states without marijuana. So I think the lesson here is, high on the highway, David, does not work.

ASMAN: Yeah. Intoxication, no matter how you cut it, doesn't work when you're driving.

That's it for this week's show. Thanks to my panel and to all of you for watching. I'm David Asman. Catch me on weekdays on "After the Bell" on the FOX Business Network. Paul is back next week to bring some order to this crowd.

We hope to see you then.

Document WSJO000020170626ed6q003pd



 ISIS  and the Destruction Of Middle Eastern Relics

By Thomas Campbell 
830 words
26 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

If you've ever been to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, chances are that you visited the glass pavilion containing the Temple of Dendur. One of only three such temples outside Egypt, it was built by the Roman emperor Augustus around 10 B.C. as part of an effort to cultivate the local Nubian population. This month marks its 50th anniversary overlooking Central Park, where it provides an unforgettable glimpse of Egypt's ancient culture for millions of tourists who will never travel to the Middle East.

At a time when the U.S. is questioning the nature of its longstanding relationships with countries across the world, the temple is a symbol of international cooperation. In the 1960s, 50 nations united to save 22 irreplaceable monuments -- including the Temple of Dendur -- set to be submerged during the construction of Lake Nasser. These countries were motivated not by their own national interests but by an understanding that mankind has a common interest in protecting historic monuments.

With a final investment of $16 million, the U.S. became the largest contributor to the $100 million preservation project. As a demonstration of gratitude, Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser gave the Temple of Dendur to the U.S. in 1965. After a competition led by the National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities, President Lyndon Johnson decided that the 2,000-year-old temple should go to the Met.

The Middle East's fragile cultural heritage was in the news again last week. On Wednesday Islamic State blew up the historic Grand al-Nuri Mosque in Mosul, obliterating a cultural and religious site that had stood since 1173. Religious fundamentalism, illicit excavation, black-market trade and simple neglect have destroyed historic sites in the Middle East at an alarming rate. Wednesday's bombing underscores the most urgent problem: Islamic State and its affiliates have turned cultural destruction in Iraq and Syria into propaganda, even as they sell looted works of art on the black market to raise money for arms.

Why should we worry about a bunch of old monuments when the human cost of the unrest is so high? There are two reasons. First, the Middle East is the cradle of civilization. These monuments are integral to our collective human story. Architectural monuments illuminate the complexity of our common past. So much has already been lost. We have a moral obligation to save what remains.

A focus on history and heritage will also be key to the eventual recovery of the Middle East. Cultural sites provide citizens with a sense of their value and self-identity beyond religious dogma. They also provide jobs, income and stability by attracting tourists. Iraq and Syria are home to some of the most significant sites in the history of civilization. It may be hard to conceive of a vacation in Damascus or Baghdad today, but travel to Vietnam would have been equally inconceivable 40 years ago. In 2017, Vietnam projects tourist revenue of $20 billion.

Countries with economies tied to tourism are motivated to maintain peace and internal safety. Thus it is in the U.S. national interest to protect Middle Eastern heritage sites.

Conflicts across the region make modern preservation efforts more complicated than the drive to save the monuments threatened by Lake Nasser. Over the past year, Britain and France created funds to help protect and restore monuments in Middle Eastern conflict zones. Earlier this spring, the United Nations passed a resolution defining the destruction of historic monuments as a war crime, creating the basis for future intervention and criminal prosecution.

This is all laudable and necessary preparation for a time when the region stabilizes. In the short term, local scholars and archaeologists, who often work in grave danger, may be the most effective avenue for aid. In late 2015, staff from the Met convened a conference in Istanbul for colleagues from museums in Iraq and Syria. They told us of their urgent need for basic photography and computer equipment to document collections that are at risk. In response, the Met developed portable documentation kits and sent them to these colleagues via Jordan. While this may sound like a drop in the bucket, it met an urgent need.

This process of listening and responding to on-the-ground experts is both scalable and replicable. Governments and foundations should promote -- and fund -- similar collaborations. The U.S. government could certainly play a more active role than it has so far.

As we reflect on the effort that saved the Temple of Dendur, let's not be deterred by the sheer complexity of present-day challenges. Iraq and Syria will have peace once again. For the sake of future generations, let's play our part in safeguarding the cultural heritage of the Middle East.

---

Mr. Campbell is director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170626ed6q00009



World News: Russia Strikes  ISIS  Targets in Syria

By Thomas Grove 
285 words
24 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSCOW -- Russian armed forces launched a cruise-missile attack on Islamic State targets in Syria's Hama province, the defense ministry said Friday.

The defense ministry statement said the Kalibr cruise missiles struck infrastructure used to store weapons and ammunition for militants coming from Raqqa, where the U.S. seeks to squeeze the group out of the urban stronghold.

Russia said it had been monitoring Islamic State militants escaping from Raqqa to the south over the past week. The six missiles were launched from Russia's permanent naval grouping in the east Mediterranean.

"Remains of the terrorists and the IS terrorist infrastructure were destroyed by Russian Air Force's bomber airstrikes," the statement said.

Russia said it had informed Turkey and Israel of its attack plans before launching strikes. It was unclear whether Russia had informed the U.S. of the plans through a special military channel used to ensure the countries' planes operate safely in the airspace over Syria.

Russia said this week after U.S. jet fighters downed a Syrian war plane that it would pull out of a cooperation agreement that sets out the use of the deconfliction line.

U.S. officials have said that line has stayed open despite Russian threats. In response to the U.S. strike on the Syrian aircraft, Russia also said it would track U.S. and coalition aircraft in Syria as targets.

Both Russia and the U.S. have stepped up their attacks on Islamic State, although the U.S. has had its attention diverted by a series of recent confrontations with forces backing the Syrian government.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170624ed6o00029



Cross Country: Detroit's Iraqi Christians Could Use Some Mercy From Washington

By Jillian Kay Melchior 
841 words
24 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A11
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Dreams have been haunting Haydar Butris. From his prison bed in Youngstown, Ohio, the 39-year-old has envisioned the Islamic State hacking his body with knives and beheading him. But waking doesn't end his nightmare. Barring a legal miracle, Mr. Butris will soon be deported to his native Iraq, a country he hasn't seen since he was a teenager.

On June 11, Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents detained 114 Iraqi nationals. Like Mr. Butris, the vast majority are Chaldean Christians who came to the U.S. legally, then committed a crime that made them eligible for deportation. But if they're remanded to Iraq, they fear their faith could get them killed.

"We're sending people back to a country their families fled from, and at all possible times, that's the worst place to go," says Mr. Butris's lawyer, Clarence Dass, who also represents 19 other Chaldeans. "This could be a death sentence."

The Chaldeans' plight is a particular challenge for the Trump administration, which has positioned itself as a defender of Middle Eastern Christians. But it could also pose a problem for progressives, who have long insisted religion must not be a factor in immigration policy.

The administration has depicted the Detroit deportations as a critical safety measure. Immigration officials have said that the "overwhelming majority" of those being sent back to Iraq committed serious crimes, including murder, rape and kidnapping. The Detroit News reported this week that one of them, Louis Akrawi, is "a convicted murderer who was known to police as the 'Godfather of the Chaldean Mafia,'" and two others were his associates.

But in many cases, Iraqi Christians committed nonviolent crimes decades ago, in the folly of youth. Mr. Butris was put on probation after delivering seven pounds of weed in 1998. In another case, a mother of three was convicted for misdemeanor fraud 14 years ago. Neither has been charged with a crime since.

Until this year, the Iraqi government refused to take back immigrants, buying time for Chaldeans with criminal records. During that period, many have settled down, married their sweethearts, started businesses, and gotten involved in the church.

Mr. Butris has two daughters, 12 and 9, and a 3-year-old son. All born in America. "His kids, they're devastated," Mr. Butris's brother, Marty Mansor, says. "They keep asking when their dad is going to come back. I don't know what to tell them."

The harsh truth: Deporting these Detroit Chaldeans to Iraq inherently exposes them to peril and persecution. Last month, Vice President Mike Pence accused Islamic State of carrying out genocide against Christians. "Our administration is fully committed in bringing relief and comfort to believers not only across the Middle East but across the world," Mr. Pence said.

And it's not just ISIS that threatens Iraqi Chaldeans. Last month, a cleric who oversees the government's Shia endowment fund publicly said Christians must convert to Islam and pay a tax "or else they are killed." And just before Christmas, gunmen shot up Christian-owned shops in Baghdad, killing several people.

A famed Baghdad vicar has since bemoaned that his faith will soon be extinct in his homeland. In 2003, roughly 1.5 million Christians lived in Iraq. Four-fifths of them have fled abroad.

Progressives claim the Constitution bars the government from basing immigration and deportation decisions on religion. Yet so far it's been mainly progressives arguing for a reprieve for Detroit's Chaldeans, for whom "the risk is because of their religion," said William Swor, another Michigan attorney representing several Iraqi Christians.

But if the Trump administration considers religion a factor for these Iraqi Christians, why shouldn't it do so for those affected by the so-called travel ban? And in that case, why not give Middle Eastern Christians priority over Muslims who are also seeking refugee status? The potential repercussions grow broad because U.S. law doesn't allow much discretion when it comes to the deportation of immigrants who have committed crimes.

The Iraqi Chaldeans have three basic options: They can apply for relief under the U.N. Convention Against Torture, under which religious persecution can be a consideration; they can seek pardons for their original crimes; or, in some cases, they can ask for a reprieve based on "exceptional and extreme hardship" for their citizen spouses or children.

In all three cases, the burden of proof is on the immigrant facing deportation. These near-immutable strictures constitute a harsh irony for Chaldeans, who may soon face persecution for adhering to a faith grounded in redemption.

Both the Trump administration and its progressive opponents may find themselves yearning for a legal way to allow mercy to season justice. Otherwise, the case of the Iraqi Chaldeans is likely to have thorny implications, whether they stay or go.

---

Ms. Melchior is Heat Street's political editor.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170624ed6o0001m



World
Australia Joins Philippines' Fight Against Islamic State-Linked Militants; Two patrol planes will back Philippine troops fighting Muslim extremists on the southern island of Mindanao

By Rob Taylor and Rachel Pannett 
735 words
23 June 2017
13:06
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Australia is sending patrol planes to the Philippines—here it has long deferred to the U.S. on security issues—s it takes a more assertive role against terror threats in Southeast Asia.

Two Australian P-3 Orion aircraft will support Philippine troops fighting the Muslim-extremist Maute  group on the southern island of Mindanao , Defense Minister Marise Payne said Friday.

The deployment marks the first time Australia has directly interceded in the long-running conflict in the southern Philippines . Just days earlier, it announced an aid package for people displaced by the fighting in the Mindanao city of Marawi.

"The regional threat from terrorism, in particular from Daesh [Islamic State] and foreign fighters, is a direct threat to Australia and our interests," Ms. Payne said Friday.

Security experts fear that disparate extremists are coalescing in Mindanao under Islamic State banner, establishing themselves in a country with a thriving illegal-arms trade and ready supply of brutal criminal factions.

The Philippine military has received training and advice from foreign powers including the U.S. and Australia—ut given the fraying ties between the U.S. and Philippines under President Rodrigo Duterte , Australia's expanding role is less contentious, analysts say. Mr. Duterte last year declared his "separation" from the U.S. , a longstanding ally.

Australian Foreign Minister Julie Bishop was one of the first senior officials to visit the Philippines following Mr. Duterte's election a year ago. On that trip she urged closer regional cooperation to prevent Islamic State from "metastasizing" and making the area a launchpad for radicalized fighters, and expressed concern about militants' declaring an Islamic caliphate in the southern Philippines.

"It's pretty clear they're trying to emulate what ISIS has done in the Middle East," said Alan Dupont, a strategic analyst at the Lowy Institute , a foreign-policy think tank in Sydney. "Marawi would be a magnet for disaffected people in Southeast Asia, including in Australia."

Australia has more at stake in the Philippines conflict than the U.S., Dr. Dupont added, because it is much closer.

The Philippines appears to be "hanging on the edge of stability," said Peter Jennings, one of Australia's top strategic advisers and the head of the government-backed Australian Strategic Policy Institute . Several hundred fighters already may have returned to Mindanao from the Middle East, he said.

Australia reached an agreement with the Philippines in 2012 allowing deeper military engagement, a deal whose roots went back a decade to a 2002 bombing on the Indonesian resort island of Bali  that killed 202 people, including 88 Australians. Several of the Islamic militants responsible fled to Mindanao, historically a haven for Indonesian terrorists.

"Looking at what Australia's now doing, it looks like a very similar response," said Malcolm Cook, senior fellow at the Iseas-Yusof Ishak Institute in Singapore.

Australia has experienced five deadly terror attacks by so-called lone-wolf assailants  since 2014, increasing worries about homegrown militancy. It has increased the powers of intelligence agencies and police  to monitor and detain suspected extremists, and to prosecute returning fighters.

Canberra, long a U.S. ally, has also sent warplanes and special forces to the war on Islamic State in Syria and Iraq.

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull told a security conference in Singapore recently that Australia is willing to step up its counterterrorism efforts: Islamic State terrorists should be "killed in the field," he declared. Australia and Indonesia will jointly host a regional counterterrorism summit in August and push for more cooperation among disparate Southeast Asian nations against both foreign and homegrown militant fighters.

Facing a surge in hostage-taking by Islamic militants last year, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines agreed to conduct joint patrols  in waters off the southwestern Philippines and allow their maritime forces to pursue suspected criminals into each other's waters. Australian defense secretary Delfin Lorenzana told The Australian newspaper on Friday the P-3 aircraft would also fly over the area.

Some of Australia's P-3s carry sophisticated signals-interception and intelligence-gathering equipment that can pick up insurgents' mobile-phone communications.

Write to Rob Taylor at rob.taylor@wsj.com  and Rachel Pannett at rachel.pannett@wsj.com  and Rachel Pannett at 

Document WSJO000020170623ed6n001uq



World News:  ISIS  Bombs Mosque As Troops Close In

By Tamer El-Ghobashy 
451 words
23 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq -- Islamic State militants bombed the historic Nouri Grand Mosque in Mosul late Wednesday, Iraq's military said, destroying the site where Islamic State's leader first announced the creation of a self-declared caliphate straddling Iraq and Syria.

The destruction of the mosque came as Iraqi counterterrorism forces approached within 50 meters of the structure, in a final push of an eight-month campaign to reclaim the last major urban territory controlled by Islamic State in the country.

The mosque had became a symbol of the militant group's control of huge swaths of the country in 2014. Its destruction comes nearly three years to the day Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi used the landmark to announce the creation of his so-called caliphate -- a territory that has shrunk significantly in recent months. Since October, Iraqi forces backed by U.S. advisers and air power have reclaimed nearly all of Mosul.

Iraq's military called the detonation of the ancient mosque "a historic crime."

Islamic State, in a statement posted online through its media arm, claimed the mosque had been destroyed by an American airstrike.

"As our Iraqi Security Force partners closed in on the al-Nuri mosque, ISIS destroyed one of Mosul and Iraq's great treasures," said Maj. Gen. Joseph Martin, commanding general of Combined Joint Forces Land Component Command-Operation Inherent Resolve.

"This is a crime against the people of Mosul and all of Iraq, and is an example of why this brutal organization must be annihilated," Gen. Martin said.

The structure sat in the small Old City district where the militants are putting up a fierce fight in a city that they have all but lost, but at one point symbolized their startling strength.

In July 2014, Mr. Baghdadi ascended the imam's pulpit in the historic mosque and made his first public speech, declaring himself the leader of all Sunni Muslims. Built in the late 12th century on the western bank of the Tigris River, and once best known for its 150-foot leaning minaret, it quickly became a symbol of Islamic State's grip on Mosul.

His speech came less than one month after the extremist group's fighters swarmed Iraq's Sunni population centers, seizing about one-third of the country in a blitz that sent Iraqi forces into retreat and ceding control of Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, to Islamic State.

The mosque's reclamation holds mostly symbolic value for Iraqi forces just starting to break the militants' fierce grip on western Mosul's Old City, a densely packed warren of narrow streets and alleys and brittle homes.

Document AWSJ000020170622ed6n0000m



CN-Others
道琼斯海外投资动态信息-6月22日日报（节选）

4,790 words
22 June 2017
09:15
华尔街日报中文版 (简体)
WSJCN
Chinese - Simplified
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

中国政策汇             

                 中国"一带一路"政策和项目新闻汇编（以下内容来自于第三方媒体，未经道琼斯通讯社独立核实）                          

中国             

                 战略 |  中国首次提出"一带一路"海上合作设想 建三条蓝色经济通道                           

发改委和国家海洋局联合发布《一带一路"建设海上合作设想》，提出要重点建设中国－印度洋－非洲－地中海、中国－大洋洲－南太平、以及经北冰洋连接欧洲的三条蓝色经济通道。这是自2015年发布《推动共建丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路的愿景与行动》以来，中国政府首次就推进"一带一路"建设海上合作提出中国方案。（来源：新华网）             

                 会议 |  第二届"一带一路"行动联合国峰会8月举行                           

为落实"一带一路"北京高峰论坛的成果，推进国际行动，第二届"一带一路"行动联合国峰会将于8月1日在联合国总部举行。此次峰会还将被纳入2017联合国NGO大会的一个主要议题。（来源：新华网）             

全球情报站             

                 道琼斯通讯社驻全球记者报道                          

                 亚太                          

                 澳大利亚                          

                 能源 |  力拓回绝嘉能可，确认兖煤为其澳洲动力煤资产首选买家                          

目前正试图剥离大部分煤炭业务的力拓6月20日表示，针对该公司澳大利亚动力煤资产，董事会在比较了嘉能可25亿美元和兖煤此前的24.5亿美元收购提议后，拒绝了嘉能可的提议，并建议股东批准兖煤澳洲公司的提议，部分原因是预计兖煤提议的交易会比嘉能可的提议更快完成。该交易料在2017年第三季度完成。被出售的资产中包括了力拓位于澳大利亚Hunter Valley的大型煤炭业务Coal & Allied Industries Ltd.。             

                 基建 | 中澳合资公司接获悉尼地铁海底隧道合同                          

澳大利亚承包商Cimic Group Ltd. 于6月22日称，其合资公司将在悉尼地铁二期项目中建设9.6英里（16.5公里）长的双隧道及相关的土木工程，上述地铁隧道在悉尼港下方海底穿过。该合同金额达28.1亿澳元（合21.2亿美元）。隧道和车站的挖土工作预计将在未来几周开始，合同将于2021年中期结束。Cimic的子公司CPB Contractors和中国交通建设股份有限公司各占上述合资公司45%股份，建筑公司Ghella SpA占10%股份。             

                 中东                          

                 沙特                          

                 政治 | 沙特王储易主，力主变革的王子上位                          

沙特国王萨勒曼6月21日指定他的儿子Mohammed bin Salman为新王储，原王储、萨勒曼的侄子Mohammed bin Nayef将被剥夺所有职务。此举将给沙特带来深远影响。Mohammed bin Salman是过去两年沙特一系列巨大变革的设计师，被立为王储意味着他左右经济改革方向的权力得以强化。作为沙特阿美上市计划的支持者，他的上位为沙特阿美上市扫除了障碍，这一计划将全速推进。他将继续负责沙特的国防事务，沙特在中东的政策或将变得更具冒险性。             

                 背景分析：过去两年，Mohammed bin Salman一直是沙特变革的代言人。他推出紧缩措施以减少油价下跌造成的预算赤字，其中一些举措后来被撤销。他支持沙特阿美上市计划一定程度上是为了推动沙特经济走上私有化道路并增强竞争力，为年轻人创造就业，吸引石油业以外的海外投资。他此前已经承诺，将用大部分发行所得投资于一个经济多元化项目，旨在提升沙特的科技和工业，降低对石油收入的依赖。                          

                 伊朗                          

                 能源 |  道达尔将推进对伊朗天然气项目的10亿美元投资                          

道达尔集团6月20日称，计划推进对伊朗巨型天然气田South Pars的10亿美元投资，这是西方公司首次承诺向伊朗重新恢复起来的能源行业进行实际投资。自伊朗能源产业面临的制裁被解除之后，道达尔一直在积极寻求重返伊朗的机会，尽管美国目前仍对与伊朗进行商业往来加以限制。             

                 背景分析：去年年底，道达尔与中国石油集团就投资48亿美元开发South Pars天然气田达成了初步协议。但由于政治原因，这一投资计划一直被拖延。                          

                 欧洲                          

                 乌克兰/俄罗斯                          

                 制裁 |  美国扩大对乌克兰冲突相关的制裁名单                          

6月20日，乌克兰总统波罗申科访问美国，同日，美国表示将扩大乌克兰冲突相关制裁名单。根据美国财政部声明，新加入的制裁目标包括乌克兰分裂分子、实体及其支持者；在克里米亚经营业务的一些个人、银行和其他实体；俄罗斯武器行业的业内人士及公司。财政部还表示，与乌克兰冲突有关的美国对俄制裁措施将继续有效，与克里米亚有关的制裁在俄罗斯结束对该半岛的占领前不会解除。             

                 德国                          

                 贸易 |  德国今年对亚洲出口额激增                          

德国统计局6月21公布，今年该国对亚洲的出口额大幅上升，其中对中国的出口额在今年头四个月同比上升12%，对印度的出口额升幅相似，对印度尼西亚和越南的出口额则分别上升逾20%。相比之下，德国头四个月对美国出口额同比增长3.9%。对亚洲出口上升的趋势或能缓解德国面临的特朗普保护主义政策的风险。             

近期经济制裁             

制裁文件被制裁方国别被制裁机构/个人事项背景欧盟理事会实施条例(EU) No 2017/998N/AAl-Nusrah Front for the People of the Levant欧盟理事会将该组织在与ISIS和基地组织有关的制裁名单的内容进行了更新。6月12日起生效。N/A欧盟理事会实施条例(EU) No 2017/993朝鲜Chon Chi bu等32个个人、Koea Pugang mining and Machinery Corp等6个实体。欧盟理事会将32个个人和6个实体加入到与朝鲜局势有关的名单，并对其他部分信息进行了更新。6月12日起生效。N/A             

深度阅读             

                 沙特新王储将给中东带来什么？                          

沙特的王储之争已告一段落，权杖已交到年轻一代王子们的手中，他们决心要让中东知道谁才是这里的老大，形势山雨欲来。             

沙特国王萨勒曼(Salman)之子穆罕默德•本•萨勒曼(Mohammed bin Salman)周三被立为王储，成为81岁老国王的指定继承人。穆罕默德•本•萨勒曼主导了过去两年沙特的一系列巨大变革，打破了这个国家的沉闷。             

今年刚31岁的穆罕默德•本•萨勒曼领导了沙特对也门的战争，是国内经济改革的设计师，主张用强硬手段遏制伊朗，最近还促使沙特牵头周边国家孤立卡塔尔。             

相比之下，被废黜的王储、穆罕默德•本•萨勒曼57岁的堂兄穆罕默德•本•纳伊夫(Mohammed bin Nayef)被普遍认为是沙特权力集团中一个谨慎而又富有经验的人物，可能对穆罕默德•本•萨勒曼一些较为激进的举动构成牵制。穆罕默德•本•纳伊夫同时还被免去了内政大臣一职。             

如今，随着穆罕默德•本•纳伊夫被废黜（其内政大臣一职被他33岁的侄子所取代），沙特在中东的政策或将变得更具冒险性。             

华盛顿智库美国企业研究所(American Enterprise Institute)沙特问题专家Andrew Bowen表示，穆罕默德•本•萨勒曼更愿意把沙特的极端民族主义作为巩固国内社会变革的一种手段。他指出，相比稳重、谨慎且务实的穆罕默德•本•纳伊夫，穆罕默德•本•萨勒曼性格刚愎、固执、冲动且更具民族主义思想，把这样一个领导人放在那个位置是有风险的。             

虽然穆罕默德•本•纳伊夫没有公开批评过他的年轻对手，但他主张沙特采用一种更传统的手段──通过幕后策划和建立区域共识来处理问题，包括沙特与卡塔尔和伊朗的关系。             

相比之下，穆罕默德•本•萨勒曼主张炫耀沙特的军事及经济实力。他与阿联酋激进的实际统治者穆罕默德•本•扎耶德(Mohammed bin Zayed)建立了密切关系。             

沙特政治评论家及商人Ahmad al-Ibrahim说，从现在起，沙特会变得更加果断，无论在也门内战还是在与卡塔尔断交的问题上；沙特的外交政策将变得更加开放，更具活力。             

当然，最近几个月来，穆罕默德•本•纳伊夫在他负责的国内治安领域以外行使权力的空间已经非常有限了，因此，大西洋理事会(Atlantic Council)非常驻研究员、沙特分析人士Mohammed Alyahya指出，尽管沙特王室进行了权力整合，但这个国家的行事作风未必会像许多人预计的那样发生急剧变化。             

Alyahya预计，沙特在外交、经济政策和国防领域不会出现翻天覆地的变化，因为新王储负责这些领域已经有一段时间。             

的确，过去几个月，随着穆罕默德•本•萨勒曼扩大自己的势力范围，任命几位年轻王子担任政府关键职务（包括让一位弟弟担任沙特驻美国大使），穆罕默德•本•纳伊夫被排挤出局似乎只是时间问题。             

但几乎没有人料到形势会发展得如此之快，驻沙特的西方外交家此前一致认为，穆罕默德•本•萨勒曼需要拿出一些切实的成绩才会有所行动。             

随着也门战争陷入泥潭、卡塔尔拒绝让步、沙特王室4月份被迫中止不受欢迎的紧缩措施，穆罕默德•本•萨勒曼取得的唯一成功是和美国总统特朗普(Donald Trump)发展出一种令人意外的友好关系，特朗普在去年竞选总统时曾多次抨击沙特。             

穆罕默德•本•萨勒曼3月份访问了白宫，为上个月高调举行的利雅得峰会开辟了道路，特朗普在会上似乎表示支持沙特领导整个穆斯林世界。之后不久，沙特及其盟友与卡塔尔断交，获得了特朗普的支持，至少在一开始是这样。             

但到了本周二，就在沙特王室发生变化前几个小时，美国国防部严厉谴责了沙特和阿联酋对卡塔尔实施的禁运，美国在这一地区的一个主要军事基地就位于卡塔尔。对许多中东人来说，这说明沙特领导人对自己和美国政府的关系可能过于自信了。             

设在迪拜的近东及海湾军事分析研究所(Institute for Near East and Gulf Military Analysis)首席执行长Riad Kahwaji说，现在还不能说特朗普政府给沙特开了一张空白支票，也不宜过早断言这是沙特取得的一项成就，因为还没有看到特朗普政府在不远的未来实际上会向沙特提供些什么。             

                                      Yaroslav Trofimov                                           

                 中国用百亿美元投资挑战美国在巴基斯坦的地位                          

长久以来，人们总是用三个词来总结巴基斯坦的统治权力结构，那就是真主(Allah)、军队(Army)和美国(America)。             

如今，中国正试图利用百亿美元级别的投资取代美国在巴基斯坦的地位，在承诺给巴基斯坦带来经济效益的同时也让巴基斯坦背上巨额债务，进而长期锁定中巴之间的密切关系。             

在中国致力于对外输出基础设施从而将影响力扩展到亚洲乃至更广泛的地区之际，中国国家主席习近平已将"中巴经济走廊"视为其中一个标杆。到目前为止，巴基斯坦已和中国签署了550亿美元的项目，其中许多项目许诺给中国巨大的投资回报，并给予中国企业税收优惠待遇。             

前美国总统奥巴马(Barack Obama)的"重返亚洲"战略正在让位于习近平庞大的基建计划，这一模式可能在整个亚洲地区复制并推广。             

巴基斯坦商务部长Khurram Dastagir说，在没有其他国家愿意投资巴基斯坦的时候，中国来了，而美国错过了机会。             

中国将 自己的亚洲战略称之为"一带一路"，意指复兴古代的海上和陆上丝绸之路(Silk Road)。巴基斯坦总理谢里夫(Nawaz Sharif) 5月底为"一带一路"在巴基斯坦的第一个大型项目的完成举行了仪式，该项目是位于谢里夫家乡旁遮普省(Punjab)的一座由中国建造的燃煤电厂。             

中国正在巴基斯坦修建公路、铁路、发电厂和一个港口，并且不到两年时间就向巴基斯坦提供了20亿美元贷款，帮助巴基斯坦补充外汇储备。             

中国承诺的1万亿美元巨额投资在许多国家还没有兑现，但在巴基斯坦，已经有规模为180亿美元的项目在"中巴经济走廊"框架下投入建设。             

其中的重点项目是位于巴基斯坦瓜达尔(Gwadar)的阿拉伯海港口，该港口由一家中国公司扩建运营，未来，中国西南部的商品将通过这一港口进行贸易。             

巴基斯坦估计，通过提供工业化启动所必需的基础设施建设，未来几年中国的投资将为巴基斯坦经济增幅贡献两个百分点。             

美国总统特朗普(Donald Trump)放弃了被奥巴马用来制衡中国的跨太平洋伙伴关系协定(TPP)。美国官员称，虽然美国对其长期盟友巴基斯坦的民用援助依然庞大，但在传达美国的意图方面遇到了挑战。             

美国独立智库外交关系委员会(Council on Foreign Relations)的Ely Ratner表示，不管现实如何，中国正在赢得这场感知游戏，随之而来的将是政治后果，因为人们会发现中国的崛起和影响力是不可避免的。             

Ratner表示，美国政府在亚洲的战略以军事为主，中国则是用经济利益来捆绑。             

今年5月，美国国家安全委员会(National Security Council)东亚事务高级主管Matt Pottinger在北京出席"一带一路"庆祝活动时对中国在巴基斯坦的投资计划表示欢迎，但呼吁中国政府确保私营企业能够公平地参与竞争。             

美国官员表示，这也就是说，应该允许美国企业参与项目竞标。             

但在巴基斯坦几乎看不到这样的迹象。巴基斯坦政府从中国政府提供的经过筛选的名单中挑选竞标者，而名单中全是中国公司。巴基斯坦官员表示，这是因为中国公司自己会带来项目资金。             

一位美国官员表示，美国曾要求参与中巴经济走廊，但没有任何进展。             

正 如美国是通过援助巴基斯坦强大的军队来取得同巴基斯坦的同盟关系，中国也让巴基斯坦军方成为受益者。很多没有授予中国公司的建筑合同都被巴基斯坦军队的工 程部门拿走了。巴基斯坦军方专门组建了一支特种部队来保护中国的工程项目，这支部队现有1.5万人，未来可能扩充一倍。             

美国国会研究服务部(Congressional Research Service)数据显示，2001年以来，巴基斯坦共获得330亿美元的美国军事和民间援助。但美国的援助并未让美国公司在巴基斯坦赢得任何知名的基础 设施项目，巴基斯坦官员称，巴基斯坦加入美国的反恐战争已导致该国遭受1,230亿美元的经济损失和数万人的死亡。             

负责监督中国投资的巴基斯坦计划和发展部长伊克巴尔(Ahsan Iqbal)说，巴基斯坦希望从地缘政治转向地缘经济，从战争转向其他方面。他表示，巴基斯坦的愿景是成为本地区的贸易和商务枢纽。             

中国在巴基斯坦的投资并非援助。交通项目让巴基斯坦背上了债务，建设发电厂的条件是巴基斯坦需要从这些发电厂购买电力。             

巴 基斯坦反对党统一民族运动党(Muttahida Qaumi Movement)参议员Tahir Mashhadi将中国比作东印度公司(East India Company)。东印度公司是一个商业企业，在英国政府直接统治印度前，东印度公司对印度进行殖民掠夺。             

Mashhadi说，危险就在于，银行是中国的，资金是中国的，技术是中国的，管理是中国的，利润是中国的，劳动力也是中国的。             

巴基斯坦计划部首席经济学家Nadeem Javaid表示，2022年以前，巴基斯坦每年需要向中国支付50亿美元，但随着巴基斯坦出口增加，电价下降，加上中国至瓜达尔的贸易产生的通行费收入，这笔债务应该不难偿还。             

他说，这些担心只是杞人忧天。             

                                      Saeed Shah                                           

Document WSJCN00020170622ed6m001jl



World-Wide
What's News
World-Wide

201 words
22 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Saudi Arabia's king named his 31-year-old son Mohammed bin Salman, the country's minister of defense, as his successor.

---

Cybersecurity officials said investigators had evidence that Russia targeted election systems in nearly two dozen U.S. states.

---

Belgian officials said a man killed in a Brussels train station tried to use a homemade bomb and had sympathy for Islamic State.

---

Romanian lawmakers ousted the prime minister after only six months in office following massive anticorruption protests.

---

Queen Elizabeth unveiled the Conservative government's legislative agenda, confirming Britain's negotiating aim in Brexit talks.

---

Philippine militants aligned with Islamic State attacked a village and fought security forces in the south of the country.

---

Democrats bemoaned a loss in a Georgia race that had been seen as their best shot of gaining a House seat before the 2018 midterms.

---

The FBI said the man who shot GOP lawmakers at a baseball practice didn't appear to have methodically planned his attack.

---

France's Macron revamped his government, replacing the justice minister who led a centrist party.

---

ISIS bombed a Mosul mosque where the group declared a caliphate.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170622ed6m0001w



World News: Low-Tech Drones Steer Battle for Mosul --- Iraqi security forces use quadcopters to supply aircraft with  ISIS  targets in the city

By Ben Kesling and Ghassan Adnan 
706 words
21 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- Iraqi forces are using small, off-the-shelf drones to target Islamic State in the crowded and twisting streets of Mosul's Old City, where the militants are making a last stand.

Iraq's counterterrorism forces on Tuesday said they pushed to within a few hundred yards of the al-Nuri Mosque, where Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi officially announced the creation of the Islamic State caliphate in 2014, and has been a symbol of the militants' power.

The Old City likely has some 100,000 civilians and a dwindling number of extremist fighters packed into about 1 1/2 square miles.

Mosul is Iraq's second-largest city, and Islamic State's last major stronghold in the country.

Iraqi forces worry that this stretch of fighting could be the bloodiest of the battle for Mosul, which began in October, and that it could last for weeks longer.

Iraqi and American forces are looking for any advantage to loosen Islamic State's hold in the Old City, where militants use civilians as human shields and deploy booby traps.

Though troops can see the mosque, they also see civilians fleeing the fighting and that has slowed their advance, counterterrorism officials said.

The latest advance in Mosul was aided in part by the drones, quadcopters that are small enough to carry in a backpack, sell for about $1,500 commercially and are rigged with cameras on the underside.

Iraqi counterterrorism forces have said they used quadcopters to supply aircraft with the U.S.-led coalition with some of their first targets in the Old City.

Iraq's federal police say they do the same.

Islamic State terrorized Iraqi forces earlier in the battle for the city by using their own drones rigged to drop grenades.

Now, Iraq's security forces have turned the technology against the militants.

At a command post near the front lines, American combat advisers huddled days ago around stacks of high-tech communications equipment and screens with feeds from multimillion-dollar aircraft while they waited patiently for an Iraqi quadcopter to give them the battlefield intelligence needed for an airstrike.

"Using the Iraqi drones is something new," said Brigadier General Walid Khalifa, deputy commander of the Iraqi Army's 9th Division. "We see the enemy and we decide its location and we give the coordinates of targets. It's faster than before."

Lt. Col. James Browning, a battalion commander with the U.S. Army 's 82nd Airborne Division, said it can be time-consuming to have Iraqi forces spot a potential target and then pass along the coordinates for an airstrike verbally.

By the time he got the requests translated from Arabic, double-checked the target and approved the strike, the opportunity had sometimes passed in the quick-moving urban warfare.

Weeks ago he realized the Iraqis already had the technology available to cut through such problems.

When Iraqi drone pilots fly a quadcopter over a target -- and bring that target up on screen, showing militants fighting Iraqi troops in high definition -- Col. Browning said he gets what he needs to authorize a strike in seconds.

"We're able to deliver joint fires essentially at their command," he said, referring to airstrikes, artillery and other weapons.

Iraqi troops have been tinkering with quadcopters to make it possible for them to fly further and still provide real-time video feeds in dense parts of Mosul.

Col. Browning said Iraqi drone technicians had fitted drones with bigger batteries, giving them extended range.

If one falls from the sky or gets shot down, they launch another at little cost, he said.

And if there is no Iraqi drone available, the U.S. is still able to call on its ample arsenal of high-tech drones and aircraft, which are often already in the sky, can fly longer and further and can be equipped with infrared cameras, powerful weapons and other advanced gear.

The U.S. can use those to coordinate strikes, though it may take a few minutes longer, Col. Browning said. "We can still go old-school."

Document AWSJ000020170620ed6l0001b



World News: World Watch

292 words
21 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BELGIUM

Police Shoot Suspect

At Train Station

Belgian security forces shot and killed a man believed to have caused an explosion in Brussels' Central Station on Tuesday evening.

No other casualties were reported.

A spokesman for Belgium's federal prosecutor's office said a small explosion went off in the station but the suspect was then "neutralized" by soldiers patrolling the area.

"The incident is being considered a terrorist attack," said the spokesman, Eric Van Der Sypt.

Belgium has been on terror alert level 3 for months following an attack in March 2016 at the national airport and a subway station in Brussels that killed 32 people. Its top terror alert level is 4.

-- Valentina Pop

---

PHILIPPINES

Militants Linked

To ISIS Attack Village

Militants aligned with Islamic State stormed a village and may have taken hostages in the southern Philippines early Wednesday, police and the military said, 50 miles south of where government forces have been waging an urban war against Islamic militants for more than a month.

Members of the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters group attacked a village near the town of Pigcawayan in central Mindanao island at dawn and held an unknown number of hostages, Chief Insp. Realan Mamon, police chief of Pigcawayan, said in a radio interview. He told the Associated Press that it wasn't clear whether militants had taken hostages or if people had been trapped in the fighting.

The gunmen targeted an army outpost and a patrol base of pro-government militiamen, military spokesman Brig. Gen. Restituto Padilla told the Associated Press. He said the attack could be an effort by militants to divert the military's focus from fighting in Marawi.

-- Ben Otto

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170621ed6l0002z



World News: U.S. Downs Drone in Southern Syria --- Confrontations with pro-regime forces are distracting from fight against  ISIS , U.S. says

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington, Ben Kesling in Baghdad and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut 
994 words
21 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

An American fighter jet shot down an Iranian-made armed drone on Tuesday after it flew toward U.S.-led coalition troops in southern Syria, the latest in a series of confrontations with pro-regime forces that the U.S. military says is diverting attention from the fight against Islamic State.

The downing of the drone marked the third time in two weeks the U.S. has brought down a pro-regime aircraft viewed as a threat to the coalition and Syrian fighters the U.S. is backing in the fight against Islamic State. It was the latest indication that American efforts to discourage Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and his Iranian allies from challenging the U.S. have fallen short.

The new challenges to American power in Syria come as the U.S. seeks to deliver dual blows to Islamic State by forcing the extremist group, also known as ISIS, from its last two major urban strongholds, Raqqa, in Syria, and Mosul, in Iraq.

"We want to be focused on ISIS," said Col. Ryan Dillon, a Baghdad-based spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition. "Anything that distracts us, or takes our attention, or takes resources away from fighting ISIS is not helpful. We are doing a lot of things to get that back on track."

The shooting down of the drone on Tuesday came two days after a U.S. jet shot down a Syrian plane that had targeted American-backed forces on the ground, the first such incident in the six-year Syrian war.

On Monday, in response to the downing of the Syrian plane, Russia threatened to track American warplanes west of the Euphrates River in Syria.

The threat was followed by an immediate drop-off in U.S. airstrikes in Syria against Islamic State, as the U.S. military took time to assess the risks. After weeks of launching airstrikes that numbered in the double digits on a daily basis in Syria, the U.S. military said it carried out eight on Monday -- all of them near Raqqa.

The decrease in airstrikes was accompanied by a decision by Australia, a member of the U.S.-led coalition against Islamic State, to temporarily suspend its flights in Syria. There are 60 countries in the coalition.

The coalition also began using more advanced aircraft with better air defenses to fly missions in Syria, U.S. officials said.

In Tuesday's incident, the American military spotted the armed, Iranian-made Shahed 129 drone flying toward a small outpost in southeastern Syria used by coalition troops working with forces fighting Islamic State, the military said.

The U.S. pilot quickly shot down the Predator-sized drone, which was the same type as one downed two weeks ago after it dropped a dud munition near the same outpost. U.S. officials said they didn't know who was operating the drones, but said primary suspicion falls on Syria or Iran.

U.S. forces have also launched three airstrikes in recent weeks on Iranian-backed fighters supporting the Assad regime who the U.S. military said were threatening coalition forces. The encounters have ratcheted up tensions with the regime's two most important military backers, Russia and Iran.

U.S. officials said Tuesday that they were seeing no serious steps by Moscow to target American coalition pilots.

"Public statements aside, we have not seen the Russians do any actions that cause us concern," said Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman. "We have no reason to think that the Russians seek conflict with us."

While Moscow also said it would shut down a special military channel used to ensure that Russian and American planes operate safely in crowded airspace over Syria, U.S. officials said the lines of communication were still working on Tuesday.

Syria isn't the only place Moscow is testing the U.S. military. On Monday, a Russian fighter jet buzzed an American reconnaissance plane over the Baltic Sea, coming within 10 yards of the U.S. jet, according to a senior defense official.

Capt. Davis called that incident "unsafe," but said it was an exception, not the norm. Russia blamed the U.S. plane.

Uncertainty surrounding the administration's Syria policy may help explain why the Syrian military and its allies have pressed their attacks on American special operations forces and their local allies in an effort to test the limits of America's willingness to strike back, Western diplomats said.

"Damascus is trying to push the boundaries; this [U.S.] administration is so unpredictable they are testing the waters to see what the policy is," said a Western diplomat in the Middle East who represents a country that is part of the U.S.-led coalition. "The Obama administration was more predictable, and they were less willing to confront Damascus, and the regime engaged in much less risky behavior as a result."

The drone shot down on Tuesday was near al-Tanf in southeastern Syria. The area has become the focal point for U.S. efforts to counter Iran in Syria, with U.S.-backed rebels pushing north from al-Tanf to deprive Iran of an ability to ferry weapons and supplies to allies in Syria and Lebanon.

"Iran is playing an unhelpful role in Syria and elsewhere in the Middle East," Gen. Joe Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said Monday in Washington. "I think their major export is malign influence."

Iran already is fighting Islamic State in Syria, sending thousands of troops to back Mr. Assad's forces, although they have been accused of focusing more on rebel groups opposed to Mr. Assad's rule.

---

Gordon Lubold contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170621ed6l0002l



World
Iraqis Deploy Drones to Target  ISIS  in Mosul Battle; Off-the-shelf models are proving effective at directing airstrikes on militants in the crowded city

By Ben Kesling and Ghassan Adnan 
717 words
20 June 2017
20:55
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD—raqi forces are using small, off-the-shelf drones to target Islamic State in the crowded and twisting streets of Mosul's Old City, where the militants are making a last stand .

Iraq's counterterrorism forces on Tuesday said they pushed to within a few hundred yards of the al-Nuri Mosque, where Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi officially announced the creation of the Islamic State caliphate in 2014, and has been a symbol of the militants' power.

The Old City likely has some 100,000 civilians and a dwindling number of extremist fighters packed into about 1½quare miles.

Mosul is Iraq's second-largest city, and Islamic State's last major stronghold in the country .

Iraqi forces worry that this stretch of fighting could be the bloodiest of the battle for Mosul, which began in October , and that it could last for weeks longer.

Iraqi and American forces are looking for any advantage to loosen Islamic State's hold in the Old City, where militants use civilians as human shields and deploy booby traps.

Though troops can see the mosque, they also see civilians fleeing the fighting and that has slowed their advance, counterterrorism officials said.

The latest advance in Mosul was aided in part by the drones, quadcopters that are small enough to carry in a backpack, sell for about $1,500 commercially and are rigged with cameras on the underside.

Iraqi counterterrorism forces have said they used quadcopters to supply aircraft with the U.S.-led coalition with some of their first targets in the Old City.

Iraq's federal police say they do the same.

Islamic State terrorized Iraqi forces earlier in the battle  for the city by using their own drones rigged to drop grenades.

Now, Iraq's security forces have turned the technology against the militants.

At a command post near the front lines, American combat advisers huddled days ago around stacks of high-tech communications equipment and screens with feeds from multimillion-dollar aircraft while they waited patiently for an Iraqi quadcopter to give them the battlefield intelligence needed for an airstrike.

"Using the Iraqi drones is something new," said Brig. Gen. Walid Khalifa, deputy commander of the Iraqi Army's 9th Division. "We see the enemy and we decide its location and we give the coordinates of targets. It's faster than before."

Lt. Col. James Browning, a battalion commander with the U.S. Army 's 82d Airborne Division, said it can be time-consuming to have Iraqi forces spot a potential target and then pass along the coordinates for an airstrike verbally.

By the time he got the requests translated from Arabic, double-checked the target and approved the strike, the opportunity had sometimes passed in the quick-moving urban warfare.

Weeks ago he realized the Iraqis already had the technology available to cut through such problems.

When Iraqi drone pilots fly a quadcopter over a target—nd bring that target up on screen, showing militants fighting Iraqi troops in high definition—ol. Browning said he gets what he needs to authorize a strike in seconds.

"We're able to deliver joint fires essentially at their command," he said, referring to airstrikes, artillery and other weapons.

Iraqi troops have been tinkering with quadcopters to make it possible for them to fly further and still provide real-time video feeds in dense parts of Mosul.

Col. Browning said Iraqi drone technicians had fitted drones with bigger batteries, giving them extended range.

If one falls from the sky or gets shot down, they launch another at little cost, he said.

And if there is no Iraqi drone available, the U.S. is still able to call on its ample arsenal of high-tech drones and aircraft, which are often already in the sky, can fly longer and further and can be equipped with infrared cameras, powerful weapons and other advanced gear.

The U.S. can use those to coordinate strikes, though it may take a few minutes longer, Col. Browning said. "We can still go old-school."

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com 

Document WSJO000020170620ed6k0018o



World News: Russia Warns U.S. as Risks Rise in Syria --- Threat to track U.S. planes comes after American pilot shot down Syria regime jet

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington and Thomas Grove in Moscow 
683 words
20 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Tensions between Washington and Moscow escalated on Monday when Russia threatened to track American warplanes in Syria after a U.S. pilot shot down a Syrian jet for the first time in the country's six-year war.

The U.S. military responded to Moscow's warnings by shifting the flight routes of some pilots carrying out missions in Syria, U.S. officials said, an effort to minimize risks to American pilots as the White House and the Pentagon both appealed for calm.

Sunday's U.S. downing of the Syrian regime warplane came as American forces are increasingly at risk of direct confrontation with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and his allies from Russia and Iran.

The U.S. military has stepped up its operations in Syria as the American-led coalition tries to push Islamic State from its stronghold in Raqqa. Over the past month, U.S. forces have shot down an Iranian-made drone that targeted coalition forces in southern Syria and carried out three airstrikes on Iranian-backed fighters. The U.S. targeted the Syrian jet on Sunday after it carried out an airstrike on American-backed forces near Raqqa in northern Syria.

Tehran has also stepped up its military actions in Syria by launching cruise missiles at Islamic State fighters in eastern Syria and sending one of its top military commanders to pray on the front lines with Iranian-backed fighters, a move seen by some U.S. officials as a deliberate taunt aimed a Washington.

On Monday, Moscow said it would treat U.S. and coalition aircraft flying west of the Euphrates River in Syria as "targets" that could be tracked by air defense systems or Russian pilots. But Russia stopped short of threatening to shoot them down, giving some U.S. officials hope that the situation won't worsen.

"I think the worst thing any of us could do right now is address this thing with hyperbole," Gen. Joe Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said Monday in Washington. "The only actions that we have taken against pro-regime forces have been in self-defense -- and we've communicated that clearly."

As a practical matter, U.S. officials said, the Russian threat could have only a limited impact, since much of the American military focus right now is on driving Islamic State out of Raqqa, which is on the eastern side of the Euphrates.

The new standoff with Russia comes amid a swirling debate within the Trump administration over its Middle East strategy. While key military officials, including Gen. Dunford, want to focus on defeating Islamic State, other administration officials are pushing for a more aggressive confrontation with Mr. Assad and his Iranian allies.

At the White House, spokesman Sean Spicer said the U.S. wanted to avoid further clashes with Mr. Assad and his allies.

"The escalation of hostilities among all of the factions that are operating there doesn't help anybody," he said. "While we want to de-escalate the situation there . . . we will always preserve the right of self-defense."

The increasingly congested battlefield is raising fears that the U.S. could be drawn more deeply into the Syrian war. Under former President Barack Obama, the U.S. sought to avoid direct confrontations with the Assad regime while it focused on defeating Islamic State.

President Donald Trump has embraced a more aggressive approach in Syria by sending in more U.S. forces to work side-by-side with the Syrian Democratic Forces and other American-backed fighters battling Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

While the U.S. has stepped up direct military action against Syrian government forces in recent weeks, the Russian government has pushed a narrative that Washington is hampering its efforts to target Islamic State.

---

Aresu Eqbali and Rebecca Ballhaus contributed to this article.



License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170620ed6k0000j



REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
Skirmishing Over Syria

622 words
20 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A16
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A bipartisan conceit has been that the U.S. can defeat Islamic State by ducking the larger conflict in Syria, and now we're finding out that may not be possible. A U.S. F-18 jet shot down a Syrian bomber on Sunday to protect U.S. allies fighting Islamic State, and on Monday Russia and Iran threatened to target U.S. planes in response.

A U.S. fighter shot down the Syrian SU-22 plane after Syrian aircraft made their second bombing run against Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) allied with the U.S. near Taqba. The regime was clearly testing whether the U.S. would assist its allies on the ground. The U.S. needed to send a deterrent message or Syrian President Bashar Assad will continue to press his offensive across SDF-held territory.

The risk of escalation is real, but this isn't a skirmish the U.S. can easily avoid. Mr. Assad and his allies in Moscow and Tehran know that ISIS's days controlling Raqqa in Syria are numbered. They want to assert control over as much territory as possible in the interim, and that means crushing the SDF.

The Russian threat on Monday to target with anti-aircraft missiles any U.S. aircraft flying west of the Euphrates River in Syria is part of the same intimidation strategy. Russia also suspended a hotline between the two armed forces designed to reduce the risk of a military mistake. Iran, which arms and assists Mr. Assad on the ground, vowed further Syrian regime attacks against SDF, all but daring U.S. planes to respond amid the Russian threat.

The White House and Pentagon reacted with restraint on Monday, calling for a de-escalation and open lines of communication. But if Syria and its allies are determined to escalate, the U.S. will either have to back down or prepare a more concerted effort to protect its allies and now U.S. aircraft.

This is the predicament President Obama put the U.S. in when his Syrian abdication created an opening for Vladimir Putin to intervene. Had the U.S. established a no-fly or other safe zone to protect refugees, the Kremlin might have been more cautious. Mr. Putin took the measure of Mr. Obama and gambled the former U.S. President would protest and do nothing. He was right. Now the Russian is testing President Trump as everyone maneuvers for post-ISIS advantage.

As a candidate, Mr. Trump supported "safe zones" for refugees and opposition forces. But he's also shown no interest in a larger strategic goal than defeating ISIS. Now is the time for thinking through such a strategy because Syria, Russia and Iran know what they want.

Mr. Assad wants to reassert control over all of Syria, not a country divided into Alawite, Sunni and Kurdish parts. Iran wants a Shiite arc of influence from Tehran to Beirut. Mr. Putin will settle for a Mediterranean port and a demonstration that Russia can be trusted to stand by its allies, while America is unreliable. None of this is in the U.S. national interest.

The alternative would be to demonstrate that Mr. Assad, Iran and Russia will pay a higher price for their ambitions. This means refusing to back down from defending U.S. allies on the ground and responding if Russian aircraft or missiles attempt to take down U.S. planes. Our guess is that Russia doesn't want a military engagement with the U.S. any more than the U.S. wants one with Russia, but Russia will keep pressing for advantage unless President Trump shows more firmness than his predecessor.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170620ed6k0000v



World News: Russia Cautions U.S. Over Syria

By Thomas Grove in Moscow and Aresu Eqbali in Tehran 
865 words
20 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Russia escalated tensions with the U.S. on Monday, promising to track U.S. and coalition aircraft over Syria with its air defense systems and warplanes, the Defense Ministry said.

In a statement Monday, the Russian military said it would treat U.S. and coalition aircraft operating west of the Euphrates River as "aerial targets," but stopped short of threatening to shoot them down.

"In regions where the Russian air force is carrying out operations in the skies above Syria, any flying objects -- including airplanes and drones of the international coalition -- discovered west of the Euphrates River will be treated as aerial targets for tracking by land and air defense systems," the statement said.

U.S. defense officials said they were staying in touch with the Russian military to see what the practical impact of the statement might be on air operations in Syria. Defense officials said there were no immediate steps taken to curtail air operations as a result of the Russian warnings.

Pentagon spokeswoman Dana White reiterated the U.S. position that the military wanted to avoid direct confrontations with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and his allies so it could focus it firepower on Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

"The U.S. and its coalition partners are not in Syria to fight the Syrian regime or pro-regime forces," she said. "We are there to defeat ISIS. However, we will not hesitate to defend ourselves, the coalition or its partners."

Russia's threat was in response to the U.S. downing of a Syrian government jet over the weekend, the first time a U.S. pilot has shot down a regime aircraft during the six-year conflict.

Russia's Defense Ministry also said it would pull out of an agreement between Moscow and Washington to cooperate in the crowded skies above Syria, where U.S. coalition planes operate alongside Syrian and Russian aircraft.

This isn't the first time Russia has escalated its rhetoric over Syria. Earlier this year, Moscow pulled out of the memorandum on military coordination after U.S. President Donald Trump ordered a Tomahawk missile strike at the Shayrat air base in western Syria in early April. Washington and Moscow subsequently confirmed they would resume the agreement.

While the U.S. has stepped up direct military action against Syrian government forces in recent weeks, the Russian government has pushed a narrative that Washington is hampering its efforts to target Islamic State.

In a recent Moscow briefing, Col. Gen. Sergei Surovikin, the commander of Russian forces in Syria,condemned U.S. strikes on Syrian regime forces, saying they were aimed at thwarting the advances of the Syrian government.

The coalition strikes, he said, "blocked the way for government troops that carry out the task of destroying the ISIS groupings," adding that recent actions were a violation of Syrian sovereignty.

"It creates the impression that it is the government forces of Syria, not the terrorists of ISIS, that present the real danger to the coalition," Gen. Surovikin said.

The downing of the aircraft comes amid a shifting situation on the ground in Syria.U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic Forces are battling to capture the Islamic State stronghold of Raqqa. Mr. Assad'sforces, backed by the Russians and Iranians, have advanced east from Aleppo province into neighboring Raqqa province, putting them on a collision course similar to the confrontations happening in southeast Syria.

There, the U.S. has fired on pro-regime forces and downed an Iranian drone to stop an advance toward U.S.-backed rebels fighting ISIS near the Jordanian and Iraqi borders.

A spokesman for the U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic Forces said Mondaythat the regime forces began widespread attacks on themSundayusing warplanes, artillery fire and tanks on areas that the SDF had previously captured from Islamic State around the Tabaqa Dam.

"If the intention of the regime's repeated attacks on our forces is to terminate the liberation of Raqqa city, we stress that continued regime attacks on our forces in Raqqa will compel us to respond in a similar manner," spokesman Talal Silo said.

On Sunday, Iran's Revolutionary Guards force launched missile strikes at Islamic State in one of its last Syrian strongholds, Deir Ezzour province.

Those strikes were retaliation for a June 7 attack on Iran's parliament and a shrine in Tehran claimed by the terror group, and Iranian state television on Monday aired celebratory footage of the strikes, which were launched by mobile systems in the western Iranian provinces of Kermanshah and Kordestan. Iranian state TV also showed the drone-sent footage of the targets being hit.

Iranian officials from across the political spectrum praised the missile attack, including Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif.

"Terrorist supporters should receive Iran's message of power," Mohsen Rezai, secretary of the prominent Expediency Council and former commander of Iran's hard-line Revolutionary Guards force was quoted as saying by state TV.

---

Nathan Hodge in Moscow, Raja Abdulrahim in Beirut and Dion Nissenbaum in Washington contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170620ed6k0001l



CN-Tech
Facebook失误泄露审查员信息 安全或受到威胁

Georgia Wells 
312 words
19 June 2017
09:40
华尔街日报中文版 (简体)
WSJCN
Chinese - Simplified
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Facebook Inc. (FB)因疏忽将负责审核疑似恐怖分子和其它群组发布内容的审查员姓名暴露给这些审查对象，该公司上周五称这一漏洞已修复。             

Facebook发言人称，大约1,000名Facebook审查员受到在活动日志中公开审查员姓名的该漏洞影响。不过，点击审查员姓名将转向该审查员Facebook个人资料公开页。该发言人称，绝大多数情况下这些群组的管理员看不到审查员姓名。             

Facebook调查人员认为，疑似恐怖分子也许已经查看了不少于六名审查员的个人资料；据调查，这些情况无一涉及恐怖组织伊斯兰国(ISIS)疑似成员。             

该发言人称，这一问题去年秋天出现，于去年11月解决。英国《卫报》(Guardian)早先报道了该漏洞及后来被解决的消息。             

针对这种情况，Facebook做出大量改变，防止员工信息再次外泄。该公司还在测试无须审查员用个人Facebook账户登录的新审查账号。             

Document WSJCN00020170619ed6j000e2



CN-World
美国军方称击落一架叙利亚政府飞机

Dion Nissenbaum 发自华盛顿 / Raja Abdulrahim 发自贝鲁特 
272 words
19 June 2017
10:15
华尔街日报中文版 (简体)
WSJCN
Chinese - Simplified
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

美国国防部称，一架美国战机周日击落了一架叙利亚政府的飞机，这是美国飞行员首次在叙利亚内战中攻击叙利亚政府的飞机，也暗示特朗普政府越来越倾向直接挑战叙利亚总统阿萨德(Bashar al-Assad)及其盟友。

美国军方周日称，已击落一架叙利亚的SU-22飞机，此前叙利亚政府军对美国所支持的叙利亚武装的成员发动了两次袭击，该叙利亚武装主导针对拉卡的袭击。伊斯兰国(Islamic State, 也称ISIS)恐怖组织宣称拉卡为其首都。

美国军方通过击落叙利亚飞机表明，美方现在愿意将叙利亚政府的飞机作为目标，以保护与美国特种部队合作的库尔德和阿拉伯武装人员联盟，将伊斯兰国赶出拉卡。

Document WSJCN00020170619ed6j000dx



CFO Network (A Special Report) --- What Worries John McCain the Most: The Arizona senator says it's North Korea in the short term and Russia in the long term; Also: thoughts on China, Syria

By Gerald F. Seib 
1,265 words
19 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
R4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

In an interview with Sen. John McCain published in Monday's CFO Network report, Mr. McCain in response to a question about Syria recounted a time that President Barack Obama told him: "I'm going to degrade Bashar al-Assad, I'm going to upgrade the Free Syrian Army, and we're going to have a change in treatment." Mr. McCain mistakenly said the conversation was with President Donald Trump.

(WSJ June 21, 2017)

(END)

National security is front and center in people's minds right now -- from the continuing fight with ISIS to dealing with provocative moves by Russia. The Wall Street Journal's executive Washington editor, Gerald F. Seib, spoke with John McCain, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee. Here are edited excerpts of their discussion.

MR. SEIB: What world problem keeps you awake at night more than any other these days?

SEN. MCCAIN: Probably in the short term, North Korea because of the progress they're making on nuclear weapons. And in the long term, Russia. Everybody talks about ISIS. We all know how terrible ISIS is. We know that ISIS is killing people as we speak. They're very dangerous, and they're going to continue to kill people for a long time, but they don't have a nuclear weapon and they don't have a means to deliver it.

Vladimir Putin's behavior is more and more aggressive and provocative, whether it be in the conventional weapons as far as continued aggression in Ukraine to the cyberattacks throughout the region. The guy is hellbent on returning the Russian Empire. And that's what he wants to do.

MR. SEIB: China, friend or foe, has been a question that's puzzled people for the last three decades. Where are we on the China friend-or-foe continuum right now?

SEN. MCCAIN: We have to understand the Chinese want to control the Western Pacific. Lee Kuan Yew, one of the wisest persons I've ever met in my life, told me, "The Chinese want the West China Sea." They believe that the last 200 years were accidents of history, and it's their historic role to be the predominant power in the Asia-Pacific region.

That does not mean that China is ready to risk a war. It doesn't mean that they are ready to have a conflict with the United States of America, but they do believe that that part of the world is a historic Chinese area of control.

I also believe that they have the strongest leader that they've had since Deng Xiaoping. I think we're going to have to, at some point, exercise what we've been to war over a couple of times, and that's freedom of navigation. If we don't respect freedom of navigation of the high seas, then we are going to have problems in a lot of other places besides the Pacific.

MR. SEIB: What's the view of the Trump administration in Asia? And what's the view of the Trump administration in Europe among allies right now? What did you find?

SEN. MCCAIN: Uncertainty. They see him say one thing, and then they see him do another, and then they see him say another thing and then do another.

MR. SEIB: If there's a global trade war it's probably going to start in Asia, where you just were. How acute is the fear of a trade war there?

SEN. MCCAIN: If there's ever anything that describes beauty in the eye of the beholder, it is certainly trade. History shows that one of several factors in the strongest economy of the last 70 years was the new world order established in 1947. That new world order is under stress and pressure that it has not been in 70 years. And so when our secretary of commerce says, "All we want is a level playing field," I've heard that song before.

MR. SEIB: There was a suggestion made yesterday that the White House would just dismiss Bob Mueller, the newly appointed special counsel to look into the questions of the Trump administration's ties to Russia. What would your advice be if that suggestion came up?

SEN. MCCAIN: I can't believe they would think of such a thing. Look, there are a lot of people in Washington, around this country, that have tarnished reputations, and there's some question about Mueller? Come on. I think it would be as explosive as anything I can think any single act that the president might take.

MR. SEIB: So if you get to the core issue here, it basically was what were the Russians trying to do, A), and B), was there a collusion between the Russian agents and the Trump campaign? What are your answers to those two questions?

SEN. MCCAIN: I don't know. I don't know. And I think that's the reason why we need these hearings, and that's why I've always said we need a select committee. I've been saying it for weeks, because I've seen this movie before as the scandal unfolds, and another shoe drops. We're going to have to have a complete investigation. For me to draw a conclusion when we haven't got all the evidence I think would be prejudging. But I think there's enough out there that we should have a select committee of people who are highly regarded, who will work together in a bipartisan fashion. This thing spills over into all different aspects of American security.

The Russians have literally tried to play in all aspects of American life. If you can destroy a free and fair election, you destroy democracy.

MR. SEIB: There's one area we haven't talked about: how the Syrian mess gets resolved. What's your advice? What do you want to see happen in Syria?

SEN. MCCAIN: I'd like to see us do what President Trump told me and Lindsey Graham after Bashar al-Assad crossed the red line. He said, "I'm going to degrade Bashar al-Assad, I'm going to upgrade the Free Syrian Army, and we're going to have a change in treatment." Lindsey and I go out, drive away, "Hey, we're with the president."

About 10 days later I'm sitting in my office and CNN says, "Oh, the president has decided that he's going to go to Congress for permission before he acts." Whoops. I wasn't the only one who was surprised. The Saudis had planes on the runway, ready to attack. They found out the same way that I did. We need to replace Bashar al-Assad. That's how they found out, by watching CNN.

One of the reasons why President Trump was so well received in that part of the world, one was because he's not Barack Obama, and two, because he never mentioned human rights.

If we abandon our advocacy for human rights, we're no different than any other nation that rises and falls throughout history. And we've already seen the reaction of some of these countries to President Trump's lack of mention of human rights by seeing increasing crackdowns on human-rights activists. There's no mention of it whatsoever. Human rights is not the fundamental principle; American self-interest is our fundamental principle.

When we abandon that position on human rights, then you start seeing the crackdowns, and the people thrown in jail, and the increase in tension. And it doesn't work. You can't change human beings. They want freedom. They want human rights, and they look to us as the role model and our inspiration.



License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170619ed6j00005



World
Iran Hits Targets in Syria in Response to Islamic State Attacks; Missile strikes by Iran's Revolutionary Guard come in response to attacks in Tehran claimed by  ISIS 

Associated Press
362 words
19 June 2017
02:26
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Iran's Revolutionary Guard said Sunday it launched missiles into eastern Syria targeting Islamic State militants in response to an attack on Iran's parliament and a shrine in Tehran, warning that it would similarly retaliate against anyone else carrying out attacks in Iran.

The launch of surface-to-surface medium range missiles into Syria's Deir el-Zour province comes as Islamic State militants fleeing a U.S.-led coalition onslaught try to fortify their positions there.

Activists in Syria said they had no immediate information on damage or casualties from the strikes, launched from Iran's Kurdistan and Kermanshah provinces. Social media was awash in shaky mobile phone footage from those areas, allegedly showing the missiles rising in an orange glow before heading toward their targets.

Sunday's assault marked an extremely rare direct attack from the Islamic Republic amid its support for embattled Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. Iran's Revolutionary Guard, a hard-line paramilitary force, has seen advisers and fighters killed in the conflict.

The Guard said on its website that many "terrorists" were killed and their weapons were destroyed in the strike.

Activists in Syria didn't immediately have information about the Iranian-claimed strikes. Deir el-Zour is home to both Islamic State militants and civilians.

Five Islamic State-linked attackers stormed Iran's parliament and a shrine to revolutionary leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini on June 7, killing at least 17 people and wounding more than 50.

That attack marked the first to hit Iran, shocking its residents who believed the chaos engulfing the rest of the Middle East wouldn't reach them in the Shiite-majority nation.

Iran has described the attackers as being "long affiliated with the Wahhabi," an ultraconservative form of Sunni Islam practiced in Saudi Arabia. However, it stopped short of directly blaming the kingdom for the attack, though many in the country expressed suspicion Iran's regional rival had a hand in the attack.

Copyright 2017 the Associated Press

Document WSJO000020170619ed6j0048t



Business
What Adam Schiff Worries About; The ranking member of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence outlines his top fears: North Korea, terrorism, Russia, China

1,339 words
19 June 2017
04:10
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ISIS. Russia. North Korea. The national-security picture is crowded and complex, and made even more so by questions about the Trump administration's ties to Russia. To shed light on these issues, Adam Schiff, ranking member of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, spoke with Wall Street Journal Executive Washington Editor Gerald F. Seib. Here are edited excerpts of their conversation.

The biggest issues

MR. SEIB: We're thinking about risk in a dangerous world. You think about it all the time because of your position on the Intelligence Committee. What are the one or two problems that you worry about among all the others?

REP. SCHIFF: I think in terms of the most profound crisis that we're going to see within this president's term is likely to be if North Korea gets to the point where they can marry a nuclear warhead and an intercontinental ballistic missile. They're obviously progressing with the miniaturization of the nuclear devices and with their ballistic-missile technology. I do think the administration is right that China is the key. China doesn't have complete control over North Korea, but they have more control than any other nation. And there's a lot more they can do.

I also worry from the terrorism point of view about any kind of attack that would bring about a fundamental change in America.

We have seen a number of attacks, some quite devastating. We just celebrated the terrible anniversary of the shooting in Orlando. But I still worry about the aviation threat. That is a predominant concern of mine. Not only because ISIS has gotten so heavily involved in this space but because al Qaeda remains pernicious and potent.

The broader challenges I think that we face are certainly Russia, but also the degree to which we are ceding leadership in Asia to China. The final point that I would make is that through all of my life I've lived in a world where freedom and democracy were on the rise. But we've reached an inflection point. It is a phenomenal challenge for the United States. It's a time where we are needed more than ever in terms of being a defender of liberal democracy, and freedom of speech and association, and religion. This is not a time for us to lay down that mantle.

MR. SEIB: Let me draw you out a little bit more on the terrorist question. There is a sense when you watch what's happening in Europe that as ISIS shrinks on the ground, that it's sending the threat outward in the form of terrorism. Is that how you see it?

REP. SCHIFF: It is how I see it, but I don't think people should lose hope about this. The reality is we have to eliminate this so-called caliphate. That is a necessary prerequisite to defeating this scourge. In the near term or midterm it might result in these foreign fighters coming back home, predominantly to Europe, and increasing the threat there and indirectly increasing the threat here. Nonetheless, we have to cut off the resources they can derive from the caliphate from taxing people, et cetera.

Why have we been less subject to this violence? On the front end, we have far fewer people who have left the United States to join the fight. We also have a Muslim community far better integrated in the United States. We obviously don't want to do anything to alienate or jeopardize that. We need good lines of communication between the Muslim community and law enforcement, and public-safety officials.

It's unlikely we're ever going to get to zero. We do need a very comprehensive approach to dealing with this. There's certainly a strong military component in shrinking their ability to plot and plan. Intelligence and information sharing and our relationships with our partners elsewhere are vitally important. But it's also in terms of online radicalism and lone attackers. It's never going to be possible to prevent every single attack, unfortunately.

MR. SEIB: From what you've seen of the cyberthreat and the cyberdefenses of the United States from where you sit on the Intelligence Committee, how well positioned are we as a country and how well positioned are we as a government to help people in the private sector deal with the cyberthreat?

REP. SCHIFF: We are way behind in dealing with this problem. We need to, and we are trying to, improve our cyberdefenses, but one thing we have to recognize is our cyberdefenses are never going to be good enough.

When you take capable adversaries—ike the Russians, for example—f the Russians want to hack into the DNC next year or three years from now, they will hack into the DNC, and they'll get into the RNC, and they'll get in my computer if they want to. They have the capacity to do it. And no matter how well you train your workforce—nd obviously we're all going to have to use best practices here— determined adversary is going to get in.

So there's no cure with a software patch. The only real cure is twofold. We've got to educate our country and our public about what to expect, which is part of why I think the Russia investigation that we're doing in the House and Senate, quite apart from what Bob Mueller is doing, is so important. What made the Russian attack so successful last year was that there was no consensus that we ought to reject that foreign interference.

And somehow we have to prepare the country for what they may see next. The Russians may go beyond what they did last year in dumping not only authentic stolen documents but forgeries along with it. The best defense is ultimately inoculation. We have to derive a consensus that whoever [a document release] helps and whoever it hurts, we will reject it.

Beyond that, we need a deterrent. I took issue with our lack of an adequate response when the North Koreans hacked Sony. I think the Russians were watching. The rest of the world was watching what we would do and what we wouldn't.

Trump and Russia

MR. SEIB: From what you know right now, the core question in the Russia investigation obviously is collusion. Was there collusion between the Trump campaign and Russians of some variety? Right now, do you think there was collusion?

REP. SCHIFF: I think it's too early to draw any definitive conclusions. When I look at what [former FBI director James Comey] testified to, as a former prosecutor, I say, "That is all evidence of interference or obstruction."

Whether it is sufficient evidence is another story. And of course it would need to be corroborated. But if I were prosecuting a case of obstruction and I sought to admit director Comey's testimony, there's not a judge in the land who would exclude it. It's clearly relevant evidence. I think there's relevant evidence on the issue of collusion that warrants our continued investigation.

I think the FBI began that investigation for a reason. I think they're continuing it for a reason. We now have the added very important issue of whether there was any effort to obstruct that investigation. But I do think it's too early to be drawing conclusions. I already see efforts to try to curtail the investigation.

Write to reports@wsj.com

Journal Report

* Read more at WSJ.com/LeadershipReport

More in CFO Network

* Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross Talks Trade

* How CFOs Are Feeling

* What Worries John McCain the Most

* Elizabeth Warren: Americans Don't Want Less Regulation

* The House Gears Up to Tackle Taxes

Related

* What Worries John McCain the Most

Document WSJO000020170619ed6j001e1



Business News: Facebook Fixes Security Bug

By Georgia Wells 
239 words
19 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
B3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Facebook Inc. inadvertently exposed the names of some moderators to suspected terrorists and other groups whose content the workers were tasked with reviewing, a flaw the company Friday said has been fixed.

About 1,000 of Facebook's moderators were affected by the flaw, which disclosed their names in an activity log, a spokesman said. Clicking on a name, though, would take the viewer to the public version of the moderator's Facebook profile page. In the vast majority of cases, he said, moderator names weren't viewed by administrators of these groups.

Facebook investigators believe suspected terrorists may have viewed the profiles of fewer than six workers, the spokesman said. According to the investigators, none of the cases involved suspected members of the terror group ISIS, the spokesman said.

The problem began in the fall and was fixed in November, the spokesman said. News of the flaw and subsequent fix was reported earlier by the Guardian.

In response, Facebook made a number of changes to prevent workers' information from becoming available externally again. The company is also testing new accounts that won't require workers to log in with personal Facebook accounts.

"As soon as we learned about this issue, we fixed it and began a thorough investigation to learn as much as possible about what happened," the Facebook spokesman said.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170618ed6j0000c



World
Iraqi Troops Press Into Mosul's Old City to Dislodge  ISIS ; U.S.-backed military aims to reclaim militant group's last stronghold in Iraq

By Ben Kesling and Ghassan Adnan 
700 words
18 June 2017
21:18
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD—raqi forces on Sunday pushed into Mosul's historic Old City, in what is expected to be the final and most intense phase of the fight to retake the country's second-largest city from Islamic State control.

The U.S.-backed offensive began soon after sunrise, with troops advancing on the Old City from three sides, Iraqi military officials said. By nightfall some units had pushed forward a few hundred yards, the military said, which can be considered a substantial gain in an urban environment.

"With the blessing of God, the army, counterterrorism forces and federal police started breaking into the Old City to liberate what is left of the western side of Mosul," Lt. Gen Abdul Amir Yaralla, operations commander in Nineveh province, said in a brief statement.

The fighting is expected to mark the heaviest and bloodiest stage of the monthslong fight for Mosul because the Old City district is a densely populated warren of narrow streets and alleys, which will likely require house-to-house combat to clear out the militants.

"For sure Daesh is going to fight in a fierce way since this is their last place," said Lt. Gen. Abdul Ghani al-Assadi, commander of Iraq's counterterrorism force, the country's special forces, using another name for Islamic State. "But we have taken into consideration how the place is densely populated, the streets are narrow and explosive devices might be placed by the enemy."

The Iraqi military said it has given Islamic State fighters a chance to surrender via announcements by loudspeaker on the battlefield. But both Iraqi and U.S. forces have said in the past they expect the militants to keep fighting.

As night fell, Lt. Gen. Jabbar al-Darraj, commander of the country's 16th division, said on state TV that he hoped Islamic State fighters would give up, and that the Iraqi troops remained ever mindful of noncombatants.

"We have prepared safe corridors to receive civilians and prepared vehicles to transport civilians when we reach them," he said.

The fight for Mosul began in October, with Iraqi military and Kurdish Peshmerga troops pushing through rural areas and outlying villages primarily to the east of the city. Despite casualties among the troops, they made relatively quick progress before entering the city itself.

With U.S.-led coalition air support, including a new policy from Washington that allowed a more visible American troop presence on the ground and greater flexibility in air and artillery targeting, the Iraqi forces retook the east side of the city by the end of January.

In February, Iraqi troops crossed the Tigris river, which splits the city in half, and began squeezing Islamic State deeper into the heart of Mosul's dense neighborhoods. Fighting slowed in recent weeks as Iraqi troops engaged in bitter street-to-street battles in the neighborhoods adjacent to the Old City.

Iraqi troops struggled to advance through streets jammed with abandoned cars, booby-trapped houses and hidden Islamic State sharpshooters, while trying to avoid causing civilian casualties among the thousands of residents rounded up to be used as human shields by Islamic State.

As many as 100,000 civilians remain in the Old City, according to United Nations estimates last week. Fighting has displaced more than 600,000 people just from the west side of the city, the U.N. estimates, with a large number of those pushed into camps near the city.

Iraqi forces gave no timeline for concluding the operation, though officials praised its launch before the end of Islam's holiest month of Ramadan.

"These are blessed days, these are the last 10 days of Ramadan and we hope to achieve victory," said Abdulwahab al-Taee, spokesman for the Interior Ministry, in a statement.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Related

* Iraqi Forces Close In on Militants in Mosul (June 6)

* Foreign \b ISIS\b0  Fighters Increasingly Isolated in Mosul Battle (March 16)

* Iraqis Tell of Islamic State Brutality in Mosul (March 5)

Document WSJO000020170618ed6i00105



World
Palestinians Kill Israeli Police Officer;  ISIS  Claim Is Refuted; Hamas, PFLP also claim responsibility for Jerusalem attacks

By Rory Jones 
458 words
17 June 2017
16:42
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

TEL AVIV—tabbing attacks by Palestinian militants in Jerusalem left an Israeli police officer dead, Israeli officials said Saturday, but authorities cast doubt on a claim by Islamic State that its fighters were responsible for the assaults.

The three attackers also lightly injured several other officers and civilians before security forces shot them dead in locations outside Jerusalem's Old City on Friday evening, Israeli police said. One of the assailants had a gun that jammed, avoiding more serious casualties, the police added.

Sergeant Major Hadas Malka, 23 years old, was stabbed while engaging the attackers and later died of her wounds, Israeli officials said.

The bloodshed on Friday ended a lull in Palestinian violence against Israelis after a wave of attacks that began in September 2015 had largely abated in recent months in part due to greater security coordination between Israeli and Palestinian security forces.

Islamic State quickly took responsibility for the attacks, but Israeli authorities said they had no evidence to support the extremist group's claims, which were also dismissed by other Palestinian militant groups.

Islamic State made the claim in a statement on its official channel, its first about an attack in Israel.

In response, Islamist movement Hamas, which controls the Gaza Strip and regularly claims responsibility for Palestinian violence against Israelis, said one of its members and two operatives from the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine conducted the attacks.

Hamas spokesman Sami Abu Zuhri said Islamic State's claim aimed to "muddy the waters."

The PFLP, a secular nationalist group that has only a small level of support among Palestinians, said in a statement it also was responsible for the attacks.

The three attackers came from a village in the Palestinian West Bank, Israeli security officials said. The authorities launched an investigation into the assaults and attackers' affiliations to militant groups.

As Islamic State loses territory in Iraq and Syria, the extremist group has claimed responsibility for a number of attacks globally in a bid to project power and maintain its relevance among Sunni supporters. But it isn't often clear if the attackers are directly supported by the group.

The extremist group has said it was behind more than a dozen attacks around the world this month, including on major landmarks in Tehran and in a bustling London food market.

Israeli security officials have said some Palestinians are sympathetic to the extremist group's ideology but estimate it doesn't have widespread support among Palestinians who instead back nationalist groups such as Hamas that are driven to establish a Palestinian state.

Write to Rory Jones at rory.jones@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170617ed6h000ul



World
The 10-Point.A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,078 words
16 June 2017
12:55
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,             

Russian Roulette             

The U.S. Senate overwhelmingly passed a bill Thursday to expand sanctions on Moscow and wrest more control of Russia policy from the Trump administration, bucking criticism from European allies, the State Department and the Kremlin. The bipartisan bill, which passed on a 98-2 vote, requires that the administration receive congressional approval to lift existing sanctions on Russia. It also broadens sanctions on the country's energy sector, mandates punishment of malicious cyber actors and crimps financing available to the Russian banking and energy industries. The result is the strongest rebuke yet from U.S. lawmakers to Moscow over Russia's alleged interference in the 2016 presidential campaign. The bill also represents a warning shot to the White House from the Senate, where lawmakers on both sides of the aisle have raised concerns the Trump administration isn't responding forcefully enough to Russia.              

The Antisocial Network             

Facebook is leaning more on artificial intelligence. Under intense political pressure to better block terrorist propaganda, the social-media giant said it has expanded its use of A.I. in recent months to identify potential terrorist postings—nd at times to delete or block them without review by a human. In the past, Facebook and other tech companies relied mostly on users and human moderators to identify offensive content. Even when algorithms flagged content for removal, these companies generally turned to humans to make a final call. In response to a groundswell of criticism from governments and advertisers, Facebook disclosed new software that it says it is using to better police its content. One tool combs the site for known terrorist imagery to stop it from being reposted, while another set of algorithms attempts to identify propagandists and sometimes autonomously block them from opening new accounts after they have been kicked off the platform.             

Quants Cool Off             

This year is shaping up to be a dismal one for so-called quant funds, typically some of Wall Street's hottest investors. Over all, quantitative funds, which use sophisticated statistical models—ften developed by Ph.D.s—ather than human research and intuition to find attractive trades, rose 1.44% this year through May. That compares with a gain of 8.7% for the S&P 500 index and a rise of 5.7% for the Vanguard Balanced Index Fund, which invests 60% in stocks and 40% in bonds. So far, though, the weakness hasn't stunted investor interest. Through the first quarter of the year, $4.6 billion of net new money was invested in quant funds, even as more than $10 billion was withdrawn from non-quant funds. Still, the disappointing recent performance raises questions among some investors about whether too much money is pursuing quant strategies and whether these funds are beginning to suffer as a result.             

The Bell Tolls for Whom              

Would anyone listen to a band called the Whom? And for that matter, would the signature phrases of "Ghostbusters" and a certain Bo Diddley song have worked if they had read "Whom ya gonna call?" and "Whom Do You Love?" As the controversial four-letter word is increasingly neglected and scorned in popular culture, die-hard grammarians are fighting to save it. Twitter advises users on "who to follow," so Thomas Steiner, a systems engineer at Google, wrote a free browser plug-in that automatically corrects the "who" to "whom." Some say he "fixed the internet," but others say the formality is better left to butlers. Take our quiz to see if you know who's who and who's whom.

Today's Video                 

Escape the Hamptons                                  

Shelter Island—n 8,000-acre spot of land wedged between the North and South Forks of Long Island that can be reached only by boat or private plane—raws a moneyed crowd in search of a more laid-back vibe.                                           

TOP STORIES                 

U.S.                 

Rural America Is Stranded in the Dial-Up Age

Trump to Issue Directive Narrowing Obama's Cuba Opening

WORLD                 

Russia Says \b ISIS\b0  Leader May Have Been Killed in Airstrike

Arab Diplomats Seek to Sway Trump Administration in Middle East Rift

BUSINESS                 

Nestlélans to Sell Its U.S. Confectionery Business

Nike to Cut Jobs as It Combats Sneaker Slump

MARKETS                 

U.S.'s Latest Target in 1MDB Probe: Leonardo DiCaprio's Art, Miranda Kerr's Jewelry

A Radical Thought for Investors

Number of the Day                 

19%                 

The drop in Kroger shares Thursday after the U.S.'s biggest supermarket chain said that sales at longstanding stores fell for the second straight quarter and that increasing competition would hurt earnings for the year.                                                        

Today's Question                  

Returning to our story above, with whom do you agree—he grammar sticklers or their detractors? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.                          

                 —ompiled by Margaret Rawson                                           

Reader Response                 

Responding to yesterday's question on the shooting in Virginia,                     Bill Weber of California said: "Incidents such as these are no doubt partly encouraged by the partisan rancor and social media vitriol infecting our political dialogue. It will be interesting to see how long it will be before the 'coming together' comments from our political leaders—rom both parties—eturn to the irresponsible and unproductive noise that seems to so enthrall our politicians and the media." Mohd Saat of Virginia wrote: "It's a shrewd reminder that there could always be a sliver of extremism in any group—olitical, racial or religious. The war against terror needs to account for different perspectives and motives." And Tom Palumbo of Michigan reflected: "We throw a lot of hate at politicians (in all parties), but they are still human, and they and their families receive death threats more often than we may realize."                                           

                     This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.                                  

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.                                           

The 10-Point In Your Inbox                 

Document WSJO000020170616ed6g00209



World
Ex-CIA Operative Is Caught Up in a Montenegrin Mystery; Why was Joseph Assad in Montenegro as alleged Russian-backed coup plot unfolded?

By Julian E. Barnes in Brussels and Drew Hinshaw in Podgorica, Montenegro 
1,347 words
16 June 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. congressional investigators want to know what an ex-CIA operative was doing in Montenegro last fall at the time of an alleged Russian-backed coup plot against NATO's newest member.

Former Central Intelligence Agency‎fficer Joseph Assad is celebrated in Washington for helping extract dozens of Iraqi Christians from Islamic State territory in 2015‎ Last October, days before a hotly contested national election in Montenegro, Mr. Assad flew to the tiny Balkan country that has been the subject of tensions between the U.S. and Russia.

Why Mr. Assad went is a focus of an espionage trial in Montenegro—nd now a congressional inquiry in Washington.

The imbroglio is a sign that old East-versus-West spy games are alive again in Europe. Current and former U.S. and Russian officials acknowledge privately that their operatives are at work in the Balkans and in Montenegro in particular.

Montenegro's most recent troubles began to unfold when the North Atlantic Treaty Organization said it would admit the country, a setback in Moscow's efforts to block further expansion of the military alliance. Russia immediately declared its opposition, and Western officials say it began a campaign to derail the country's entry.

U.S. and Montenegrin officials say the campaign culminated in a Russian-backed plot that was thwarted at the last moment. The government's opponents say the events amounted to a fake coup intended to rally the people to the ruling party's side.

Congressional officials said they want to learn if Mr. Assad, intentionally or unwittingly, was dragged into the alleged Russian plot. Russia denies backing any coup attempt.

Montenegrin officials said they are investigating whether Mr. Assad was hired to help the alleged perpetrators. Prosecutors have charged 14 people in the alleged plot, including what the indictment describes as a group of Serb nationalists, several of whom called themselves The Wolves. The indictment, recently upheld by Montenegrin courts, says the men planned to overthrow Montenegro's government, possibly kill its prime minister and install a pro-Russian regime. It doesn't charge Mr. Assad, but names him as a potential contractor hired to help to lead a subsequent escape from the country.

U.S. and allied officials have said it makes no sense that the coup plotters would use an outsider to help extract their team from the country. But Montenegrin and U.S. officials said it is possible Russian operatives wanted to associate a former CIA officer unwittingly with the plot so as to obscure Moscow's responsibility.

U.S. and allied officials said one reason they believe there was a coup planned was that Serbian President Aleksandar Vučć said his country's security services had found "undeniable and material" evidence to back the Montenegrin account and cooperated with the investigation.

Prosecutors allege in their indictment that Mr. Assad approached a Florida security firm, Patriot Defense Group, looking for someone to help with "counter surveillance and evacuation" for the opposition party.

Brian Scott, a former CIA official and chief executive of Patriot Defense Group, said a staff member spoke with Mr. Assad about general security work in Montenegro for a company affiliated with Patriot. Mr. Scott said he didn't know if the work was to conduct an evacuation, adding his company quickly turned down the job because it wasn't aligned with his firm's mission to assist U.S. companies overseas.

Mr. Assad, who hasn't been indicted, declined to speak to The Wall Street Journal. His lawyer, Vincent Citro, said Mr. Assad had been in Montenegro to assist a friend and colleague who was managing the opposition's campaign. Mr. Citro says Mr. Assad had nothing to do with any plot and denies Mr. Assad was working as a spy for Russia or anyone else.

Mr. Citro confirmed there was a call between Mr. Assad and Patriot Defense Group. He said Mr. Assad has cooperated with the U.S. government "to clarify misinformation coming from Montenegro" but said he was told his client isn't under investigation.

A story about Mr. Assad and his wife on the website of his college alma mater and a 2016 profile in a Florida newspaper provides this sketch of Mr. Assad: He is an Egyptian Christian raised in Lebanon and Egypt and is now a naturalized U.S. citizen. He moved to the U.S. to attend Palm Beach Atlantic University in Florida, where he focused on political science and biblical studies and graduated in 1994. In 1999, Mr. Assad and his wife, born in the U.S., both joined the CIA.

In 2015, after Mr. Assad moved to a private security consultancy, ABC's 20/20 featured a segment on how the Assads helped rescue 149 Iraqi Christians from ISIS.

Among those charged in the alleged plot in Montenegro are two accused Russian operatives, three members of the Montenegrin opposition and nine Serbs. The trial will hinge on the credibility of the government's main witness, a (unindicted) Serb who in a statement cited in the indictment says he was recruited by a Russian intelligence agent to overthrow a government.

Staff members and investigators of the House Intelligence Committee this week reached out to Mr. Assad and Mr. Scott to ask them questions. "If Americans were involved we need to investigate," said Rep. Devin Nunes (R., Calif.), the committee's chairman. He recently visited Montenegro to meet with prosecutors about the allegations of Russian involvement. "This was an attempt to take down the pro-NATO government by Russian interests," he said.

Last year, Montenegro's Democratic Party of Socialists, which has ruled the country since independence in 2006 and has pushed for NATO membership, faced a stiff challenge from the Democratic Front, a coalition of opposition groups that campaigned on an anticorruption platform and called for a referendum on NATO.

The opposition hired Aron Shaviv, a British-Israeli campaign manager who had made his mark producing amusing political advertisements for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. With Mr. Shaviv's satirical ads poking fun of the government on the air, Mr. Shaviv said, he was followed and pulled over by Montenegrin police and security.

Mr. Shaviv said he called Mr. Assad, with whom he had worked previously, to come to Montenegro to conduct a security assessment. Mr. Assad's lawyer says his client provided the assessments for Mr. Shaviv, then left on the day of the election.

Montenegrin officials say they have no indication Mr. Shaviv was followed by the military or security agencies.

Montenegrin and U.S. congressional investigators have questioned the timing of Mr. Assad's exit. In conversations with the Journal, they asked why a security adviser would leave his client on the day of the election, hours after high-profile arrests of alleged plotters.

Mr. Shaviv, who hasn't been accused in the plot, said the Montenegrin prosecutors' allegations amount to believing Moscow tried to topple a government using a team made up of a political consultant, a former CIA agent and "some farm boys from rural Montenegro with their hunting rifles."

Mr. Shaviv said Montenegro's government faced defeat in the October election and whipped up the "sloppiest conspiracy theory ever concocted." Both the Montenegrin government and ruling-party officials deny the allegation.

The ruling party won the election and on June 5, the country formally joined NATO, becoming its 29th member, delivering a win for the West.

While Russian officials deny they are trying to destabilize NATO aspirants or countries on their borders, U.S. officials said they expect more Russian interference across Europe. Gen. Ben Hodges, a senior U.S. Army commander in Europe, said Russia is "going to continue doing this, putting pressure on countries on their periphery."

Write to Julian E. Barnes at julian.barnes@wsj.com and Drew Hinshaw at drew.hinshaw@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170616ed6g001gz



World
Russia Investigates if It Killed  ISIS  Leader in Airstrike; Warplanes struck a meeting of high-ranking Islamic State commanders in Syria in May, Moscow says

By Nathan Hodge in Moscow and Julian E. Barnes in Brussels 
749 words
16 June 2017
15:44
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The Russian military said Friday it may have killed Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi in an airstrike in Syria in late May, a claim that the Pentagon couldn't confirm and Russia's foreign minister quickly played down.

Russia's Defense Ministry said Su-35 and Su-34 warplanes struck a meeting of high-ranking Islamic State commanders near Raqqa, the group's de facto Syrian capital, on May 28.

"According to the information that is now being checked through various channels, Islamic State leader Ibrahim Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi was present at the meeting, and was destroyed as a result of the strike," the statement read.

After the military's announcement, the foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said he didn't have "100% confirmation" that Baghdadi had been killed, Russian news agencies reported.

Navy Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said the U.S. military had "no information to corroborate those reports" of Baghdadi's death.

In Washington, a senior administration official said the U.S. wasn't able to corroborate the Russian claim. "At this point the claims seem to have a number of infirmities," the official said, noting there has been a pattern of unconfirmed claims by Russia and Syria in the fight against extremists in Syria.

U.S. military and intelligence officials are examining the claim and evidence for it, the official said.

Another senior U.S. official said Russia has reasons to play up their Syria strikes and make sweeping claims of success, even if evidence of that success isn't clear. The official couldn't confirm whether the airstrike in May hit Baghdadi, who has been reported killed several times before.

A Syrian pro-government news website carried a report on June 11 saying Syrian state television had reported the previous weekend that Baghdadi had been killed in an airstrike in Raqqa.

The U.S. and Russia are backing opposing sides in the Syrian conflict, with Moscow supporting the government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and the U.S. backing antigovernment rebels. But both Moscow and Washington target Islamic State.

The Russian military said Friday that the U.S. was notified in advance about the time and location of the airstrike in May.

Baghdadi has generally remained in hiding. In November 2016, he delivered a rare audio recording, after a nearly yearlong silence, in which he called on his followers to defend Islamic State strongholds.

Russia has stepped up its attacks against Islamic State in Syria, although they don't account for the majority of Russian strikes, which target antigovernment rebels, according to U.S. officials. The strategy is designed, the U.S. official said, to gain diplomatic leverage internationally and bolster Moscow's case that it is doing more than just propping up Mr. Assad.

The Russian military's claim it had killed Baghdadi may also be intended for a domestic audience.

Ahead of scheduled elections next year, Russian President Vladimir Putin is trying to shore up his image as a strong leader who can protect Russia, and has ramped up strikes against Islamic State to help him make his case, the U.S. official said.

Russia faces a growing threat from Islamic State affiliates in the Caucasus region and former Soviet republics, an issue of growing concern to the Russian government.

Since U.S.-backed Kurdish and Arab forces launched an offensive on Raqqa last week, residents of the city and anti-Islamic State activists have reported increased coalition airstrikes and artillery attacks.

The airstrikes have hit internet cafes, hospitals, mosques, schools and other municipal buildings, and killed dozens of civilians, the residents and activists said. Much of the city's infrastructure was taken over by Islamic State in 2014 and became part of the bureaucracy of its self-declared caliphate.

An audio message circulated Monday on Islamic State social media channels and attributed to spokesman Abi al-Hassan al-Muhajer urged "soldiers of the caliphate" to remain steadfast in Syria and Iraq and followers around the world to follow suit.

Raja Abdulrahim and Noam Raydan in Beirut, Nour Alakraa in Berlin and Carol E. Lee in Washington contributed to this article.

Write to Nathan Hodge at nathan.hodge@wsj.com and Julian E. Barnes at julian.barnes@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170616ed6g001b9



World News: EU Says Al Qaeda Seeks to Pass  ISIS 

By Julian E. Barnes 
311 words
16 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BRUSSELS -- A resurgent al Qaeda is attempting to take advantage of a weakening Islamic State to challenge its rival for pre-eminence in the global jihadist movement, the European Union's police agency warned.

As a U.S.-led international military coalition rolls back Islamic State's self-declared caliphate in Iraq and Syria, al Qaeda undertook efforts in 2016 to replace it as leader of the movement, Europol said in its annual report on terrorism.

Al Qaeda's challenge to the extremist Sunni Muslims of its rival is occurring despite its messages in Arabic that tend to "downplay its international aspirations."

Its propaganda aimed at the West, however, echoes Islamic State's calls for terrorist attacks, the agency said Thursday.

Europol said al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the organization's affiliate in Yemen, began publishing short English-language commentaries aimed at guiding would-be attackers in the West, offering advice on what groups to target in attacks and how to maximize the impact of strikes.

Among the report's other findings, it said the amount of propaganda generated by Islamic State fell, as military pressure on it grew and countermeasures by social-media companies became more effective, Europol said.

The total number of jihadist terrorist attacks slightly decreased in 2016, to 13 from 17 the year before. While the deaths caused by those attacks fell during the period, to 135 from 150, the casualty toll is still far higher than in other recent years, Europol said.

Meanwhile, arrests for terrorism-related offenses continued to increase for the fourth straight year, the agency said.

Rob Wainwright, Europol's executive director, said the need for improved information-sharing on suspected militants has become more pressing in the past two years.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170616ed6g0001q



Facebook Targets Terror --- New software blocks content and users, without seeking any human moderation

By Sam Schechner 
774 words
16 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Under intense political pressure to better block terrorist propaganda on the internet, Facebook Inc. is leaning more on artificial intelligence.

The social-media firm said Thursday that it has expanded its use of AI in recent months to identify potential terrorist postings and accounts on its platform -- and at times to delete or block them without review by a human. In the past, Facebook and other tech giants relied mostly on users and human moderators to identify offensive content. Even when algorithms flagged content for removal, these firms generally turned to humans to make a final call.

Companies have sharply boosted the volume of content they have removed in the past two years, but these efforts haven't proven effective enough to tamp down a groundswell of criticism from governments and advertisers. They have accused Facebook, Google parent Alphabet Inc. and others of complacency over the proliferation of inappropriate content -- in particular, posts or videos deemed as extremist propaganda or communication -- on their social networks.

British Prime Minister Theresa May ratcheted up complaints this month in the wake of a series of deadly terror attacks in the U.K. and sought new international agreements to regulate the internet and force technology companies to filter content pre-emptively.

In response, Facebook disclosed new software that it said it is using to better police its content. One tool, in use for several months now, combs the site, including live videos, for known terrorist imagery, like beheading videos, to stop them from being reposted, executives said Thursday. The tool, however, doesn't identify new violent videos like the Cleveland murder that was posted on Facebook in April.

Another set of algorithms attempts to identify -- and sometimes autonomously block -- propagandists from opening new accounts after they have already been kicked off the platform. Another experimental tool uses AI that has been trained to identify language used by terrorist propagandists.

Facebook declined to say what portion of extremist material it removes is being blocked or removed automatically, and what percentage is reviewed by humans.

The firm's new moves reflect a growing willingness to trust machines to help even in part with thorny tasks like distinguishing inappropriate content from satire or news coverage -- something firms resisted after a spate of attacks just two years ago as a potential threat to free speech.

One factor in the changed approach, Facebook executives said, has been the improved ability of algorithms to identify unambiguously terrorist content in some cases, while referring other content for human review.

While an ISIS-propaganda photo posted without a caption may be an easy removal for an algorithm, the same image with a caption might for instance require human review, said Monika Bickert, Facebook's head of global policy management. Similarly a beheading video that has previously been removed is easy to block. Short clips of the same video, or a never-before-seen but similar looking video, might need a reviewer to check if they are part of a news report or other commentary.

"Our AI can know when it can make a definitive choice, and when it can't make a definitive choice," said Brian Fishman, lead policy manager for counterterrorism at Facebook. "That's something new."

Another factor in the fresh AI push: a spate of recent terrorist attacks and scandals involving ads being shown before jihadist videos.

Just days before a general election in the U.K., for instance, the campaigns for the country's two main parties pulled political ads from Alphabet's YouTube video-sharing site after being alerted those ads were appearing before extremist content.

Germany earlier this year proposed a bill that could fine firms up to 50 million euros ($56 million) for failing to remove fake news or hate speech -- including terrorist content.

The U.K. and France published a counterterrorism action plan this week that calls on technology companies to go beyond deleting content that is flagged, and instead identify it beforehand to prevent publication.

"There have been promises made. They are insufficient," said President Emmanuel Macron of France on Tuesday.

Facebook has expanded its use of human reviewers to look at what executives said are difficult cases. In May, the company said it would add about 3,000 new moderators to its community operations team that takes down content that violates Facebook policies, expanding the team by two thirds. Across the company, Facebook said it has 150 people focused on counterterrorism as their core job.

---

Jack Nicas contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170616ed6g0001s



World News: Terrorist Was 'Unyielding' On Islam

By Eric Sylvers in Fagnano, Italy, and Giovanni Legorano in Rome 
800 words
16 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Valeria Collina tried in June 2016 to enter the east London fast-food restaurant where her son Youssef Zaghba worked in the kitchen. He blocked her at the door, saying she couldn't sit there unaccompanied by a male relative.

"He was becoming more and more unyielding in his views on Islam," Ms. Collina said in an interview outside Bologna. "But there was no reason to think it could end in the terrible act that he did."

More than a year before Zaghba and two other terrorists killed eight people in a rampage at London Bridge and nearby Borough Market this month, the Italian-Moroccan man's steady radicalization had alarmed his family and raised the suspicions of Italian authorities. But despite the warning signs, he slipped through the grasp of Italian security personnel with an aggressive approach to extremists and years of experience combating the mafia.

"You hear about the guys who become terrorists after coming out of jail or those who are ex-drug addicts looking for something to latch onto," Ms. Collina said. "But Youssef is a different case and maybe that makes it more dangerous and harder to control."

The problem of Islamic extremism has been less severe in Italy than in other European countries, in part because Muslim immigration has been more limited here than elsewhere in the region. About 2.7% of the country's population is Muslim, compared with 8.7% in France, according to the World Religion Database.

Italy hasn't suffered a major Islamist terrorist attack. The country has seen about 100 foreign fighters depart for battlefields in the Middle East, and several hundred people are under special observation for the risk of radicalism in Italian jails -- far fewer than in other large European countries.

The country has long had some of Europe's strictest antiterrorism laws, a legacy of its experience combating the mafia and homegrown political terrorism. Authorities have broad authority to wiretap suspects and to order preventive detention if they feel a subject could repeat an offense or hide potential evidence.

But since most of the country's suspected Islamist extremists are foreign-born, authorities' main tool in combating them has been expulsion and repatriation. Italy has been especially aggressive at expelling people who display extremist views, even if they haven't been convicted of any crime. Since January 2015, the country has expelled 184 suspected extremists.

Such techniques didn't apply to Zaghba, who was born in Morocco of an Italian mother and a Moroccan father and had dual citizenship. Ms. Collina, born in Bologna, moved to Morocco about 25 years ago after converting to Islam and marrying Zaghba's father. She gave birth to her son there in 1995. The two returned to Italy in 2015 after Zaghba failed two university exams in Morocco.

In 2014 when Ms. Collina and her son still lived in Morocco she noticed that he had an Islamic State flag on his Facebook profile. He told her he wanted to go to Syria.

"He'd say to me, 'That's pure Islam, I'm going to go there,'" Ms. Collina said. "But I never thought he wanted to go to Syria to fight and even less that he would do a terrorist attack."

Once they moved to Italy, she said, Zaghba told her he preferred how she dressed in Morocco, where she wore a face covering known as a niqab that left only a narrow opening for her eyes. Another time he scolded her because a small bit of her pants could be seen under her long robes, Ms. Collina said.

In March 2016, Italian police stopped Zaghba at the Bologna airport with a one-way ticket to Istanbul. They found Islamic State propaganda on his phone and his mother told them her son wanted to reach Syria. Antiterrorism agents searched her house, taking away a tablet computer, documents, cellphones and phone cards.

But the authorities lacked sufficient evidence to hold Zaghba and had to release him after a few hours. They took away his passport and continued to monitor his movements, but couldn't expel him because he was an Italian citizen. About a month later, a court-appointed attorney helped him get his passport back, and almost immediately he departed for London.

It was there, according to Ms. Collina, that her son underwent the radicalization that would lead to the terrorist attack, specifically at the gym where Zaghba met Khuram Butt, another of the London Bridge attackers.

"He had his politics and I had mine," his mother said. "He believed in ISIS and I tried to show him what they do is wrong."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170616ed6g0001g



World News: Terrorist Had 'Unyielding' Views

By Eric Sylvers in Fagnano, Italy, and Giovanni Legorano in Rome 
798 words
16 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Valeria Collina tried in June 2016 to enter the east London fast-food restaurant where her son Youssef Zaghba worked in the kitchen. He blocked her at the door, saying she couldn't sit there unaccompanied by a male relative.

"He was becoming more and more unyielding in his views on Islam," Ms. Collina said in an interview outside Bologna. "But there was no reason to think it could end in the terrible act that he did."

More than a year before Zaghba and two other terrorists killed eight people in a rampage at London Bridge and nearby Borough Market this month, the Italian-Moroccan man's steady radicalization had alarmed his family and raised the suspicions of Italian authorities. But despite the warning signs, he slipped through the grasp of Italian security personnel with an aggressive approach to extremists and years of experience combating the mafia.

"You hear about the guys who become terrorists after coming out of jail or those who are ex-drug addicts looking for something to latch onto," Ms. Collina said. "But Youssef is a different case and maybe that makes it more dangerous and harder to control."

The problem of Islamic extremism has been less severe in Italy than in other European countries, in part because Muslim immigration has been more limited here than elsewhere in the region. About 2.7% of the country's population is Muslim, compared with 8.7% in France, according to the World Religion Database.

Italy hasn't suffered a major Islamist terrorist attack. The country has seen about 100 foreign fighters depart for battlefields in the Middle East, and several hundred people are under special observation for the risk of radicalism in Italian jails -- far fewer than in other large European countries.

The country has long had some of Europe's strictest antiterrorism laws, a legacy of its experience combating the mafia and homegrown political terrorism. Authorities have broad authority to wiretap suspects and to order preventive detention if they feel a subject could repeat an offense or hide potential evidence.

But since most of the country's suspected Islamist extremists are foreign-born, authorities' main tool in combating them has been expulsion and repatriation. Italy has been especially aggressive at expelling people who display extremist views, even if they haven't been convicted of any crime. Since January 2015, the country has expelled 184 suspected extremists.

Such techniques didn't apply to Zaghba, who was born in Morocco of an Italian mother and a Moroccan father and had dual citizenship. Ms. Collina, born in Bologna, moved to Morocco about 25 years ago after converting to Islam and marrying Zaghba's father. She gave birth to her son there in 1995. The two returned to Italy in 2015 after Zaghba failed two university exams in Morocco.

In 2014 when Ms. Collina and her son still lived in Morocco she noticed that he had an Islamic State flag on his Facebook profile. He told her he wanted to go to Syria.

"He'd say to me, 'That's pure Islam, I'm going to go there,' " Ms. Collina said. "But I never thought he wanted to go to Syria to fight and even less that he would do a terrorist attack."

Once they moved to Italy, she said, Zaghba told her he preferred how she dressed in Morocco, where she wore a face covering known as a niqab that left only a narrow opening for her eyes. Another time he scolded her because a bit of her pants could be seen under her long robes, Ms. Collina said.

In March 2016, Italian police stopped Zaghba at the Bologna airport with a one-way ticket to Istanbul. They found Islamic State propaganda on his phone and his mother told them her son wanted to reach Syria. Antiterrorism agents searched her house, taking away a tablet computer, documents, cellphones and phone cards.

But the authorities lacked sufficient evidence to hold Zaghba and had to release him after a few hours. They took away his passport and continued to monitor his movements, but couldn't expel him because he was an Italian citizen. About a month later, a court-appointed attorney helped him get his passport back, and almost immediately he departed for London.

It was there, according to Ms. Collina, that her son underwent the radicalization that would lead to the terrorist attack, specifically at the gym where Zaghba met Khuram Butt, another of the London Bridge attackers.

"He had his politics and I had mine," his mother said. "He believed in ISIS and I tried to show him what they do is wrong."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170615ed6g00015



World News: Al Qaeda Trying to Fill  ISIS  Gap, EU Warns

By Julian E. Barnes 
296 words
16 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BRUSSELS -- A resurgent al Qaeda is attempting to take advantage of a weakening Islamic State to challenge its rival for pre-eminence in the global jihadist movement, the European Union's police agency warned.

As a U.S.-led international military coalition rolls back Islamic State's self-declared caliphate in Iraq and Syria, al Qaeda undertook efforts in 2016 to replace it as leader of the movement, Europol said in its annual report on terrorism.

Al Qaeda's challenge to the extremist Sunni Muslims of its rival is occurring despite its messages in Arabic that tend to "downplay its international aspirations." Its propaganda aimed at the West, however, echoes Islamic State's calls for terrorist attacks, the agency said on Thursday.

Europol said al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the organization's affiliate in Yemen, began publishing English-language commentaries aimed at would-be attackers in the West, offering advice on what groups to target in attacks and how to maximize the impact of strikes.

Among the report's other findings, it said the amount of propaganda generated by Islamic State fell, as military pressure on it grew and countermeasures by social-media companies became more effective, Europol said.

The total number of jihadist terrorist attacks slightly decreased in 2016, to 13 from 17 the year before. While the deaths caused by those attacks fell during the same period, to 135 from 150, the casualty toll is still far higher than in other recent years, Europol said.

Rob Wainwright, Europol's executive director, said the need for improved information-sharing on suspected militants has become more pressing in the past two years.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170615ed6g00011



Tech
Facebook Boosts AI to Block Terrorist Propaganda; New software is tasked with identifying videos, photos, language and users that need to be removed, at times without human moderators.

By Sam Schechner 
1,120 words
15 June 2017
21:57
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Under intense political pressure to better block terrorist propaganda on the internet, Facebook Inc. is leaning more on artificial intelligence.

The social-media firm said Thursday that it has expanded its use of A.I. in recent months to identify potential terrorist postings and accounts on its platform—nd at times to delete or block them without review by a human. In the past, Facebook and other tech giants relied mostly on users and human moderators to identify offensive content. Even when algorithms flagged content for removal, these firms generally turned to humans to make a final call.

Companies have sharply boosted the volume of content they have removed in the past two years, but these efforts haven't proven effective enough to tamp down a groundswell of criticism from governments and advertisers. They have accused Facebook, Google parent Alphabet Inc. and others of complacency over the proliferation of inappropriate content—n particular, posts or videos deemed as extremist propaganda or communication—n their social networks.

British Prime Minister Theresa May ratcheted up complaints this month in the wake of a series of deadly terror attacks in the U.K., and sought new international agreements to regulate the internet and force technology companies to preemptively filter content.

In response, Facebook disclosed new software that it says it is using to better police its content. One tool, in use for several months now, combs the site, including live videos, for known terrorist imagery, like beheading videos, to stop them from being reposted, executives said Thursday. The tool, however, doesn't identify new violent videos like the Cleveland murder that was posted on Facebook in April.

Another set of algorithms attempts to identify—nd sometimes autonomously block—ropagandists from opening new accounts after they have already been kicked off the platform. Another experimental tool uses A.I. that has been trained to identify language used by terrorist propagandists.

Facebook declined to say what portion of extremist material it removes is being blocked or removed automatically, and what percentage is reviewed by humans. The firm's moves reflect a growing willingness to trust machines to help even in part with thorny tasks like distinguishing inappropriate content from satire or news coverage—omething firms resisted after a spate of attacks just two years ago as a potential threat to free speech.

One factor in the changed approach, Facebook executives say, has been the improved ability of algorithms to identify unambiguously terrorist content in some cases, while referring other content for human review.

While an Isis-propaganda photo posted without a caption may be an easy removal for an algorithm, the same image with a caption might for instance require human review, said Monika Bickert, Facebook's head of global policy management. Similarly a beheading video that has previously been removed is easy to block. Short clips of the same video, or a never-before-seen but similar looking video, might need a reviewer to check if they are part of a news report or other commentary.

"Our A.I. can know when it can make a definitive choice, and when it can't make a definitive choice," said Brian Fishman, lead policy manager for counterterrorism at Facebook. "That's something new."

Another factor in the fresh A.I. push: a spate of recent terrorist attacks and scandals involving ads being shown before jihadist videos.

Just days before a general election in the U.K, for instance, the campaigns for the country's two main parties pulled political ads from Alphabet's YouTube video-sharing site after being alerted those ads were appearing before extremist content.

Germany earlier this year proposed a bill that could fine firms up to €0 million ($56 million) for failing to remove fake news or hate speech—ncluding terrorist content. The U.K. and France published a counterterrorism action plan this week that calls on technology companies to go beyond deleting content that is flagged, and instead identify it beforehand to prevent publication.

"There have been promises made. They are insufficient," said French President Emmanuel Macron on Tuesday.

Facebook has expanded its use of human reviewers to look at what executives say are difficult cases. In May, the company said it would add about 3,000 new moderators to its community operations team that takes down content that violates Facebook policies, expanding the team by two thirds. Across the company, Facebook says it has 150 people focused on counterterrorism as their core job.

Facebook already has rolled out software to identify other questionable content such as child pornography and fake news stories. Ahead of French and German elections this year, the company began tagging "disputed" stories when outside news organizations ruled them as false.

The issue of content removal remains at times fraught for Silicon Valley companies, whose values often place a premium on permitting debate. At times, firms have also acknowledged that algorithms have gone too far. Last July, Facebook was criticized for removing live video from Minnesota woman Diamond Reynolds, who showed her boyfriend, Philando Castile, dying after being shot by a police officer during a traffic stop. Facebook blamed the removal on a technical glitch and restored the video.

Social-media firms including Facebook, Yahoo Inc. and Twitter Inc. are adamant that they want to stamp out terrorism on their platforms—nd already do a lot to remove such content. Twitter says it is expanding its use of automated technology to combat terrorist content, too. From July through December last year, Twitter said internal tools flagged 74% of the 376,890 accounts it removed.

YouTube said Thursday that it uses automated software to block users from uploading videos that have already been flagged and removed from the site, adding that more than half of the content removed for terrorism in the last six months was removed at least in part using such technology.

Along with Facebook, it is collaborating with the other social media firms on a shared database of previously identified terrorist imagery, first announced in December, which allows the companies to more quickly identify posts that use them. But the company doesn't use technology to screen new content for policy violations, saying computers lack the nuance to determine the difference between propaganda and newsworthy or religious speech in a previously uncategorized video.

"These are complicated and challenging problems, but we are committed to doing better and being part of a lasting solution," a YouTube spokesman said.

Jack Nicas contributed to this article.

Write to Sam Schechner at sam.schechner@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170615ed6f004v1



World
Syria's Newest Flashpoint Is Bringing U.S. and Iran Face to Face; Risks of a confrontation in country's south have unexpectedly increased as the U.S. ramps up its operations against Islamic State

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington and Maria Abi-Habib in London 
1,297 words
15 June 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Southern Syria, once the quietest corner of the country's multisided conflict, has unexpectedly become the most volatile flashpoint between America and Iran as the two countries vie for control.

The U.S. military has moved mobile artillery-rocket launchers into southern Syria for the first time, as American troops in the area face increasing dangers from Iran-backed forces. Iran's best-known military commander, meanwhile, was photographed praying with allied fighters in Syria, a visit seen by some U.S. officials as a public taunt by Tehran. Worried that the situation may spiral out of control, top U.S. military commanders are pressing Moscow to step in.

"This is rapidly developing, it's not settled at all and I don't even know that there's a good direction determined yet," one U.S. official said. "Everybody's trying to figure out what to do here. It's in nobody's interest for us to get into an active fight with these pro-regime forces."

For years, the U.S. military has focused its firepower in Syria on defeating Islamic State and largely avoided direct confrontations with President Bashar al-Assad's forces and his Iranian allies. But the risks of a combustive confrontation in southern Syria have unexpectedly increased as the U.S. has ramped up its operations against Islamic State.

The jostling is partly driven by a view among some U.S. officials that the vast desert could become a staging ground for President Donald Trump's nascent efforts to counter Iranian influence in the region, including Tehran's efforts to establish firm control over weapons supply routes running through Iraq, Syria and into Lebanon.

Elite U.S. special operations forces have stepped up training and brought in more firepower to a small garrison known as al Tanf, near a key border crossing with Iraq. About 150 U.S. special operations forces are rotating in-and-out of the training base, U.S. officials said. In Syria's north, more than 750 U.S. Marines and soldiers are using helicopters, artillery and airstrikes to help Syrian fighters push Islamic State from Raqqa, the extremist group's largest remaining stronghold in Syria.

Last month, the U.S. military carried out a rare airstrike on allies of Mr. Assad, who were heading toward the garrison and were viewed as a threat. That was followed by three more airstrikes, including the shootdown of an Iranian-made drone that had attacked U.S. military advisers in southern Syria.

While the U.S. has stopped short of publicly identifying the kind of drone used in the attack, U.S. officials have said it was an Iranian-made Shahed 129. U.S. officials said they may never figure out who was piloting the Predator-size drone, but they have narrowed their suspicions down to either Iran or Syria.

New details about last Friday's shootdown of the drone over the vast desert in southeastern Syria points to the expanding risks U.S. forces are taking in the area. U.S. forces watched as the drone repeatedly circled a small patrol base recently set up by Western advisers working alongside Syrian fighters, U.S. officials said. The drone dropped a munition near the small military outpost, but it didn't explode. As the drone continued to circle the area, a U.S. F-15 took aim and blew it out of the sky, they said.

The increasing hostilities have triggered a debate in Washington over how to respond. Some Trump administration officials, including the State Department's point man on the fight against Islamic State, want to avoid taking provocative steps that could lead to clashes with fighters backed by Tehran, Damascus and Moscow, U.S. and Western officials said. Others, including top U.S. military commanders, see a need to more aggressively confront an increasing threat posed by Iran-backed forces trying to seize an advantage.

Those pushing for a more aggressive approach have been encouraged by Mr. Trump's hostility toward Tehran, a marked departure from former President Barack Obama, who steered around military confrontations with Iran while negotiating a nuclear deal with the country's leaders.

While the U.S. focuses on Islamic State, Mr. Assad's forces and their allies are pushing toward a key Iraq-Syria border crossing in the south now held by Islamic State. The offensive, U.S. officials said, appears aimed at preventing U.S.-backed Syrian rebels trained at al Tanf from moving north to seize the Abu Kamal border crossing.

Control of Abu Kamal would allow the rebels to cut off any possible Iranian weapons shipments both to the Damascus government and to the militant group Hezbollah in Lebanon.

"The idea is to cut off access to the border and routes for weapons flows from Tehran to Beirut," said a U.S. official based in the Middle East who monitors the situation.

The Abu Kamal border crossing in Deir Ezzour province has been a key land bridge for Islamic State forces to travel in and out of Iraq and Syria and also is strategic for its proximity to the extremist group's key source of revenue: nearby oil fields in Deir Ezzour.

U.S. officials say Islamic State moved much of its leadership and equipment to the province as they came under increased pressure in Raqqa and Mosul in Iraq, and they expect the extremists to launch a last stand for its self-declared caliphate there.

As the rival military forces jockey for position, Lt. Gen. Stephen Townsend, head of the U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State, has repeatedly asked the Russian military to constrain its allies in Syria, U.S. officials said. Gen. Townsend has sent blunt warnings to Russia that the U.S. won't shy away from a fight if Moscow doesn't help, they said.

To help check further threats, the U.S. military has sent High Mobility Artillery Rocket Systems into southern Syria for the first time to protect the small garrison at al Tanf. Military officials are concerned that forces backed by Damascus and Iranmay also try to seize a border crossing near the U.S. rebel-training base. The U.S. has established a 33-mile buffer zone around the base and told regime forces to steer clear.

The expanding U.S. military moves are being countered by Iran. Earlier this week, Qassem Soleimani, head of Iran's elite Qods Force, was photographed praying in southern Syria with militants backed by Tehran.

The photos didn't escape notice at the Pentagon, where Defense Secretary Jim Mattis is intent on preventing Iran from seizing an advantage in Syria.

"Jim Mattis has spent the last 15 years thinking about Iran," said one U.S. official. "He's not going to let the Iranians surprise him."

One U.S. official based overseas said the clashes in southern Syria are an indication that Washington can't dictate terms to rivals looking to thwart American plans.

"I think it's emblematic of the broader contradictions in our policy between the immediate focus on utilizing virtually any and all tools available to defeat Daesh, and the ripple effects from the choices we make on the post-ISIL landscape," said a second U.S. official. "Just because we want to approach this sequentially doesn't mean Tehran will—nd clearly isn't."

Write to Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com and Maria Abi-Habib at maria.habib@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170615ed6f0015p



World News: World Watch

388 words
15 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

IRAQ

ISIS Attack in Mosul

Fails to Gain Ground

Islamic State fighters armed with machine guns and wearing suicide vests launched a counterattack against Iraqi government forces in western Mosul, police officials said, briefly retaking control of some city blocks before they were beaten back.

In the operation early Wednesday, at least 50 Islamic State fighters slipped from their positions in the Old City. The militants swept into the Dendan neighborhood and set houses on fire, sending plumes of black smoke into the sky in what police said was an attempt to hamper air support for Iraqi government forces on the ground.

Col. Ryan Dillon, spokesman for the U.S.-led international coalition fighting Islamic State, said no ground had been lost to Islamic State in Wednesday's fighting. He didn't respond to questions whether smoke from the burning houses impaired efforts to provide coalition air support.

Since driving Islamic State from eastern Mosul in January, Iraqi forces have seized swaths of territory in the west of the city and largely bottled up the militants in a small area of the Old City.

-- Ben Kesling

---

SPAIN

Rajoy Survives

No-Confidence Vote

Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy survived a parliamentary vote of confidence Wednesday, but the two-day debate was an uncomfortable public airing of the corruption investigations that have dogged his party.

Spanish lawmakers rejected by 170 to 82 the no-confidence vote against Mr. Rajoy, who was re-elected prime minister at the end of October. "We're going to be able to keep working," Mr. Rajoy said after the vote.

As expected, the only votes in favor of ousting the prime minister came from far-left Podemos, the three-year-old party that called the no-confidence motion, and some other left-wing parties. Podemos proposed its leader, 38-year-old Pablo Iglesias, as the successor to the 62-year-old Mr. Rajoy.

The prime minister has been called to testify as a witness at a trial of party members on July 26 related to an investigation into an alleged party slush fund. He hasn't been accused of wrongdoing. Podemos's focus on alleged kickbacks has resonated in Spain, where corruption has been a top public concern for several years.

-- Jeannette Neumann

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170615ed6f0002l



World News:  ISIS  Sinks Teeth Into Philippines --- Amid Mideast losses, militants expand focus; conflict in south is now jihadist 'cause celebre'

By James Hookway 
747 words
15 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The signs are mounting that the Philippines is now a primary target for Islamic State.

The southern reaches of the mostly Roman Catholic country have long been home to Muslim insurgents seeking to carve out an independent state. Until now, counterterrorism officials and experts have largely viewed local declarations of loyalty to Islamic State founder Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi as little more than pleas for attention. That is changing.

One of the newest insurgent groups shocked the country three weeks ago by marching into Marawi City and waving black Islamic State flags; it is still holding around 20% of the city along with hundreds of hostages. The standoff with the Philippine military so far has claimed the lives of at least 58 security forces, nearly 200 rebels and dozens of civilians.

Since the May 23 attack, Islamic State has taken a stronger interest in the Philippines, profiling some of the militants in its propaganda magazine Rumiyah and falsely claiming responsibility for the burning of a Manila casino that left 37 people dead; police say it was in fact a botched robbery.

On Sunday, Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said "it appears that al-Baghdadi himself, the leader of ISIS, has specifically ordered terrorist activities here in the Philippines." Mr. Duterte didn't say how he knew about Mr. Baghdadi's instructions.

Islamic State's spokesman, in an audio recording circulated on Tuesday, appeared to single out the Philippines for further attacks and praised the assault on Marawi.

The battle for Marawi is being waged by one of the region's most powerful militias, and it could determine whether Islamic State can lay down a marker in the Philippines.

Some intelligence officials worry that the Philippines' growing profile in jihadist circles could bring more foreign fighters to its shores as Islamic State loses ground in Syria and Iraq.

Governments across Southeast Asia and Australia already are watching the Philippines with concern as militants from Indonesia, Malaysia, Yemen and Saudi Arabia join the fight. U.S. Special Operations Forces are providing support for the Philippine military in Marawi.

The danger, said an intelligence official in the Philippines, is that "the southern Philippines is becoming a cause celebre again."

The potential for recruiting the Philippines' Muslim minority, whose lands were gradually taken over by waves of settlers under Spanish then American colonizers, has long drawn the interest of foreign jihadists. Osama bin Laden was in regular contact with the late Muslim separatist leader Hashim Salamat.

The Philippines' porous borders and lax immigration control also make it an attractive destination for foreign extremists, according to Sidney Jones, a terrorism expert at the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict in Jakarta. Fighters are also attracted, in part, because some of the combatants have extensive networks, Ms. Jones said.

"They're really quite sophisticated and have a lot of resources to draw on, and that's attractive," she said.

Islamic State's emir in the Philippines is Isnilon Hapilon, a 51-year-old commander with the Abu Sayyaf terrorist group, which was seeded in the 1990s with help from al Qaeda. He swore loyalty to Islamic State in 2014, and since then has built an alliance with the Maute family, an aristocratic landowning clan who command hundreds of followers.

Ms. Jones said the Mautes are likely the brains behind the Marawi operation, particularly 37-year-old Omarkhayam Maute.

Omar, as he is known, studied Islam in Egypt and later married the daughter of an influential conservative cleric in Indonesia. He returned to the southern Philippines, where he and his brother Abdullah Maute took the reins of the family's local militia. In 2015, the brothers publicly aligned it with Islamic State.

Their ultimate goal, senior Philippine officials said, was to take control of Marawi, the Philippines' largest Muslim-majority city.

Armed forces chief Gen. Eduardo Ano said the military caught a break when soldiers inadvertently interrupted the planning for the operation by raiding a safe house in Marawi where they believed Mr. Hapilon was holed up. That forced the Maute group to take up arms prematurely.

"They were not able to fully deploy all their forces," Gen. Ano told reporters.

Military officials said they are trying to determine whether the Maute brothers are among several guerrillas killed in a battle on Saturday.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170615ed6f0001b



World News: Iraqi Forces Beat Back  ISIS  Counterattack --- Islamic State fighters reclaim parts of western Mosul before being pushed back

By Ben Kesling, Awadh Altaie and Ghassan Adnan 
421 words
15 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

ERBIL, Iraq -- Islamic State fighters armed with machine guns and wearing suicide vests launched a counterattack against Iraqi government forces in western Mosul, police officials said, briefly retaking control of some city blocks before they were beaten back.

In the operation early Wednesday, at least 50 Islamic State fighters slipped from their positions in the Old City, with some moving down the bank of the Tigris River and evading defenses established by U.S.-backed Iraqi forces, said Col. Faris Radhi, a top official in Iraq's Federal Police.

Underscoring the resilience of the estimated hundreds of Islamic State fighters still in the Old City, the militants swept into the Dendan neighborhood and set houses on fire, sending plumes of black smoke into the sky in what police said was an attempt to hamper air support for Iraqi government forces on the ground.

The death toll of civilians and combatants wasn't immediately known, as government forces continued to search the area late Wednesday, Col. Radhi said. Islamic State said it killed 40 police and seized weapons in the attack.

Col. Ryan Dillon, spokesman for the U.S.-led international coalition fighting against Islamic State, said no ground had been lost to Islamic State in Wednesday's fighting. He didn't respond to questions whether smoke from the burning houses impaired efforts to provide coalition air support for government ground forces.

Since driving Islamic State from eastern Mosul in January, Iraqi forces have seized large swaths of territory in the west of the city and have largely bottled up the militants in a small area of the Old City.

Dendan abuts the southern edge of the Old City and was retaken by government forces from Islamic State months ago. Federal Police established defenses there, and some people had moved back into their homes nearby.

The government's campaign to take out Islamic State from Mosul began in October, and in recent weeks, government forces have sought to complete and tighten their encirclement of the Old City, where tens of thousands of civilians are also believed to be holed up in addition to the militants.

The fighting to remove Islamic State from its last stronghold in the city is expected to be especially brutal because of the neighborhood's densely packed buildings and narrow, twisting streets.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170615ed6f00016



In Iran, Radio Liberty Doesn't Live Up to Its Name

By Sohrab Ahmari 
904 words
13 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A11
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

President Trump is hiring a chief executive for the Broadcasting Board of Governors, the federal agency that oversees Voice of America and other media outlets charged with beaming light and liberty into closed societies world-wide. Politico reports the leading contender is Michael Pack, a conservative filmmaker and president of the Claremont Institute. Whoever gets the job faces an uphill battle to reform an agency that has lost its sense of mission.

To get a feel for the dysfunction, consider Radio Farda, the Persian-language component of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. With an annual budget of $117 million, RFE/RL is supposed to serve as a surrogate press in 23 countries across Europe and Asia that restrict media freedom. Farda is one of its most important broadcasters, intended to give Iranians a rigorous, fair and morally credible alternative to propaganda from Tehran.

But Farda too often fails to deliver. Nowhere is this more apparent than in its treatment of Israel. Here's how it recounted a Palestinian attack that took place March 19, 2016, amid last year's stabbing intifada: "Israeli media, quoting security officials, claimed that Abdullah Ajlouni, a 20-year-old youth, had, as Israeli media put it, approached several Israeli soldiers in a 'suspicious manner,' and 'had tried to attack them.'"

In fact, Israeli forces didn't open fire on Ajlouni merely because he had acted suspicious. Ajlouni had pulled a knife and stabbed one of the soldiers before they opened fire.

The story went on to claim that Ahmad Dawabsheh, a 6-year-old Palestinian boy who eight months earlier survived an arson attack by hard-line Israeli settlers, had been "transferred to Spain for treatment of wounds sustained in the flames, and Israel still hasn't arrested anyone on suspicion of carrying out the attack."

Again, incorrect. Israel had two months earlier indicted two Jews, charging one with murder over the attack, which killed Ahmad's parents and 18-month-old brother. Iranians relying on Farda to understand these events were given the false impression that Israel is a place where Jews kill Arabs with impunity. Nenad Pejic, a former Balkan correspondent who now serves as RFE/RL's Prague-based editor-in-chief, conceded in an email that the stabbing story that also discussed the Dawabsheh case had been "inaccurate."

Here's a Farda headline, from a March 10, 2016, news brief: "Three Palestinians and One American Killed in Clashes in Israel." The implication of saying that Palestinians were killed in impersonal "clashes" is that unmentioned Israelis hover in the background as potential culprits. It is only in the second paragraph that the story identifies the attacker as a "Palestinian man." Omitted altogether is that the "clashes" started after he began stabbing mainly Jewish civilians.

Such obfuscation of assailants' and victims' identities reinforces the frame, familiar to Iranians from their own media, in which Israelis are always aggressors. Mr. Pejic acknowledged that this story was "incomplete."

Still another article, published in February 2017, concerned Israel's decision to deny a visa to a researcher with Human Rights Watch. The story failed to note that the researcher had participated in the movement to boycott the Jewish state -- context Iranians deserved to know.

Mr. Pejic countered that a three-paragraph squib didn't allow room for elaboration. Yet Farda published a second, much longer story on this incident that still didn't divulge the researcher's anti-Israel views.

Then there is Farda's coverage of President Obama's nuclear diplomacy. At least five stories, published between 2012 and 2017, described critics of Mr. Obama's engagement with Tehran as "extremists" and their views of Iranian realities as "amateurish."

The extremists in question included Sen. John McCain, congressional opponents of the deal generally, GOP aides on Capitol Hill, the American Israel Public Affairs Committee and the Foundation for Defense of Democracies.

Mr. Pejic said the label "extremist" was "misused" with respect to Mr. McCain in a 2012 article. But he said the other instances arose from quotes, or came from opinion pieces, or were otherwise "in line with the kind of political observation frequently found in news analysis."

Yet RFE/RL couldn't point to any instances in which Democrats or supporters of the deal were labeled "extremists" -- or with other pejoratives like "peaceniks" or "hippies." As a taxpayer-funded broadcaster, RFE/RL has a particular duty to refrain from partisanship when reporting on American politics.

Perhaps most dismaying are the stories that seem to be borrowed wholesale from state-run Iranian media.

An April 2016 Farda headline quoted President Hassan Rouhani to the effect that "If It Weren't for Iran's Assistance, ISIS would Have Captured Baghdad and Damascus." Another, from November 2016, read: "Iran's Deputy President Visits Shiite Festival in Iraq."

Like any item that might appear in Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting, these U.S.-funded stories deferentially quoted one Iranian official after another without offering context or any alternative view. Mr. Pejic agreed that these stories were "incomplete."

If any federal agency could use a Trumpian shake-up, the Broadcasting Board of Governors is it.

---

Mr. Ahmari is a Journal editorial writer in London.

(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: Radio Liberty Persian Service: Mixed Reviews" -- WSJE June 23, 2017)

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170613ed6d00004



World News: London Attacker Didn't Hide His Views

By Max Colchester, Georgi Kantchev, Joshua Robinson and Margot Patrick 
697 words
12 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

LONDON -- Khuram Butt, one of the knife-wielding terrorists who killed eight in a rampage last weekend, wasn't a silent plotter blending unseen into immigrant neighborhoods. He was out and about, openly trying to draw others to his radical view.

Near a carpet shop on a side street in east London, the Ummah Fitness Centre bills itself as a spot for Muslims to box and lift weights. Men and women exercise separately, there are prayer breaks, and sayings from the Quran line the walls.

For Butt, the gym was a place to trumpet extremist opinions and, amid the punching bags and barbells, look for like-minded friends.

He would say "very surprising things," said Fahad Khan, a cousin of Butt's wife who uses the gym. He would say "ISIS is doing a very good thing."

The Saturday-night assault and two others in the U.K. in under three months have exposed the difficulty authorities face in keeping tabs on threats.

The attacks also pose a conundrum for governments that honor liberty and free speech: How should they fight on an amorphous battlefield where conservative religious beliefs can shade into fanatical rhetoric and ultimately into terrorism?

Butt made no secret of his ideology. He can be seen in a television documentary, "The Jihadis Next Door," praying with well-known Islamist preachers. He publicly confronted Muslim leaders he considered too moderate. He proselytized in parks.

Some who came into contact with Butt reported him to the police for expressing extremist views or, in one case, for trying to radicalize their child. Others, in a place where conservative religious beliefs are commonplace, shrugged off his words.

Police said Butt was known to them but they had no evidence he was plotting violence.

The three attackers -- Butt, a Pakistan-born British citizen; Youssef Zaghba, a dual Italian-Moroccan national; and Rachid Redouane, a 30-year-old Libyan-Moroccan pastry chef -- spent their final months living humdrum lives within miles of each other in east London.

Zaghba taught gymnastics to children at a sports center. In May, Butt and Redouane attended male-only swimming sessions at a public pool.

Days before the assault, the attackers met outside the Ummah gym. Just after midnight, they embraced each other and parted, camera footage shows.

The working-class areas around Barking and nearby Ilford have been transformed by immigrants. Barking's main street serves African food and has a Romanian convenience store.

"As nice a place as it is here, there are a few people in our community who think extremism is a good idea," said Stephen Timms, a local member of Parliament.

Butt, living a mile away in a tall gray apartment complex, had a young family, attended two mosques sporadically and went by the nickname Abz, short for Abu Zaitun, neighbors say. He had worked briefly for the London Underground.

He would sometimes greet children in the complex when they returned from school. He enjoyed cycling and supported the Arsenal soccer club. He died in the attack, shot by police, wearing an Arsenal shirt.

Away from the neighborhood, Butt fraternized with several people who had formed the Al Muhajiroun group, whose stated aim is to establish a state governed by Shariah law. In 2013 he stood outside Parliament alongside Anjem Choudary, a radical preacher who helped found the group, at a rally showing support for the murder of an off-duty soldier by two Islamic extremists.

Despite his behavior, Butt remained popular with some of the locals. The weekend before his attack, he held a barbecue that was attended by 20 people.

Jean Morrison, a neighbor who was invited, said she didn't see his preaching as unusual. "Others do that too," she said. Last Saturday, a neighbor invited Butt to come over and watch a soccer match on TV. He declined. Just after 9 p.m., a white van screeched away from the apartment complex. An hour later the killing began.

---

Mike Bird, Saabira Chaudhuri and Riva Gold contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170612ed6c0001f

