 


At Site of Big Bomb,  ISIS  Battle Grinds On

By Jessica Donati 
877 words
18 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ASAD KHEL, Afghanistan -- Near the blast site of the "Mother of All Bombs," U.S. and Afghan forces are trying to dislodge Islamic State from a mountain stronghold where the militant group recently established a new front.

Afghan commandos and U.S. Special Forces clustered with their armored vehicles on Monday by a river at the foot of the Spingar Mountains, less than a mile from where the powerful U.S. bomb struck last week. Apache helicopters and fighter jets buzzed constantly overhead, and blasts echoed across the valley.

Remains of Islamic State fighters lay strewn in the grass yards away, casualties of a battle for control of the area that began more than two weeks ago, Afghan commandos told the first journalists to arrive in Asad Khel since Thursday's bombing. The bombing came days after an American soldier was shot in the neck and killed in a nearby village.

The bomb -- often referred to by its nickname but officially called the GBU-43, or Massive Ordnance Air Blast -- is one of the largest non-nuclear weapons in the U.S. arsenal and was used to target caves and tunnels in the valley beyond the village of Asad Khel.

A spokesman said the U.S. military is still assessing the damage from the bomb. An Afghan special forces commander, who was seeking shelter from the sun in a grove of trees by the river, said the bomb left a "big hole in the ground" and showed a picture of the bombing site on his phone.

In the days leading up to the blast, U.S. and Afghan forces killed more than a dozen Islamic State fighters, driving the militants out of much of the surrounding Achin district and into the mountains, according to the commander, who declined to give his name.

"It gives us a lot of pleasure to kill them," said the commander, who also showed pictures of commandos posing with the dead bodies of two men with long black hair and beards.

Islamic State first appeared in Afghanistan in late 2014, as the U.S.-led coalition reduced its presence in the country. The following year, the militant group expanded to as many as a dozen districts in Nangarhar province, its main Afghan stronghold, including Achin.

The snow-capped Spingar Mountains extend for hundreds of miles along the border with Pakistan, and Osama bin Laden is believed to have taken shelter there in 2001 after the U.S.-led invasion following the September 11 attacks.

The U.S. military dropped its 15,000-pound "Daisy Cutter" bombs there at the time. Sixteen years on, the U.S. has again resorted to its heaviest weaponry to fight a new brand of militants in the same area, Islamic State.

But just as the militants have lost substantial ground in Iraq, Syria and Libya, the Islamic State presence in eastern Nangarhar province has shrunk by about 150 square miles since early March, according to the U.S. military. The Islamic State affiliate in Afghanistan doesn't have a spokesman.

Yet the valley around Asad Khel hasn't yet been secured and the Afghan government presence in Achin is minimal. Two Islamic State fighters on Saturday tried to attack the government's district headquarters several miles away with a car bomb, but a U.S. airstrike intercepted the vehicle, according to security sources.

The Islamic State fighters in the area include Afghans and foreigners, according to the Afghan commander. He said identification cards found among the fighters were from Arab countries, Pakistan, Uzbekistan and other places. The Wall Street Journal could not independently verify those claims. A U.S. soldier in command at the site declined to be interviewed.

The recent advances by U.S. and Afghan forces have allowed some residents of Asad Khel to return to their homes for the first time in two years and inspect the damage.

The ruins of abandoned shops and homes are pockmarked with bullets and graffiti. Next to the local school, among the worst-hit buildings, were freshly dug, unmarked graves where villagers had buried two Islamic State fighters, according to Afghan commandos.

Except for a handful of men who were tending to cornfields with shovels and a few children who were playing in the fields, the village was mostly deserted. Some villagers fear Islamic State fighters could return if U.S. and Afghan forces don't oust them from the mountains.

"We request from them please go further" up the valley, said Sabitullah, who like many Afghans goes by one name. He was home for the first time in two years, after he said Islamic State killed two of his relatives, forcing him to flee to a safer area. "Go to the mountain and attack their center and we will support you," he said.

The police chief of Nangarhar province, Abdul Rahman Rahimi, said estimates of the number of Islamic State fighters in the province range between 700 and 1,200. He said the current offensive has turned the tide against Islamic State in the area.

"In my view, their backbone is broken," he said. "They have lost momentum."



License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170418ed4i0001q



Opinion
White House Intrigue; A transcript of the weekend's program on FOX News Channel.

7,522 words
17 April 2017
18:22
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

President Trump : Right now, we're not getting along with Russia at all. We may be at an all-time low in terms of relationship with Russia. This is built for a long period of time, but we're going to see what happens.

Paul Gigot: Welcome to "The Journal Editorial Report." I'm Paul Gigot.

That was President Trump Wednesday during a news conference alongside NATO Secretary General. The administration reversing course on its position with Russia as Secretary of State Rex Tillerson met this week with his counterpart Sergey Lavrov in Moscow, following US missile strikes on a Syrian military base in retaliation for President Bashar Assad 's chemical weapon attack on his own people.

Russia still refusing to blame Assad for that attack, but Secretary Tillerson said, one way or another, Assad must go.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson : We did discuss at length the future role for Assad, whether it be in a future political process or not. Clearly, our view is that the reign of the Assad family is coming to an end.

Gigot: Joining the panel this week, Wall Street Journal columnist and Deputy Editor Dan Henninger; columnist, Bill McGurn; and editorial board member, Mary Kissel.

So, Bill, whatever happened to the president's plans for a reset with relations with Russia?

Bill McGurn: Yes. Vladimir Putin really did engineer the victory for Donald Trump . He's not getting his monies worth from this.

Look, I think it's really interesting because what Donald Trump is doing is not just taking actions against Russia in the bombing of Syria, it's a public embarrassment of Vladimir Putin before the entire world.

Gigot: For siding with Assad.

McGurn: For siding with Assad. But also on the little things like, one of the false dichotomies of the Obama years was that the only answer to anything anyone does is either a full-scale invasion of US troops, whether it's Ukraine or Syria, or nothing.

And I think the invitation to Montenegro to join NATO , and something doesn't want, there's a lot of levers that they can push. And Rex Tillerson seems pretty sophisticated. And he's pushing some of those.

Gigot: In a way, Mary, what happened is, Donald Trump 's ambitions for a better relationship ran up against Russian reality. They're supporting Assad and there's an alliance with Assad, Iran and Russia in Syria.

And then you get the chemical attack and it's a real - it's become a lever for the pivot.

Mary Kissel: That's true. It has. And I thought it was encouraging too that Rex Tillerson suggested that sanctions are not going to be lifted anytime soon on Russia, which is, of course, another big point of leverage that we have, given how weak Russia's economy is. That was good news.

He also mentioned cybercrime in that press conference. And by the way, that was a pretty frosty press conference. And if it looks that way in public, you know it's even worse behind closed doors. There was no love lost there.

Gigot: That's good. You have John Kerry and Lavrov with these lovefests and you knew that they didn't really agree on Syria, in particular, behind the scenes, and yet it was nice up front.

Dan Henninger: You mentioned Iran, Paul. The president of Iran Rouhani was in Moscow just two weeks ago, signed 14 economic agreements. The Russians said they were going to help the Iranians rebuild their nuclear plant at Bushehr.

And clearly, they are deepening their alliance. And the Iranians are trying to establish a Shiite crescent from Iran up to the Mediterranean, engulfing Iraq, and this is not in the interest of the - whatever help we might get from Russia fighting Islamic State is way outbalanced by this alliance that they're seeking with Iran.

And I think the Trump administration sees that very clearly now.

Gigot: I want to elaborate a little bit on what Bill pointed out about Montenegro, Mary, because that's a small country. This is not a big deal, but it would be militarily at least. But it's close to Russia, its border. It's something that Putin really doesn't want it to become the 29th member of NATO .

And yet, Trump, this week, despite what he said in the campaign about NATO being obsolete -

Kissel: Suddenly, it's not so obsolete anymore.

Gigot: And he said that. Exactly. He said, I said it was obsolete. Not obsolete anymore. And he said, they sent a formal letter saying, we would agree to Montenegro's accession to NATO if the other countries agree. This is a direct pushback to Putin.

And what do you make of this in terms of Trump's own thinking and the evolving sense of what his foreign policy is?

Kissel: Well, look, Trump ran on the promise that he wasn't going to send troops into Syria and get us back into in the Middle East. So, I think some part of this is rallying allies around, whether it's NATO in Western and Central Europe or whether it's bringing in leaders from the Middle East. Look at the parade of leaders he's had into the White House recently - Jordan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, just to name a few. That's no coincidence.

I think he perceives that there is a threat in Syria that goes beyond just Bashar al-Assad. It's ISIS. It's Hezbollah. It's Al Qaeda, which is regenerating itself. And he knows that he's made this promise to the American people. So, he needs allies to rally around.

Gigot: Changing view of alliances. That was one of the big raps on Trump as a candidate, which is that he has no concern for traditional American alliances. He' really now embracing NATO .

McGurn: Yes. Look, we're never going to get a Trump doctrine in the sense the clarity and so forth. It's kind of like Nancy Pelosi said we had to pass healthcare to find what's in it. We had to elect Trump to find out what the doctrine is going to.

Gigot: Absolutely. That can be dangerous.

McGurn: It can be. But what we do see is he's not embarrassed by the use of American force. He's not inclined to let our enemies run all over us. And for the first time in eight years, Vladimir Putin has to be asking himself what will America's reaction be.

Gigot: Yes. But he said - Tillerson said, Dan, Assad's days are numbered. Is that this administration's redline now that they're going to have to follow through with, make sure that Assad does leave power?

Henninger: Well, given it's this administration, they can change their minds. But I agree with -

Henninger: They put down a difficult marker. One of the alternatives would be to partition Syria into three parts, with an Alawite section reserved for Assad and that. And if they can get to something like that as a goal to get piece in Syria, I think they would pursue it. And if Assad wants to run one-third of the country, that would be fine.

Gigot: Are we seeing the emergence of - and we don't have a lot of time - the emergence of a more conventional Donald Trump foreign policy, not the radical version that he ran on in the campaign.

Kissel: I think we could be. But, remember too, Trump and Mattis both said this week that the Syria policy isn't changing. And also, after the strike - the Syria strike, they justified that strike because Assad had broken the chemical weapons ban and used a weapon of mass destruction, not because he killed all of those people.

So, I don't think it's a big change. No.

Gigot: OK. Still ahead, what Putin stands to gain by doubling down on his support for Syria, even as the global community condemns Assad's actions. We'll look at the broader impact on the Middle East.

Gigot: A key question for the Trump administration is whether it truly can weaken Russia's support for Syria, given that Moscow is Bashar Assad 's biggest military ally in the Middle East. Here's President Trump this week on the FOX Business Network .

President Trump: Frankly, Putin is backing a person that's truly an evil person. And I think it's very bad for Russian. I think it's very bad for mankind. It's very bad for this world.

Gigot: Cliff May is the founder and president of the Foundation for Defense of Democracies. Good to see you, Cliff. Welcome.

Cliff May: Thank you, Paul.

Gigot: So, a week later, after the bombing of the Syrian airfield, how does that look as a way of changing the incentives and the behavior in the Middle East?

May: Well, in terms of Vladimir Putin , I think it causes him to reconsider. We know a few things, I believe, about Vladimir Putin after all these years. One is that, in his view, and it's a realistic view, the leader of Russia has a job to do, and that is to expand - in this case, to rebuild - the Russian Empire.

Gigot: Right.

May: He wants to do that at home, in Eastern Europe with former Soviet states. He also wants to do that in the Middle East. He wants an Arab ally. He wants a warm water port on the Mediterranean. He gets both in Syria.

But, for Putin, it's more business than personal. If he gets what he wants, I don't think he needs Assad. That said, Dan Henninger, I think, is right. If Assad were to run a little Alawite homeland and there were a port there, that might be good enough.

Keep in mind, Putin has been playing a weak hand very well. He doesn't want to see Trump now play trump cards, if you will excuse the expression and beat him.

Gigot: But here's the thing. I have seen no evidence so far in Russian behavior or Russian statements that they are at all backing away from Assad. In fact, they vetoed the resolution at the United Nations this week to assail Assad.

So, is there any sign at all that they're delinking?

May: No, we haven't seen that yet. Certainly, what he did at the UN , which was to totally negate international law at its most basic level, was a terrible thing. We haven't seen that.

On the other hand, Syria is a failing state. It's Humpty Dumpty. I don't see how it gets put back together again. One of the things that I would imagine the Trump administration is considering are what's sometimes called safe havens. I call them self-protection zones. That's likely to lead to some kind of partition of the state.

If that happens, then there will come a point where it's just the reality on the ground, the facts on the ground, that Assad doesn't rule the whole country. Now, part of that would may be ruled by ISIS, part of that may be ruled by various sectarian and ethnic groups.

If you have safe havens or self-protection zones on the Israeli border, the Jordanian border, the Kurdish areas, those will not be part of Assad's Syria any longer. There may be things that have to be accepted by Putin. And I think he can accept them.

Gigot: Well, and we knew - and we know that Donald Trump did talk about these safe havens, safe zones in the campaign. So, it's not something that he'd be flip-flopping on if he went in that direction. But that would require American air power to enforce, and that would ramp up the potential confrontation with Russia.

Do you think that you'd see any - how big a risk is there of a military engagement between the two countries?

May: I would think that Putin would back down if the US were clear that it was going to, for example, establish a no-fly zone.

One thing that's been talked about for a long time, I think it would have been a good idea, it's certainly possible to do without boots on the ground, is to eliminate Assad's airpower, his entire air force. Just a few airfields, not a lot of planes, then he couldn't do barrel bombs, couldn't do chemical weapons. Once you do that, no-fly zone is not so hard. With a no-fly zone, it's not so hard to set up the self-protection zones.

Gigot: Is there an alliance to be had with the Sunni countries in the Middle East and Turkey perhaps where you could get - the US could lead that, put that together. I'm talking about Saudi Arabia, the Gulf states and so on, Jordan, where you could put together an alliance that was really - it would be like, protected these safe zones and basically was a force to fight the Iranian-Russian-Assad triumvirate?

May: I think so, with some reservations. One is that the Sunni states, the Gulf states, the Saudis absolutely should be supportive of this. I think they should also be asked to pay for this. As for actually supplying troops, that's a little more doubtful, but Jordan will. And again, quietly, Israel will on its border. In some ways, it already is. It's supporting very quietly the Jews across its borders in Syria.

So, this sort of thing can be arranged. This is exactly what diplomacy can do if diplomacy is backed up by force. The idea that Obama had that diplomacy and force are alternatives, that was always really a very naive mistake.

Gigot: All right. So, let's step back a bit. You're looking at the first days of Trump foreign policy. Are we seeing the emergence of what you would call a kind of - for lack of a better word, a normal kind of Republican administration foreign policy, quite in contrast to what he ran on?

May: I don't think that's unfair. I think that's in a way true. If I were speaking for the administration, which I'm not -

Gigot: I know.

May: - here's what I would say that the Trump administration is going to be for what's in the American interest. But the American interest is not only to stop acts of terrorism inside our borders. The American interest is to recognize that there are threats overseas that are maturing that we have to deal with in advance. I think that's very much what he has just done in terms of Syria, very much what he has done in terms of Afghanistan.

Among other things, those two acts this week, they begin to reestablish the capability of strategic deterrence, which the US used to have, but lost during the Obama administration. That's vital for American interest. You want to establish a sense of awe in your enemies and in your allies as well.

Gigot: All right. Cliff May, very interesting. Thanks for being here.

May: When we come back, stories of White House infighting make for juicy headlines, but when it all shakes out how will the popularity contest impact how the president runs the country?

Gigot: Despite efforts by the White House to tamp down the rumors, the reports continue to swirl about Chief Strategist Steve Bannon feuding with the president's son-in-law as Jared Kushner takes on more responsibility in the West Wing.

They were helped along this past week when President Trump himself told the New York Post "I like Steve, but you have to remember he was not involved in my campaign until very late." The president went on to say, Steve is a good guy, but I told him to straighten it out or I will."

We're back with Dan Henninger and Bill McGurn. Also, joining us is editorial board member Joe Rago. So, Joe, is this the end of Steve Bannon in the White House or the beginning of the - what does it mean?

Joe Rago : Well, I think it's certainly a diminishment of his role. He was the author of a lot of the early mistakes in the administration.

Gigot: Such as?

Rago: Such as a divisive inaugural address and especially the travel ban, which really inflamed politics in a way that the polarized our country.

Gigot: And still isn't in place because it's been stopped by the courts.

Rago: Right. And he's also taking some incoming for the failure to repeal and replace Obamacare, I think a little bit unfairly, but, look, if you can't deliver results, Trump is going to go for someone who can.

Gigot: Well, why unfairly on healthcare? Is it that because he seemed to have - as somebody who is described as a conservative, a populist conservative, he couldn't deliver the Freedom Caucus, which was supposed to be his allies. Is that the rap?

Rago: Probably took the wrong tone, making ultimatums, you have to vote for this bill. Somebody said, I haven't been told what to do since I was 17 by my father and I didn't do that.

Henninger: But I think, Paul, we're also learning something about Donald Trump 's governing style here. One of the other things he said about Steve Bannon in these interviews is, look, "Steve is a guy who works for me, all right -

Gigot: And it's true.

Henninger: Everybody is a guy who works for Trump. That's the reality. But Trump has peers that he admires and he's been having a lot of meetings with the people in the business community. And he is actually listening to these business leaders.

So, on the one hand he's going to reauthorize the Export Import Bank, which is a government subsidy.

Gigot: A total flip-flop from his campaign.

Henninger: A total flip-flop because somebody convinced him that it was helping smaller businesses. On the other hand, he's going to push very hard on financial deregulation because it has been explained to him by people like Gary Cohn that that is what -

Gigot: OK, Dan. Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa -

Henninger: Steve Bannon has no role in competing with those people.

Gigot: That's not the Donald Trump who ran. If you remember, the last ad that he ran, that 60-second ad whatever it was, he had Goldman Sachs in there as one of the villains of the globalists, OK?

That was, I think, an ad that was in part helped by - developed by Steve Bannon.

Henninger: Yes.

Gigot: Now, he's got the globalists, at least what you're saying, advising him.

Henninger: My word to Steve Bannon, live and learn. You did in the election, dude. But now you're in the White House and we're talking about policy and Steve Bannon is not really contributing successful policy, as Joe was just explaining.

Gigot: Well, how do you explain this bill in terms of policy? What does this mean? Is this the eclipse of the conservative wing of the Trump administration?

McGurn: I think two things. One, infighting is endemic to any White House. People that haven't worked in a White House cannot understand how fast and furious things come at you and you're developing policy in a pressure cooker.

When it was the campaign, Steve Bannon was actually running the campaign. He was in charge of things, messaging and so forth. Now, he just has more an advisory role and there's a lot of conflict.

Look, when I was there, the war was going badly and people used to complain about speechwriters. I said give me a better war, I'll give you better a speech.

Gigot: Bill was the key speechwriter for President Bush.

McGurn: And President Bush did with the surge. So, there's a lot of - Steve Bannon has two problems, I think. One is, he doesn't have a policy portfolio really. He has a vision kind of thing, but other people are actually setting the policy.

Also, it's not that wise to go up against the president's son-in-law when the son-in-law and the daughter have official roles within the administration. That puts you at a disadvantage.

Gigot: But, ideologically, is this going to matter to fundamental issues like healthcare and tax reform and other things, Joe?

Rago: It will matter to the extent - as I mentioned, they can get results -

Gigot: Well, the rap from the right is, OK, Jared Kushner is not a Republican. He was a Democrat. Gary Cohn , he's either Democrat or he's unaligned. He has no record of being - his donations were mostly to the Democratic Party. There's nothing wrong with that.

But the point is, is this going to be an administration that's moving to the left politically. That's the question.

Rago: Right. I don't think that it is. If you look down at the National Economic Council, what the personnel's policy, to use the Washington cliche -

Gigot: And that's Gary Cohn -

Rago: Just this Gary Cohn shop. Very conservative. Murderers row of conservative policy experts on taxes, healthcare, energy down the line.

And I think Cohn himself, while a registered Democrat, really was left with a bad taste after the Obama years, the sort of degradation of free markets, entrepreneurship, and I think is most significantly to the right.

But, Paul, to a degree, the Trump philosophy is not the traditional conservative philosophy. But I think what it is where there's a lot of - it's a pro-business view as opposed to a pro-market view. And that's why you have the deregulation.

That's why, as Dan said, he's listening to these - that takes you a long way. It's not quite the same thing, but to a degree that he has a philosophy, it's a patriotic, pro-business point of view.

Gigot: All right. We're going to see how this evolves. Thank you. Still ahead, a glimpse into the hearts and minds of the American voters post 2016. Tuesday's election in Kansas telling us a fair bit about where we're heading.

Ron Estes : That it was a chance for the Democrats, they were motivated, there was a lot of angst against the president and they were going to fight back, but we really sold the pundits tonight, didn't we?

Gigot: That was Republican Ron Estes enjoying his victory this Tuesday over Democrat James Thompson. Estes won the special election in Kansas' 4th district to replace Mike Pompeo, who President Trump tapped for CIA director.

But Estes only won by just shy of 7 percent in a state that Mr. Trump won by 27 points. So, what does this tell us about the upcoming special elections in Georgia and Montana and maybe, just maybe, next year's midterms?

With us again are Dan Henninger and Joe Rago and along with editorial writer Kate Bachelder Odell.

OK, Dan, how big a warning is this result for the Republicans?

Henninger: It's a big warning call. And I think Ron Estes himself just put his finger on it. What was going on out there was there was anxiety about President Trump and the Democrats were energized, fired up.

Paul, we're in a new political era. Energy and keeping their party's energy up is an important thing. And things like the travel ban and all the politics, the amount of money pouring into Democratic campaign, soliciting candidates right now, is extraordinary. And the Republicans needed to have Ted Cruz go in there and give speeches. They poured a lot of money in at the end. Donald Trump was making robot calls.

So, the burden is really on the Trump presidency to get some victories, keep the party energized or they're going to have trouble down the line with these special elections.

Gigot: Joe, here's the argument you'd make. Well, (inaudible p6 1:40), look, Brownback - Sam Brownback, the governor, is unpopular there. He's a Republican. Estes was his treasurer. So, he was linked there. It's an open seat. Open seats are always closer than incumbent seats or typically. So, don't over-read this. That's the sort of the Republican not-worry crowd.

Rago: Right. It's a special election. You can't predict turnout. Who knows what will happen? I think this is still a warning. This is a very, very red district. And when you have to drag your own voters to the polls, it's not a very good -

Gigot: Just like those United Airlines -

Rago: Momentum in politics matters. And if Republicans lose the Tom Price seat in Georgia, Montana is a little bit of a different state, but these are flashing and warning signs about the direction of the administration.

Gigot: And, Kate, you were - let's talk about that Georgia seat, in particular. You were down there recently. You did a piece on it for us. How does it look there? Because Democrats are pouring money into that race.

Kate Bachelder Odell: So, there are a couple of unique features about this race. The first is that it's a jungle primary, meaning that there are 18 candidates. And if no one clears -

Gigot: Just like the presidential Republican -

Odell: Exactly. And that turned out so well. Eighteen candidates. And if no one clears 50 percent, then they had - the top two head to a run-off regardless of party. So, there are 11 Republican candidates -

Gigot: And one main Democrat who raised $8 million last quarter, which is a record for a House race. So, I think we'll find out.

But Jon Ossoff, who is a Democrat, his best chance of winning this seat is to win 50 percent and not give Republicans a chance to consolidate.

Gigot: And the Democrats have consolidated around Ossoff, who is 30 years old.

Odell: Thirty years old, yes.

Gigot: And the Republicans are divided up and they - and so, what could happen is, they haven't consolidated around any one candidate. Why can't they consolidate?

Odell: Well, right now, they're all attacking each other. The question, I think, is because you have the Club for Growth endorsing one candidate. You have major state politicians, some of them are behind Karen Handel former state secretary of state. Marco Rubio endorsed Judson Hill, and so did Newt Gingrich . You have this just complete mismatch.

Gigot: So, what you're seeing then is the national Republican Party come in and try to knock Ossoff down by running negative ads against him. So, he stays under 50 and then they hope to prevail in a runoff.

Odell: Right. But their message is please go out and vote for the Republican of your choice, which is not a real -

Gigot: Thrilling message. Vote for whoever.

What about Montana?

Odell: So, Montana is a little bit of a different story. And Trump carried the state by about 20 points, but that doesn't mean it's a safe seat at this point. The Democrat they've put up there is a poet musician and he is running on a centrist populist message of don't mess with Montana and that works there.

And the Republican lost the gubernatorial race last year. So, it could be competitive, especially with Zinke out of the mix for 2018.

Gigot: So, whether or not this affects - these seats are relevant to - or this race is relevant to 2018 down, I think the big issue in question is how do Republicans in Washington, in Congress perceive this?

Is it they perceive this as, oh, oh, we're in trouble. You could see a lot of them run for the hills and look out for number one. So, they're not going to make - pardon the cliches, they're not going to make difficult votes on tax reform, they're going to take a difficult vote on healthcare reform. That means there's a danger they don't get anything done and that will really hurt them in 2018.

Henninger: Yes. A real dilemma, Paul. As with what the Freedom Caucus did on the healthcare reform bill, sinking that.

Tax reform, if you have these difficult votes and if the Republicans are not able to get tax reform through, those votes will be digging their own graves.

Gigot: Right.

Henninger: No question about it because the Democrats seem to play book. They know how to run against a moderate Republican.

Gigot: Right.

Henninger: And they have got to put some victories up on the board or is it's going to very tough in 2018.

Gigot: All right. Thank you all. Still ahead. Sorry if this ruined your Easter holiday, but taxes are due this coming week. Congress hoping to score big with tax reform, but it may need to file an extension on getting a bill passed anytime soon.

Gigot: A little break this year. We have until Tuesday, the 18th, to file our tax returns. Congress has gone off on its Easter break with tax reform looming as the biggest issue on its to-do list.

But with Republicans in the House and Senate disagreeing over many key points, it's looking like they might not get it done this entire year. And President Trump is adding his own priorities to the debate.

President Trump: We have to do healthcare first to pick up additional money, so that we get great tax reform. So, we're going to have a phenomenal tax reform, but I have to do healthcare first. I want to do it first to really do it right.

Gigot: We're back with Dan Henninger, Joe Rago and Mary Kissel.

So, Mary, president saying - reversing what he said just a couple of weeks ago, now saying we've got to get healthcare reform done before tax reform. Is he right?

Kissel: Yes, he is. Absolutely yes. You heard him when he said we need to pick up more money, so that we can then do tax reform. That's because the healthcare reform bill would've involved about $1 trillion in tax cuts. So, if you don't get that done and moving to tax reform, well, you have to find $1 trillion in tax cuts to get levels down to where you want them to be.

Because you don't want to do tax reform where you're not really bringing down the marginal rate on the individual side, you're not really bringing the corporate rate down to make us globally competitive, the way that we should.

Gigot: Right. In particular, just, for example, on capital gains and dividends, the 3.8 percentage point tax on investment income in that kind of investment income and interest income in the healthcare bill and if you don't repeal that, then you don't get those rates down to 20. So, you have a steeper hill to climb to get the tax reform, Joe.

Rago: Yes. And I think there's a real danger that this isn't tax reform, but just tax cuts. So, it's tax relief -

Gigot: Why is that a danger?

Rago: Because it's much easier. Tax reform involves a lot of hard choices, what deductions to clean out, simplify the system -

Gigot: But a lot of people would say easier sounds good. Let's pass it.

Rago: Why we're in danger of getting tax relief instead of tax reform, it's really pro-growth changes that will create jobs, raise wages and improve the economy.

Gigot: That's the key because if you make the tax code more efficient, you get out the subsidies, you get out the special favors that misallocate resources to things like ethanol - pardon me, Iowa, but ethanol - things that really aren't all that productive, then what happens is you put it into more productive uses.

You get a big supply-side boom and incentives and so on and capital investment, which at this stage of the recovery is the only way frankly we're going to boost growth from 2 to 3.

Henninger: Well, you've made a good case for getting a tax reform bill. The question is, can we get?

I think President Trump was making an interesting point about healthcare. It's a political point. What happened to healthcare with the Freedom Caucus is they let the genie out of the bottle, which is to say the moderates - because of the way it was negotiated - saw that there would be losers in what was going on, at least, short-term, people losing their insurance.

Gigot: That's the definition of tax reform.

Henninger: Well, that's the point. You've got the idea that these legislations can create losers out there because of the healthcare fiasco, fast forward into the tax bill where they - inevitably, that's all the way, winners/losers. And so, that has made a lot of Republicans in the House skittish about this subject.

If they could somehow pull off the healthcare bill and set it aside as an accomplished -

Gigot: Right.

Henninger: - then it would be easier to get the hard votes on taxes.

Gigot: One thing we do know, Mary, is that Donald Trump ran on a tax reform plan that could itself fit on a postcard. It was just a simple, let's - three rates. Top rate, I think, was 25, something like it, it might have been 28, I can't recall. But 28.

But the point is that he's now tearing that up in the White House led by Gary Cohn at the National Economic Council, is rewriting it. Do we know anything about the direction they're going?

Kissel: Well, the problem with a Goldman Sachs guy like Gary Cohn is that we don't really know what his principles are, except that he's not a strong conservative. We're not sure that he really believes in supply-side economics.

So, this guy could come out for great pro-growth tax reform or he could come out with a value-added tax on top of everything else. The Hill just reported -

Gigot: I don't think that's going to happen.

Kissel: I don't think that's going to happen. I hope it doesn't happen. But the point is, Paul, I think he's looking at every option here. And because he's not steeped in the kind of principles that a Larry Kudlow or a Steve Moore would've had had they been in the White House, we could come out with a great result from him or an absolutely terrible result. We just don't know.

Gigot: Let me be the sunshine boy here and say that, at least the hiring of Kevin Hassett , an economist of some note, who is an expert on corporate taxes and their impact on wages, for example, done real solid economic research, he is now the White House chief of - at the White House economic advisors. So that's a good sign for tax reform, Joe.

Rago: It's a great sign for tax reform. And, look, Gary Cohn is a pragmatist. He wants a bill that can pass. You can't get a bad through the House, much less the Senate.

Kissel: How about with carbon tax, Joe? He's a climate change -

Gigot: DOA.

But it is going to be difficult. And one of the things that they would like to do, if possible, Dan, is to see if they can find a way to coax Democrats to come on in. And to do that, they're going to have to earmark a big chunk of the revenue from tax reform, from getting rid of loopholes, and from bringing money back overseas to infrastructure spending. That's the only way you'll get Democrats. And you may not get on that.

Henninger: And you may not get the top personal rate down from 39 to 28. It may stick at something like 35 because they don't want to give tax cuts for the wealthy.

Gigot: I wish we were going to get down to 35, Dan. I see 37, 38 in the future, I'm afraid.

All right. When we come back, a tense and somber Holy Week following the deadly Palm Sunday attack on two churches in Egypt. We'll discuss how to keep Christians safe from terrorists in the world's dangerous battles.

Gigot: Christian churches in Egypt holding scaled-back celebrations this Easter Week, following the deadly bombings at two churches last Sunday - Palm Sunday - that prompted President el-Sisi to declare a state of emergency. This, as Pope Francis plans his first visit to Egypt at the end of the month.

We're joined by Nina Shea, a senior fellow at the Hudson Institute . Good to see, Nina. Welcome.

Nina Shea: Thank you for having me.

Gigot: So, what is the condition this Easter of Christians in the Middle East? How bad is it?

Shea: It's very bad. ISIS has declared a genocide, a religious genocide against the Copts in Egypt. It did so, of course, with the bombings on Palm Sunday. It also released a video in February declaring the Christians there to be their favorite prey and calling them apostates.

And, of course, they're not apostates. They date their religion, their faith to St. Mark, the evangelist, the gospel writer in the first century. And they are the largest Christian population in the Middle East. They number about 9 million. And they are also the largest non-Muslim minority in the Middle East, even more numerous than the Jews in Israel.

Gigot: Wow! So, how big - why is Islamic State targeting Christians in Egypt? Is it because they think - there's, obviously, the religious apostate issue, but do they think that somehow the Egyptian state is unable to defend them?

Shea: Absolutely. It's both religious and political. They want to - they have a goal of purifying Egypt and the Middle East for Islam. And they think that this can resonate among the people if they stand up as the biggest, most extreme Islamists.

And it's worrisome because a Pew poll recently showed that 74 percent of the Egyptian people want to be ruled by Sharia law. And the government has been actually incompetent in protecting them and discriminates against them in their own way.

Gigot: I keep reading about an exodus of Coptic Christians from Egypt, more and more each year people leaving. How big - what kind of - what are the numbers of people leaving?

Shea: Well, there are 9 million Copts, so they can't all leave, Paul. But many have left. And we've seen churches here, for example, in the United States, of the Coptic Orthodox Church grow from 2 in 1970 to about 200 Coptic churches here today.

Gigot: Wow!

Shea: Yes. We don't know the actual numbers. But anybody who can is trying to get out - let's put it that way - at the point. That's what we're hearing.

Gigot: OK. So, Pope Francis is coming there. Should we worry whether or not the Egyptian government can keep him protected from a terrorist attack?

Shea: Well, I think that that is just such visibility that they will probably do a good job with that. More worrisome is the Coptic Pope. He has been the target of two attacks now, including on Palm Sunday, where he was in one of those churches.

So, it's going to be - but the greatest challenge that Pope Francis has is when he meets with Al-Azhar, the Sunni center of learning, and really communicating a message that they have to change the culture. They have to define what is meant by infidel and to make clear that you do not kill infidels.

Gigot: Is it fair to say that Pope Francis has been relatively muted so far in what he's been willing to say about tormented Christians around the world?

Shea: He has been fairly muted. He was the first one of prominence to come out and say that the Iraqi and Syrian Christians attacked by ISIS were facing genocide.

But he has not really harped on that issue. And one of the reasons I think is fear, fear that it will put them in further danger.

Gigot: Right.

Shea: I've been doing this human rights defense work for 30 years, Paul, and I've never seen where it made it worse to talk about a situation. It actually helps protect people.

Gigot: All right. We're going to be watching that trip very carefully. Thank you, Nina Shea, for being here.

Shea: Thank you, Paul.

Gigot: We have to take one more break. When we come back, hits and misses of the week.

Gigot: Time now for our hits and misses of the week. Dan?

Henninger: Well, Paul, I'm going to do a coin flip hit or miss this week. It's about the University of Michigan 's longtime consumer sentiment survey. And what they've discovered is, for the first time, economic expectations have become totally politically polarized in the United States.

Since Donald Trump got elected, Democrats believe we're heading into a deep recession. Republicans think we're heading towards an economic boom time. They can't both be right. I think the only silver lining here is that at least the Democratic doomsayers have the possibility of being very cheerfully disappointed.

Gigot: Well, I hope that a lot of people aren't investing based on those (inaudible). Somebody is going to lose a lot. Kate?

Odell: This is a miss for the City of Lansing, Michigan, my home state. This week Lansing declared itself a sanctuary city, in that it won't comply with federal immigration laws. It was previously a welcoming city, whatever that means.

And this outraged the local business community so much that the City Council then reversed its decision to be a sanctuary city. And then, that outraged the progressives who wanted them to be a sanctuary in the first place. So, I hope this is a lesson to other cities that are considering this gambit.

Gigot: Sanctuary or not. What is the -

Kissel: That is the question.

Gigot: Mary?

Gigot: I'm going to give a rare hit to the United Nations this week for unanimously voting to draw down its peacekeeping troop presence in the disastrous peacekeeping mission to Haiti, which has been going on for years. They're going to leave a little police force presence behind, but they'll be out by the fall.

Paul, this mission brought cholera to this Caribbean Island and killed more than 9,000 people, sickened hundreds of thousands more. There have been allegations of sexual abuse and assault that the peacekeepers themselves allegedly inflicted on the local population.

Peacekeeping is supposed to be about keeping the peace, not making it worse. It's time for bigger changes to this mission. I hope we'll see that under Nikki Haley.

Gigot: Nikki Haley is trying to drive that at the UN .

Now, Bill?

McGurn: Paul, a hit for Mike Pompeo. The new CIA chief, this week, gave some straight talk on WikiLeaks . As you know, Mr. Pompeo is a former Kansas congressman, who says that they're used to false wizards down there in Kansas, and he put it this way about WikiLeaks .

It's time to call out WikiLeaks for what it really is, a non-state, hostile intelligence service, often abetted by state actors like Russia. About time.

Gigot: Well, where does that leave, Bill, President Trump who touted some of the WikiLeaks disclosures in the campaign?

McGurn: Yes. Don't you think it's good to have someone acknowledge it honestly? He promised to go after them with great vigor.

Gigot: No, I agree with you on it. I just think that it probably wasn't great to celebrate that in the campaign. All right.

And remember, if you have your own hit or miss, be sure to tweet it to us @JERonFNC. That's it for this week's show. Thanks to my panel. Thanks to all of you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. We hope to see you right here next week. And Happy Easter.

Document WSJO000020170417ed4h004xv



After  ISIS , the U.S. Military Could Help Keep Iraq Stable

By James Jeffrey 
849 words
17 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A17
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi has called on the U.S. to deepen cooperation with Baghdad under the 2008 U.S.-Iraqi Strategic Framework Agreement. That makes sense. America has expended incalculable resources in Iraq, intervening militarily four times since 1990. Iraq is worth the effort -- the center of the Middle East, with almost two-thirds of the oil and gas reserves of Saudi Arabia, abundant water, an educated population and a functioning democracy. But if the U.S. doesn't want to intervene again, assistance must be linked to maintaining a small military contingent there.

An American-Iraqi decision on keeping U.S. troops in the country must be taken soon, as the rationale for their current presence -- to defeat Islamic State -- will fade as it is destroyed. The justification for a longer-term presence would be to train and equip Iraqi forces and assist against ISIS remnants. Strategically, it could also help keep Iraq independent of Iran.

The impending destruction of ISIS as a "caliphate" will rank with the 2003 Iraq war, the Arab Spring, the Iran nuclear agreement and Russian intervention in Syria as a regional game-changer. The first four advanced the Iranian and Russian quest to upset the U.S.-led regional security order. But the defeat of ISIS could help the U.S. reverse this trend.

To do so Washington must view the region differently. Since the Cold War the U.S. has treated Middle East challenges -- Iran, Saddam Hussein, Syria, Yemen, terrorism, and more -- as discrete problems, not part of a larger endeavor. The U.S. assumed that the region's core, an American-led regional order, would endure.

Threats to that order from Iran, Russia and Sunni Islamists challenge this assumption. In this environment, Cold War principles -- alliance solidarity and U.S. credibility -- must be reinvigorated. Anything the U.S. does must support the strategy to contain Iran and combat Sunni extremists. The two are linked: Under Iranian influence, Damascus and Baghdad so oppressed their Sunni Arab populations that they turned to ISIS.

Keeping a troop contingent in Iraq would support such a strategy. The Trump administration appears interested, but success is uncertain given that Iraq did not allow the U.S. to extend forces in Iraq in 2011. Prime Minister Abadi appears supportive, but other political leaders, the public and Iran are more or less opposed. To keep a troop presence, the U.S. will have to proceed on three avenues: "sell" the presence, link it to other assistance, and keep it noncontroversial.

Iraqis must be convinced that an American presence would support the fight against terrorism and ensure the Iraqi army does not implode as it did in Mosul in 2014. They must also be convinced that it would support Iraqi unity, by signaling to skeptical Sunni Arab and Kurdish minorities that the largely Shiite Baghdad government seeks ties to the West. Also important is the perception that the U.S. supports Iraqi sovereignty, by signaling to Iran that Iraq will not become anyone's vassal state.

The U.S. will have to link economic assistance and diplomatic cooperation -- in short, "tough love" -- to clarify that in exchange for such help, Iraqi politicians have to be flexible on troops. U.S. support for Iraq beyond security has been remarkable: an IMF-led $15 billion loan, mediation of disputes between Baghdad and Kurdistan, and the facilitation of oil production. The U.S. has a vital interest in preventing Iraq from descending into violence, enabling Iranian regional aggression, or spawning another terrorist movement, and that requires not just political and economic support but continued military ties.

But Iraq must also be reassured that a U.S military presence would be acceptable to Iraqis. Based on the troop-extension talks with Iraq in 2011, the following would be politically acceptable.

First, the troop contingent should be limited and not permanent. The 5,000 troops contemplated in 2011 are likely the maximum politically sustainable. U.S. troops should also be part of an international contingent and stationed on Iraqi bases. The U.S. should not again ask for Parliament-approved legal immunities for U.S. personnel, but rather extend the administrative status under which they now operate.

Second, the formal troop mission should focus on training and equipping Iraqi forces, and specific intelligence, counterterrorism and perhaps air-support functions. Everyone in the region would understand that such a presence would also help contain Iran and promote stability, but diplomacy requires that this not be explicit.

Third, the U.S. should be careful not to suggest that troops in Iraq are a combat force to project power into Syria or Iran against Baghdad's interests.

None of this guarantees that Iraq will allow such a military presence but it will make the choice easier. Stability in the entire region hangs on Iraq making the right one.

---

Mr. Jeffrey served as U.S. ambassador to Turkey (2008-10) and Iraq (2010-12).

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170417ed4h0000g



World News: Trump Gives Generals More Say in  ISIS  Fight

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut 
792 words
17 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. military commanders are stepping up their fight against Islamist extremism as President Donald Trump's administration urges them to make more battlefield decisions on their own.

As the White House works on a broad strategy, America's top military commanders are implementing the vision articulated by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis: Decimate Islamic State's Middle East strongholds and ensure that the militants don't establish new bridgeheads in places such as Afghanistan.

"There's nothing formal, but it is beginning to take shape," a senior U.S. defense official said Friday. "There is a sense among these commanders that they are able to do a bit more -- and so they are."

While military commanders complained about White House micromanagement under former President Barack Obama, they are now being told they have more freedom to make decisions without consulting Mr. Trump. Military commanders around the world are being encouraged to stretch the limits of their existing authority when needed, but to think seriously about the consequences of their decisions.

The more muscular military approach is expanding as the Trump administration debates a comprehensive new strategy to defeat Islamic State. Mr. Mattis has sketched out such a global plan, but the administration has yet to agree on it. While the political debate continues, the military is being encouraged to take more aggressive steps against Islamic extremists around the world.

The firmer military stance has fueled growing concerns among State Department officials working on Middle East policy that the Trump administration is giving short shrift to the diplomatic tools the Obama administration favored. Removing the carrot from the traditional carrot-and-stick approach, some State Department officials warn, could hamper the pursuit of long-term strategies needed to prevent volatile conflicts from reigniting once the shooting stops.

The new approach was on display this week in Afghanistan, where Gen. John Nicholson, head of the U.S.-led coalition there, decided to use one of the military's biggest nonnuclear bombs -- a Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb, or MOAB -- to hit a remote Islamic State underground network of tunnels and caves.

Gen. Nicholson said Friday it was too early to say how many militants had been killed in the previous day's bombing. The Afghan Defense Ministry retracted an earlier statement that the strike had killed 36 militants, saying it was unable to provide precise figures yet.

A military official for the coalition who viewed footage of the bombing said it was difficult to make out details of its effects beyond a "mushroom cloud" of smoke rising into the sky. He added that a second MOAB was available for use in the country, but no decision had been made on whether it should be deployed.

Islamic State's Amaq news agency posted a statement on Friday saying none of its fighters were killed or wounded in the strike, which took place in Nangarhar province, along the country's mountainous border with Pakistan.

Gen. Nicholson indicated that he -- not the White House -- decided to drop the bomb. "The ammunition we used last night is designed to destroy caves and tunnels. This was the right weapon against the right target," he told reporters Friday. "I am fortunate that my chain of command allows me the latitude to make assessments on the ground."

A senior administration official said Mr. Trump didn't know about the weapon's use until it had been dropped.

Mr. Mattis "is telling them, 'It's not the same as it was, you don't have to ask us before you drop a MOAB,'" the senior defense official said. "Technically there's no piece of paper that says you have to ask the president to drop a MOAB. But last year this time, the way [things were] meant, 'I'm going to drop a MOAB, better let the White House know.'"

On Thursday, Mr. Trump himself emphasized the free rein he gives the Pentagon. "I authorize my military," Mr. Trump said. "We have given them total authorization."

On Friday, the U.S. military said it had sent dozens of soldiers to Somalia, where Mr. Trump recently gave the head of the U.S. Africa Command more leeway to carry out counterterrorism operations against al-Shabaab, the al Qaeda affiliate in the area.

The more-aggressive military approach comes as the long slog against Islamic State is bearing fruit. The group is on the back foot in its Iraqi stronghold, Mosul, and is facing a hard battle to defend its de facto Syrian capital, Raqqa.

---

Jessica Donati and Habib Khan Totakhil contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170416ed4h0001f



REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
Trump's Big Bomb

356 words
17 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

As demonstration effects go, it would be hard to top the bomb the U.S. dropped Thursday on Islamic State in Afghanistan. The 21,000 pound GBU-43, or "mother of all bombs," landed on Islamic State installations in eastern Afghanistan. Like the 59 Tomahawk cruise missiles that struck a Syrian airfield last week, the right people no doubt noticed this display of American purpose.

At the top of the list would be Islamic State, which Mr. Trump has promised to eliminate. The terrorist group has seized territory in Afghanistan's Nangahar Province, near the border with Pakistan. The Afghan army, supported by the U.S., has taken significant losses in its attempt to dislodge ISIS. The commander of U.S. forces in Afghanistan, Gen. John Nicholson, called the GBU-43 smart bomb the "right munition" to "maintain momentum" against ISIS.

Momentum is an important concept in this fight. The armed forces of Iraq, for example, are on the brink of recovering Mosul from Islamic State and have taken huge casualties to do so. But it will be difficult to consolidate an achievement like that unless other nations are willing to make similar commitments to support the fight, whether in Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan or Yemen.

Momentum routinely wilts beneath the politics and factions across the Middle East. The strike against Syria and now the use in Afghanistan of the biggest non-nuclear bomb in the active U.S. arsenal makes clear America's resolve to our allies. Islamic State won't be defeated without buy-in from those allies.

We may also assume that the missile-launching crowd in Pyongyang noticed the deployment of the GBU-43. Far be it from us to suggest that the U.S. drop one on a North Korean nuclear factory. But in the space of a week, Kim Jong Un, Vladimir Putin, Bashar Assad, Xi Jinping and ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, wherever he is hiding, have learned that the U.S. considers it to be in its interest to push back hard against its adversaries' aggression.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170416ed4h0000y



Military Takes Lead on  ISIS  --- Pentagon is given reins to run global campaign; 'I authorize my military,' Trump says

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut 
913 words
15 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. military commanders are stepping up their fight against Islamist extremism as President Donald Trump's administration urges them to make more battlefield decisions on their own.

As the White House works on a broad strategy, America's top military commanders are implementing the vision articulated by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis: Decimate Islamic State's Middle East strongholds and ensure that the militants don't establish new beachheads in places such as Afghanistan.

"There's nothing formal, but it is beginning to take shape," a senior U.S. defense official said Friday. "There is a sense among these commanders that they are able to do a bit more -- and so they are."

While military commanders complained about White House micromanagement under former President Barack Obama, they are now being told they have more freedom to make decisions without consulting Mr. Trump. Military commanders are being encouraged to stretch the limits of their existing authorities when needed, but to think seriously about the consequences.

The more muscular military approach is expanding as the Trump administration debates a comprehensive new strategy to defeat Islamic State. Mr. Mattis has sketched out such a global plan, but the administration has yet to agree on it. While the political debate continues, the military is being encouraged to take more aggressive steps against Islamic extremists around the world.

The firmer military stance has fueled concerns among State Department officials working on Middle East policy that the Trump administration is giving short shrift to the diplomatic tools the Obama administration favored. Removing the carrot from the traditional carrot-and-stick approach, some State Department officials warn, could hamper the pursuit of long-term strategies needed to prevent conflicts from reigniting once the shooting stops.

The new approach was on display this week in Afghanistan, where Gen. John Nicholson, head of the U.S.-led coalition there, decided to use one of the military's biggest nonnuclear bombs -- a Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb, or MOAB -- to hit a remote Islamic State underground network of tunnels and caves.

Gen. Nicholson said Friday it was too early to say how many militants had been killed in the bombing. The Afghan Defense Ministry retracted an earlier statement that the strike killed 36 militants, saying it couldn't provide precise figures yet.

A military official for the coalition who viewed footage of the bombing said it was difficult to make out details of its effects beyond a "mushroom cloud" of smoke rising into the sky. He added that a second MOAB was available for use in the country, but no decision had been made on whether it should be deployed.

Islamic State's Amaq news agency posted a statement on Friday saying none of its fighters were killed or wounded in the strike, which took place in Nangarhar province, along the country's mountainous border with Pakistan.

Gen. Nicholson indicated that he -- not the White House -- decided to drop the bomb. "This was the right weapon against the right target," he told reporters Friday. "I am fortunate that my chain of command allows me the latitude to make assessments on the ground."

A senior administration official said Mr. Trump didn't know about the weapon's use until it had been dropped.

Mr. Mattis "is telling them, 'It's not the same as it was, you don't have to ask us before you drop a MOAB,'" the senior defense official said.

Indeed, on Thursday Mr. Trump emphasized the free rein he gives the Pentagon. "I authorize my military," Mr. Trump said. "We have given them total authorization."

On Friday, the U.S. military said it has sent dozens of soldiers to Somalia, where Mr. Trump recently gave the head of the U.S. Africa Command more leeway to carry out counterterrorism operations against al-Shabaab, the al Qaeda affiliate in the area.

The more aggressive military approach comes as the long slog against Islamic State is bearing fruit. The group is on the back foot in its Iraqi stronghold, Mosul, and is facing a hard battle to defend its de facto Syrian capital, Raqqa.

The U.S. has sent more forces into Iraq and Syria, stepped up support for Saudi Arabia's fight against Houthi militants in Yemen, and dispatched an aircraft carrier to the Korean Peninsula amid evidence that North Korea is preparing a new nuclear test.

The flip side of the Trump administration's emphasis on a more-free-wheeling military approach to Islamic State is an apparent reduction of the use of soft-power tools -- economic development, diplomacy and democracy-building -- favored by the Obama White House.

Some State Department officials describe being cut out from the White House's counterterrorism strategy in the Mideast, with efforts to nurture democratic governments and push for more secular education systems carrying less weight in the White House's evolving approach.

"State is being systematically sidelined," said a State Department official who has worked on counterterrorism in Washington and abroad. The official said the White House strategy of prioritizing military might over diplomacy makes it hard to persuade Mideast allies to relax their grip on power.

---

Jessica Donati and Habib Khan Totakhil in Kabul and Carol E. Lee in Washington contributed to this article.



License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170415ed4f0002n



World
Trump Gives Generals More Freedom on  ISIS  Fight; Pentagon brass take lead on decisions that were made by White House under Obama;  authorize my military,' Trump says

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut 
1,368 words
15 April 2017
04:29
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. military commanders are stepping up their fight against Islamist extremism as President Donald Trump's administration urges them to make more battlefield decisions on their own.

As the White House works on a broad strategy, America's top military commanders are implementing the vision articulated by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis: Decimate Islamic State's Middle East strongholds and ensure that the militants don't establish new beachheads in places such as Afghanistan.

"There's nothing formal, but it is beginning to take shape," a senior U.S. defense official said Friday. "There is a sense among these commanders that they are able to do a bit morend so they are."

While military commanders complained about White House micromanagement under former President Barack Obama, they are now being told they have more freedom to make decisions without consulting Mr. Trump. Military commanders around the world are being encouraged to stretch the limits of their existing authorities when needed, but to think seriously about the consequences of their decisions.

The more muscular military approach is expanding as the Trump administration debates a comprehensive new strategy to defeat Islamic State. Mr. Mattis has sketched out such a global plan, but the administration has yet to agree on it. While the political debate continues, the military is being encouraged to take more aggressive steps against Islamic extremists around the world.

The firmer military stance has fueled growing concerns among State Department officials working on Middle East policy that the Trump administration is giving short shrift to the diplomatic tools the Obama administration favored. Removing the carrot from the traditional carrot-and-stick approach, some State Department officials warn, could hamper the pursuit of long-term strategies needed to prevent volatile conflicts from reigniting once the shooting stops.

The new approach was on display this week in Afghanistan, where Gen. John Nicholson, head of the U.S.-led coalition there, decided to use one of the military's biggest nonnuclear bombs Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb, or MOABo hit a remote Islamic State underground network of tunnels and caves.

Gen. Nicholson said Friday it was too early to say how many militants had been killed in the previous day's bombing. The Afghan Defense Ministry retracted an earlier statement that the strike had killed 36 militants, saying it was unable to provide precise figures yet.

A military official for the coalition who viewed footage of the bombing said it was difficult to make out details of its effects beyond a "mushroom cloud" of smoke rising into the sky. He added that a second MOAB was available for use in the country, but no decision had been made on whether it should be deployed.

Islamic State's Amaq news agency posted a statement on Friday saying none of its fighters were killed or wounded in the strike, which took place in Nangarhar province, along the country's mountainous border with Pakistan.

Gen. Nicholson indicated that heot the White Houseecided to drop the bomb. "The ammunition we used last night is designed to destroy caves and tunnels. This was the right weapon against the right target," he told reporters Friday. "I am fortunate that my chain of command allows me the latitude to make assessments on the ground."

A senior administration official said Mr. Trump didn't know about the weapon's use until it had been dropped.

Mr. Mattis "is telling them, t's not the same as it was, you don't have to ask us before you drop a MOAB,'" the senior defense official said. "Technically there's no piece of paper that says you have to ask the president to drop a MOAB. But last year this time, the way [things were] meant, 'm going to drop a MOAB, better let the White House know.'"

Indeed, on Thursday Mr. Trump himself emphasized the free rein he gives the Pentagon. "I authorize my military," Mr. Trump said. "We have given them total authorization."

On Friday, the U.S. military said it has sent dozens of soldiers to Somalia, where Mr. Trump recently gave the head of the U.S. Africa Command more leeway to carry out counterterrorism operations against al-Shabaab, the al Qaeda affiliate in the area.

The more aggressive military approach comes as the long slog against Islamic State is bearing fruit. The group is on the back foot in its Iraqi stronghold, Mosul, and is facing a hard battle to defend its de facto Syrian capital, Raqqa.

The U.S. has sent more forces into Iraq and Syria, stepped up support for Saudi Arabia's fight against Houthi militants in Yemen, and dispatched an aircraft carrier to the Korean Peninsula amid growing evidence that North Korea is preparing for a new nuclear test.

Loren DeJonge Schulman, who served as senior adviser to Mr. Obama's national security adviser, said a more assertive military campaign is destined to fail unless it is part of a broader strategy against Islamic State, also known by the acronyms ISIS and ISIL.

"It's crazy that the Trump administration thinks that aking the gloves off' is either a winning strategy against ISIL or a useful narrative for the White House or the military," said Ms. Schulman, now a senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security.

Derek Chollet, a former assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs in the Obama administration, said giving the Pentagon more freedom is one of the most significant things Mr. Trump has done.

"It's not clear to me that he's making any tough decisions," said Mr. Chollet, now executive vice president at the German Marshall Fund of the United States. "All that he's essentially done is ceded decision authority down to protect himself from making tough calls."

The flip side of the Trump administration's emphasis on a more-free-wheeling military approach to Islamic State is an apparent reduction of the use of soft-power toolsconomic development, diplomacy and democracy-buildingavored by the Obama White House.

Some State Department officials describe being cut out from the White House's counterterrorism strategy in the Mideast, with efforts to nurture democratic governments and push for more secular education systems carrying less weight in the White House's evolving approach.

"State is being systematically sidelined," said a State Department official who has worked on counterterrorism issues in Washington and abroad.

The official said the White House strategy of prioritizing military might over diplomacy makes it hard to persuade Mideast allies to relax their grip on power. Many of Washington's closest Arab allies are autocratic regimes guilty of human-rights abuses that critics say fuel terrorism.

"The problem there is that in many of the places where you need carrots, those carrots are often seen as threats to local governments," the official said, referring to democracy and society-building programs the State Department funds across the Mideast.

Egypt offers a prime example of the Trump administration's leanings. When Egyptian President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, a military strongman, visited the White House earlier this month, Mr. Trump gave him a warm welcome. Mr. Obama had refused to meet him because of his regime's alleged human-rights abuses.

U.S. officials in the Mideast say a counterterror approach that focuses solely on military might without programs to fight the causes that feed extremism could backfire, leading groups like Islamic State to go underground and wait for future opportunities to re-emerge. They are particularly concerned about Raqqa, where a U.S.-led military coalition is closing in around the city but post-liberation stabilization plans aren't finalized as State Department officials wait for White House guidance.

Jessica Donati and Habib Khan Totakhil in Kabul and Carol E. Lee in Washington contributed to this article.

Write to Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com and Maria Abi-Habib at maria.habib@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170415ed4f0005l



World
U.S., Afghan Forces Begin Cleanup After Massive Bomb Blast; U.S. national security adviser McMaster in Kabul for mportant talks,' Afghan defense minister says

By Jessica Donati and Habib Khan Totakhil 
736 words
15 April 2017
21:12
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL.S. national security adviser Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster arrived in Kabul on Saturday, Afghanistan's defense minister said, days after the U.S. military dropped the second-largest nonnuclear weapon in its arsenal on a cave complex used by Islamic State fighters in east Afghanistan.

The minister, Gen. Abdullah Habibi, tweeted news of the visit and said Gen. McMaster was in the Afghan capital for "important talks with Afghan authorities."

The U.S. military didn't immediately comment on whether Gen. McMaster was in the country or what such a visit would entail.

The visit came as Afghan officials said the death toll caused by the nearly 22,000-pound U.S. bomb strike against Islamic State in eastern Afghanistan had risen to 92 militants, with U.S. and Afghan commando units discovering bodies in caves during an operation to clear the site.

The U.S. military declined to comment on the figures, without providing a reason. Coalition officials questioned how their Afghan counterparts had reached those numbers.

Gen. McMaster, a military strategist with extensive battle experience, served in both Afghanistan and Iraq. He has been a harsh critic of U.S. action taken at the behest of local nonmilitary officials without what he has described as properly developed strategies, clear goals and detailed exit plans.

The visit would mark his first trip to Afghanistan as national security adviser.

U.S. President Donald Trump's team is assessing a request by Army Gen. John Nicholson, the top U.S. military commander in Afghanistan, to put thousands more troops on the ground to bolster the fight against the Taliban.

The country's largest insurgent group has made sweeping gains since most foreign troops withdrew in 2014, and is currently threatening to overrun at least half a dozen provincial capitals from the government.

Coalition officials are also concerned about the emerging Islamic State presence in Afghanistan, fearing its vast ungoverned areas could become a haven for the group's fighters fleeing conflict in Iraq and Syria.

The extremist group began operating in Afghanistan in the vacuum left by foreign troops and has since established a base in the east and pockets of support across the country.

The U.S. military on Thursday dropped the Massive Ordnance Air Blast into the mountains of Achin district, an Islamic State stronghold, weeks into a large-scale joint U.S. and Afghan operation targeting Islamic State.

Known as the "mother of all bombs," it struck a complex of tunnels and caves used by the militant group to train fighters and launch operations.

An Afghan security official said the commandos continued to clear bodies from the caves.

"Twenty-two bodies were found in one cave, 60 in another and 10 bodies in a third, he said, adding that the figure would likely increase in the mountainous area of Achin district, an Islamic State stronghold near the Pakistani border.

The bomb sent a huge mushroom cloud into the sky, shaking homes miles away. The complex was originally a mine that had been excavated by local villagers before being seized by Islamic State.

On Friday, the top U.S. military commander in Afghanistan said no civilians had been harmed in the strike and it was the right weapon to use for the job of clearing the complex.

U.S. and Afghan Special Forces had initially tried to clear the area using a combination of ground operations and airstrikes, but had run into difficulty because it was mountainous and heavily mined.

The recent death of a U.S. soldier there helped motivate the decision to deploy the weapon, a coalition official said, as military leaders were concerned about losing more soldiers in the effort to clear Islamic State complex.

"The MOAB is definitely a munition designed for a specific tactical purpose," said Adam Routh, a defense researcher who served in Afghanistan in an Army Ranger Regiment.

Ben Kesling in Washington contributed to this article

Write to Jessica Donati at Jessica.Donati@wsj.com

More Coverage

* U.S. Drops other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0  in Afghanistan

* Bomb Built Partly as Psychological Deterrent

* The other of All Bombs': Fast Facts

* Why U.S. Dropped other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0 

Document WSJO000020170415ed4f000rt



Politics
Senate Democrats' Fundraising Jumps Ahead of 2018 Election; Lawmakers up for re-election rake in three times as much as 6 years ago from energized base; GOP makes gains, too

By Byron Tau and Rebecca Ballhaus 
1,263 words
15 April 2017
00:52
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

                 Corrections & Amplifications                  

WASHINGTONiding a wave of grass-roots enthusiasm, several Senate Democrats up for re-election in 2018 posted strong fundraising takes in the first quarter, amassing big war chests of campaign cash.             

Democratic candidates in Virginia, Indiana, Missouri and North Dakota reported large fundraising hauls rarely seen so early in an election cycle. Elsewhere, progressive champions such as Sens. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Chris Murphy of Connecticut raked in millions of dollars, despite representing heavily Democratic states where they are expected to cruise to an easy re-election.             

The pickup in donations is dramatic. Democratic incumbents in 14 Senate seats that had released their fundraising totals by Friday afternoon had raised more than $30 million in the first quarter of the year, about three times as much as those same candidates raised in the same period six years ago.             

Meanwhile, Republican incumbents in six Senate races that announced their fundraising efforts had raised $6.7 million, almost double what they raised in the same period in 2011. Six years ago, some of those candidates weren't incumbents, who typically have a fundraising advantage. More Senate candidates are expected to report their first-quarter fundraising totals in the coming days.                           

Several Republican Senate candidates, including Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, also posted impressive quarterly fundraising totals. Moreover, the Republican National Committee, with help from President Donald Trump, said this month that it raised $41.3 million in the first three months of the yearore than double what its Democratic counterpart raised in the quarter after former President Barack Obama was elected in 2008.             

The Democratic National Committee hadn't released its latest fundraising totals as of Friday afternoon.             

Republicans control 52 out of the 100 Senate seats. Although 34 Senate seats will be up for grabs in November 2018, Democrats and two allied independents are defending 25 of those seats, including several in conservative states where Mr. Trump won by double digits. As a result, any Democratic  path back to a majority in the Senate runs through states like Arizona or Texasistorically conservative places where Democrats have struggled to win statewide races in recent years.              

The influx of donations into Senate races is another manifestation of the liberal energy sparked by Mr. Trump's surprise election victory in November. Angry Democratic voters have been showing up at congressional town hall meetings, flooding Capitol Hill switchboards and are donating money to Democratic politicians. Online fundraising in particular has exploded, as several campaigns reported record-breaking digital fundraising efforts.                          

"This level of engagementspecially from Missourians who've never contributed to Claire before nows humbling," said Erika Brees, the finance director for Sen. Claire McCaskill (D., Mo.).             

Ms. McCaskill, who is a top target for Republicans looking to pick up seats, raised about $2.8 million during the first three months of 2017 record in a Missouri Senate race in the first quarter of a nonelection year. Her campaign said more than 5,500 of her contributions in Missouri came from first-time donors.             

In the first three months of 2011, the last cycle in which Ms. McCaskill was up for re-election, she raised about a third that amount: $1 million.             

Other vulnerable Democrats posted similarly large fundraising totals. Sen. Joe Donnelly posted his best fundraising in the first quarter of a nonelection year with his $1.3 million haul.              

Virginia's Sen. Tim Kaine and North Dakota's Sen. Heidi Heitkamp also broke records. Mr. Kaine, who was the Democratic nominee for vice president in 2016, raised about $2.9 million and has $5.5 million in the bank going into his re-election campaign next year. That is the most he has ever raised in a single quarter in a nonelection year.             

Ms. Heitkamp, a top GOP target in 2018, raised more money than any other North Dakota Senate candidate ever has in the first quarter of a nonelection year1.6 million. She hadn't yet announced her candidacy 18 months out from Election Day last cycle.             

But another Democrat, Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia, didn't have the same fundraising windfall as his Senate peers. Mr. Manchin, who represents a state that Mr. Trump won by more than 40 points, announced that he raised about $500,000 for his re-election bidoughly on par with what he raised at this point in 2011. He has about $2.2 million in the bank. He is considered a top target for Republicans in 2018.              

Republicans, meanwhile, have pointed to the RNC's fundraising success, and note that fundraising emails bearing Mr. Trump's name brought in about 250,000 new online donors to the RNC and Trump re-election campaign, according to a party official. That is a 398% increase over the number of new donors the RNC won in 2016n election year.             

Of Republican candidates who posted impressive numbers. Mr. Cruz, a former GOP presidential candidate and a candidate who is heavily favored for re-election in a conservative state, raised about $1.7 million. He heads into his re-election bid with $5.2 million in the bank. Mr. Cruz's only declared opponent so far is Beto O'Rourke, a Democratic congressman whose bid is considered a long-shot by many political observers.             

Sen. Orrin Hatch, a Utah Republican, raised about $1.3 millionp more than 60% from this quarter in 2011, the year before he was last on the ballot. Mr. Hatch, who is 83 years old and has served in the Senate since 1977, had initially said he would be retiring when his term is up in 2019, but has since indicated that he is likely to pursue an eighth term. He now has $3.5 million in the bank for his campaign. Former Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney has been reportedly exploring a Senate bid in Utah.             

In noncompetitive Democratic states, a number of progressive Democrats have seen an influx in donations. Ms. Warren, a Massachusetts Democrat who is routinely whispered as a potential presidential candidate, reported raising $5.2 million in the first three months of the year. She now has $9.2 million in cash on hand for a Senate race where she is the heavy favorite. And Mr. Murphy, a Connecticut Democrat who has been very critical of Mr. Trump, raised roughly $3 million in the first quarter of the year, and has $3.5 million in the bank.             

The 2017 numbers were provided by the Senate campaigns. Senate fundraising reports aren't officially due until Saturday. Campaign-finance rules don't require Senate candidates to file reports online, meaning there is often a delay in mailing, processing and digitizing their campaign-finance reports filed on paper. As a result, Senate candidates typically self-report their fundraising figures around the time of filing deadlines.             

                 Write to Byron Tau at byron.tau@wsj.com and Rebecca Ballhaus at Rebecca.Ballhaus@wsj.com



Read More on Capital Journal                 

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.                                      

* U.S. Drops other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0  Tunnels in Afghanistan



* Trump Shifts Back to Health Care



* Trump Administration Takes Steps to Stabilize Health-Insurance Market



* In Ex-Im Bank Impasse, Trump Sides With Business Establishment



* U.S. Braces for Next Provocation From North Korea

Document WSJO000020170414ed4e008ya



REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
Trump's Big Bomb

393 words
14 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A14
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

As demonstration effects go, it would be hard to top the bomb the U.S. dropped Thursday on Islamic State in Afghanistan. The 21,000 pound GBU-43, or "mother of all bombs," landed on Islamic State installations in eastern Afghanistan.

What happened at the receiving end of the bomb isn't known, nor would White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer say whether President Trump personally gave authorization, which isn't needed to deploy the GBU-43. But like the 59 Tomahawk cruise missiles that struck a Syrian airfield last week, the right people no doubt noticed this display of American purpose.

At the top of the list would be Islamic State, which Mr. Trump has promised to eliminate. The terrorist group has seized territory in Afghanistan's Nangahar Province, near the border with Pakistan. The Afghan army, supported by the U.S., has taken significant losses in its attempt to dislodge ISIS. The commander of U.S. forces in Afghanistan, Gen. John Nicholson, called the GBU-43 smart bomb the "right munition" to "maintain momentum" against ISIS.

Momentum is an important concept in this fight. The armed forces of Iraq, for example, are on the brink of recovering Mosul from Islamic State and have taken huge casualties to do so. But it will be difficult to consolidate an achievement like that unless other nations are willing to make similar commitments to support the fight, whether in Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan or Yemen.

Momentum routinely wilts beneath the politics and factions across the Middle East. The strike against Syria and now the use in Afghanistan of the biggest non-nuclear bomb in the active U.S. arsenal makes clear America's resolve to our allies. Islamic State won't be defeated without buy-in from those allies.

We may also assume that the missile-launching crowd in Pyongyang noticed the deployment of the GBU-43. Far be it from us to suggest that the U.S. drop one on a North Korean nuclear factory. But in the space of a week, Kim Jong Un, Vladimir Putin, Bashar Assad, Xi Jinping and ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, wherever he is hiding, have learned that the U.S. considers it to be in its interest to push back hard against its adversaries' aggression.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170414ed4e00017



World
U.S., Afghan Forces Assess Damage to  ISIS  From Massive Bomb; other of All Bombs' targeted a militant cave-and-tunnel complex in eastern Afghanistan

By Jessica Donati and Habib Khan Totakhil 
1,323 words
14 April 2017
18:35
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

The U.S. strikes on a Syrian air base occurred on April 7. An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated the strikes were on April 6. (April 14, 2017)

KABUL.S. and Afghan forces on Friday were on the ground assessing the damage caused by a nearly 22,000-pound American bomb that targeted an Islamic State cave-and-tunnel complex in eastern Afghanistan.

The bomb, one of the largest conventional weapons in the U.S. arsenal, was dropped on the militant stronghold in Nangarhar province's Achin district on Thursday, shaking homes and shattering windows more than a mile away, residents said.

It was the second high-profile U.S. military strike in a week. Two U.S. destroyers

fired nearly 60 Tomahawk cruise missiles at an air base in Syria on April 7 in retaliation for a suspected sarin gas attack by the government on a rebel-held town in Idlib province.

The top U.S. military commander in the Afghanistan, Army Gen. John Nicholson, said it was too early to say how many militants had been killed in Thursday's bombing. The Afghan Defense Ministry retracted an earlier statement that the strike had killed 36 militants, saying it was too early to provide precise figures. Gen. Nicholson also indicated that he made the decision to drop the bomb.

"The ammunition we used last night is designed to destroy caves and tunnels. This was the right weapon against the right target," he told reporters Friday. "I am fortunate that my chain of command allow me the latitude to make assessments on the ground."

A military official for the coalition who viewed footage of the bombing said it was difficult to make out details of its effects beyond a "mushroom cloud" of smoke rising into the sky. He added that there was a second bomb available for use in the country, but no decision yet had been made on whether it should be deployed.

Islamic State's Amaq news agency posted a statement on Friday saying that none of its fighters were killed or wounded in the strike.

There were no immediate reports from U.S. or Afghan officials on possible civilian casualties from the airstrike. Residents who live near the bomb's target spoke Friday of hearing a terrifying explosion.

"We could see the flames of the blast for minutes after the bomb was dropped," said Israr Shinwari, who lives about a mile from where the bombnown as the Massive Ordnance Air Blast and nicknamed the "Mother of All Bombs"it. "We were all horrified."

Thursday's bombing occurred during an offensive by U.S. and Afghan special forces in eastern Afghanistan against Islamic State's Afghan branch, which calls itself Khorasan Province. Previous offensives against the group have pushed the militants back, but they have typically returned.

Some local residents said the strike was intended mainly to send a general message to America's enemies, not clear the tunnel-and-cave complex. U.S. military officials say that Russia and Iran are supporting the Taliban, presenting a challenge to coalition efforts to curb the insurgency. Russian officials have denied such assistance and said they maintain contacts with the group for their own security.

Moscow on Friday offered a mixed reaction to the news from Afghanistan. Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov said the campaign against Islamic State was "our common goal," news agency Interfax reported.

But Igor Morozov, a Russian senator, said the use of the bomb threatened to spark a new arms race.

"The U.S. test of a new bomb in Afghanistan is an attempt at world domination through a kind of military threat that threatens with a new round of the arms race," he said, according to the news agency RIA-Novosti.

Also on Friday, the Russian government hosted a round of consultations on Afghan issues with representatives from the governments of Afghanistan, India, Iran, China, Pakistan, and the Central Asian states of the former Soviet Union. The U.S., which Russia said was invited, didn't take part.

According to a statement from the Russian foreign ministry, the participants emphasized that "the crisis in Afghanistan does not have a military solution."

Reactions in Afghanistan also ranged between support and condemnation.

The Afghan government praised the decision to drop the bomb, saying on Friday that the bombing had been coordinated with Afghan forces. It had said earlier it had no advance notice of plans to drop the bomb.

The government's "message to all terrorist groups is that Afghanistan is not the safe haven for terrorists and there is no place for them to shelter," said Shah Hussain Murtazawi, a spokesman for Afghan President Ashraf Ghani.

Others in Afghanistan accused the U.S. military of using the country as a testing ground for new weapons and a means of sending messages to rival powers.

"This was just a show of force. The target wasn't Daesh," said Asif Shinwari, a civil-rights activist and native of Achin, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

The Talibanhich is threatening to wrest control of at least half a dozen provinces and sometimes works with Islamic Statealled the attack a "great crime" on the part of the Americans.

Afghanistan's former president, Hamid Karzai, said it represented a "most brutal misuse of our country as testing ground for new and dangerouseapons," according to a series of posts on his Twitter account.

The Trump administration has yet to announce its plans in Afghanistan, but many expect the new U.S. president to deliver on the request by Gen. Nicholson for an increase the number of U.S. troops in the country, from its current level of about 8,500.

There also are some 6,000 soldiers in Afghanistan from other members of the international coalition, which is in the country in support of the central government in Kabul.

Islamic State Khorasan Province sometimes cooperates with the Taliban, and sometimes fights for influence. The Iocal Islamic State affiliate has joined the Taliban in carrying out high-profile attacks in the capital, which could suggest that Taliban commanders that formerly carried out attacks for the Taliban are now calling themselves Islamic State.

The U.S. and its allies worry a campaign to defeat Islamic State in Iraq and Syria could push fighters back into Afghanistan, where vast, ungoverned spaces offer militant groups freedom to operate. Afghan and allied officials report anecdotal examples of Islamic State commanders from the Middle East appearing in Afghanistan, but there are no signs yet of large concentrations of foreign fighters.

President Barack Obamaauthorized the military to begin combat operations targeting Islamic State in January last year, more than a year after the militant group emerged in eastern Afghanistan. Since then, the U.S. military has carried out near daily airstrikes targeting the group and have killed a number of its leaders, only for new ones to emerge. The U.S.-backed estimates the group's members in Afghanistan range from a few hundred to several thousand.

At its peak, Islamic State controlled parts of about a dozen districts in Nangarhar province.

One reason for the group's success is disaffection within the Taliban, which has been fighting the U.S. and its allies in the country for some 16 years and has grown increasingly divided since the death of its leader, Mullah Mohammad Omar. A U.S. drone strike killed his successor and the current leader is seen as a weak figure struggling to win the respect of powerful Taliban commanders in the south.

Nathan Hodge in Moscow contributed to this article.

Write to Jessica Donati at Jessica.Donati@wsj.com

More Coverage

* U.S. Drops other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0  in Afghanistan

* Bomb Built Partly as Psychological Deterrent

* The other of All Bombs': Fast Facts

* Why U.S. Dropped other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0 

Document WSJO000020170414ed4e00335



Politics
Donald Trump's Recent Policy Reversals Reflect Business Influence; Reliance on former and current executives helps lead to a shift away from hard-line positions on China, Ex-Im Bank and NATO

By Eli Stokols and Michael C. Bender 
1,561 words
14 April 2017
02:25
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTONresident Donald Trump's growing reliance on former corporate executives in his White Housend business leaders outside of itelped shape this week's reversals on several hard-line positions that defined his campaign, according to officials.

Unlike in the early weeks of his presidency, when his senior staff were a close-knit group of former campaign aides who had helped craft his image as an insurgent in the capital, Mr. Trump has sided recently with the more pragmatic wing of his administration that espouses economic and foreign policies that are much more in line with the Washington establishment's traditional view.

Mr. Trump appears to have taken some of the advice from chief executives he has met with frequently since taking office, as well as from former executives now in the administration and two family members with official White House roles, his daughter Ivanka Trump and son-in-law Jared Kushner.

Take the U.S. Export-Import Bank. During the campaign, Mr. Trump was skeptical of Ex-Im Bank, which funds U.S. trade deals, calling it "unnecessary." The bank has been a target of Republican criticism, which Mr. Trump seized on.

But that view changed earlier this year after he talked to Boeing Co. CEO Dennis Muilenburg, who explained to him what role the bank plays, according to people familiar with the matter. In a recent meeting with lawmakers, Sen. Heidi Heitkamp (D., N.D.) urged Mr. Trump to fill the bank's board vacancies, and the president told Ms. Heitkamp that he agreed with her that the postshich require a presidential nominationhould be filled.

In an interview Wednesday with The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Trump said he would fill the positions, explaining that he now views the bank as important for small businesses, and that other countries had similar banks.

In the interview, Mr. Trump also changed course on whether China was manipulating its currency. During the campaign, he said it was, but on Wednesday he said it had stopped. And in a news conference later on Wednesday, the president said that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is no longer "obsolete," as he had repeatedly claimed last year.

When asked in the interview whether he was lining up with the Washington establishment, Mr. Trump said: "I don't think so," pointing to his decision to withdraw the U.S. from the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement.

"We're getting ready to do certain things as an example on tradehey will not be establishment," he added.

The change in direction and tonee is no longer vociferously attacking China and Mexico, and has moderated his posts on Twitteras come as Mr. Trump has reduced the role of his chief strategist, Steve Bannon, the former executive chairman of Breitbart.com who personifies the economic nationalism that the president ran on. Mr. Bannon has also clashed with Mr. Trump's more moderate aides, including Mr. Kushner.

Speaking about Mr. Bannon's role on Wednesday, Mr. Trump described his chief strategist as a "guy who works for me." He went on to describe a "very good team" in the White House by pointing to Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, a former CEO of Exxon Mobil; Gary Cohn, who was second-in-command at Goldman Sachs Group Inc. before joining the White House as chairman of the National Economic Council; and Wilbur Ross, a billionaire investor.

Mr. Trump, usually surrounded by former top campaign aides and advisers who have followed him into the White House, sat for his interview on Wednesday with only Hope Hicks, his deputy communications director, in the Oval Office. About halfway through the 70-minute interview, Mr. Trump summoned Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, who remained in room for the rest of the meeting.

Several of those aides and advisers have worked to ease tensions with Mexico. Mexican officials have dealt extensively in the past three months with Mr. Kushner and Mr. Cohn, and Mr. Ross has been active in trying to put the relationship back on a more even keel. At a joint Washington press conference on March 10 with Mexican Economy Minister Ildefonso Guajardo to discuss the more narrow issue of negotiations over the sugar market, Mr. Ross made a point of stressing that this is "beginning of a working relationship to help bring progress and development to both our nations."

Multiple U.S. big business groups have also been active lobbying behind the scenes with Trump aides to impress upon them their views on the importance of the Nafta trade pact with Mexico and the U.S.

Another factor in the shift on Mexico has been the mid-February departure from the administration of one of the voices more hostile to Mexico: Michael Flynn, Mr. Trump's first national security adviser. Mr. Flynn had been seen as one of Mr. Trump's aides pushing for a harder line on Mexico. He was an open advocate for the border wall and said during a 2016 radio interview that "radical Islamist countries" were "cutting deals with Mexican drug cartels for some of what they call the anes of entry' in our country." He claimed to have seen Arabic signs in Mexico steering terrorists toward the U.S.

Mr. Trump said in the interview he was keen to get started on renegotiating Nafta. But he added, "We're doing very nicely with Mexico."

Asked whether he would make any changes to his inner circle in the coming months, Mr. Trump said, "I don't intend to." He added that he may change his mind. "From day to day, I don't know."

On Thursday, Sean Spicer, White House press secretary, said that rather than Mr. Trump changing his mind on key issues, circumstances were "evolving toward the president's position." He pointed to NATO, which Mr. Trump has long complained has relied too heavily on the military and financial might of the U.S. "Look at the president's position, where he wanted to see NATO, in particular, evolve," Mr. Spicer said. "It's moving exactly in the direction that he said it was in terms of its goals, of increasing the amount of participation from other member countries."

Mr. Spicer declined to elaborate on Mr. Trump's reversals on the Ex-Im Bank, which many conservatives deride as "corporate cronyism," or the president's refusal to label China a currency manipulator, as he promised during the campaign.

"The president's tough talk was a pledge to get more results for the American people," Mr. Spicer said about Mr. Trump's campaign.

Mr. Trump's shifts have raised new questions about how his base of anti-establishment voters will react. He has no major legislative victories, and his top immigration policy ban on citizens from six Muslim-majority countries from entering the U.S.as been blocked by the courts.

Asked last week what was Mr. Trump's biggest success for his anti-establishment base, White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders pointed to the president's five-year lobbying ban on administration officials.

But this week, the White House waived that ban for Marcus Peacock, a senior administration official who left the Office of Management and Budget to join the Business Roundtable, which lobbies on behalf of major corporations. Bloomberg News first reported Mr. Peacock's waiver on Wednesday.

"We didn't elect Kushner to bring a New York establishment mentality to Washington," said one campaign veteran aligned with Mr. Bannon and his political patrons, the Trump benefactors Robert and Rebekah Mercer. "The reason we worked so hard and gave so much money was because we were promised a nationalist revolution. We didn't send him there to go native once he gets to Washington, D.C."

Pat Caddell, a pollster for former President Jimmy Carter and a friend of Mr. Bannon, said Thursday that if Mr. Trump's core voters get a "perception that he was misleading them, then he will have a real problem, because one day they'll look up and say, ou lied to us, too.'"

He added: "If they reach that conclusion that he misled them and promised them and is just like everyone else after they voted for him, that's deadly."

That angst, however, does not yet appear to be widely shared by the conservative grass roots.

"Few are freaking," Laura Ingraham, a conservative radio host who occasionally advises Mr. Trump, said in an interview Thursday. "It's early. And he's done, and will do, many of the important things his voters want on the economy, trade and border enforcement."

Peter Nicholas, Rebecca Ballhaus and Jacob M. Schlesinger contributed to this article.

Write to Michael C. Bender at Mike.Bender@wsj.com

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* U.S. Drops other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0  Tunnels in Afghanistan

* Trump Shifts Back to Health Care

* Trump Administration Takes Steps to Stabilize Health-Insurance Market

* In Ex-Im Bank Impasse, Trump Sides With Business Establishment

* U.S. Braces for Next Provocation From North Korea

Document WSJO000020170414ed4e0002t



U.S. Drops 'Mother' Bomb On  ISIS  in Afghanistan

By Jessica Donati, Ben Kesling and Dion Nissenbaum 
1,048 words
14 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S. military dropped one of the largest nonnuclear bombs in its arsenal Thursday on an Islamic State tunnel-and-cave complex in eastern Afghanistan, the Pentagon said.

A U.S. plane dropped the nearly 22,000-pound Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb -- nicknamed the Mother of All Bombs -- just a few days after an American Special Forces soldier was killed during a joint U.S.-Afghan offensive against dug-in Islamic State positions in the same area.

"We have been waiting months to use it," said an allied official in Afghanistan. "I think the loss of our soldier helped motivate leaders to approve it."

The bomb is a precision-guided "smart bomb" designed to cause maximum damage to bunkers, tunnels and other areas that can typically withstand even large standard bombs or artillery strikes.

President Donald Trump suggested Thursday that he had not personally been involved in the decision to use the giant bomb, which is deployed by parachute from the rear ramp of a transport plane. "I authorize my military," Mr. Trump said. "We have given them total authorization."

Still, the use of the bomb by the military comes at a time when new military tactics are being used in other long-running foreign-policy challenges. Last week, for instance, the U.S. military, in a move approved by the president, fired 59 Tomahawk missiles onto a Syrian airfield -- the first time the U.S. has directly attacked the Syrian regime after years of war there. And in the western Pacific, a U.S. aircraft carrier -- and, Mr. Trump has said, a nuclear-powered submarine -- were directed to waters off Korea as a show of force to North Korea. The allied official in Afghanistan said, however, that the use of the big bomb wasn't designed as a message to Pyongyang.

Mr. Trump, when asked if the action served as a warning to North Korea, said: "I don't know if this sends a message, it doesn't make any difference if it does or not. North Korea is a problem, the problem will be taken care of."

The incident comes as Afghan and U.S. troops continue to fight a two-front war in Afghanistan, fending off attacks from the Taliban, who ran the country until late 2001, and Islamic State, which arrived in 2014. The two insurgent forces sometimes clash with each other and sometimes work in tandem.

Islamic State fighters have largely been holed up in Kunar and Nangarhar provinces, along the mountainous Pakistan border. "As [Islamic State's] losses have mounted, they are using [improvised bombs], bunkers and tunnels to thicken their defense," said U.S. Gen. John Nicholson, commander of allied forces in Afghanistan. "This is the right munition to reduce these obstacles and maintain the momentum of our offensive against" Islamic State.

Gen. Nicholson didn't require special permission to deploy the giant bomb, said a spokesman for U.S. forces in Afghanistan. The Afghan Ministry of Defense didn't know about the bomb strike, a ministry spokesman said.

There are currently around 8,500 American troops in Afghanistan, many of them Green Berets and other special-operations forces. Another 6,000 or so allied forces remain. The U.S. and its allies invaded Afghanistan in 2001 after concluding that the Taliban had allowed Osama bin Laden to plan the Sept. 11 attacks from sanctuary on Afghan soil. At one point there were more than 100,000 U.S. troops in the country.

The tempo of U.S. and Afghan operations against Islamic State has stepped up in recent weeks. U.S. and Afghan commandos are carrying out a 10-day offensive in Nangarhar province, where Islamic State retains its strongest presence in the country.

That operation cost the life of Staff Sgt. Mark De Alencar, a 37-year-old Green Beret from Edgewood, Md., who was killed in a firefight in Nangarhar on April 8, according to the military.

U.S. officials said Sgt. De Alencar's death was very much on their minds when commanders decided to escalate the air campaign.

"We lost a soldier because of the booby traps and [improvised explosive devices] around caves," said the allied official. "We will lose Afghan and U.S. lives trying to clear those caves."

White House press secretary Sean Spicer said the attack took place around 7 p.m. local time in Afghanistan. "We targeted a system of tunnels and caves that [Islamic State] fighters used to move around freely," Mr. Spicer said.

The U.S. military has been bombing Islamic State positions in the area almost daily for more than a year, but the rate of such strikes has increased dramatically since Mr. Trump took office in January. The past two months have seen the greatest number of bombs dropped in Afghanistan since 2013, according to U.S. Air Force data. A large proportion of these munitions have been dropped over Islamic State strongholds.

While the U.S. is concerned about Islamic State in Afghanistan, the military's main focus remains the resurgent Taliban, which poses a more existential threat to the U.S.-allied Kabul government. "The Taliban remains the priority, but certainly we want [Islamic State] to know that they're not welcome," said a senior U.S. military official.

The caves targeted on Thursday are about 250 yards long and were excavated by local villagers mining a semiprecious stone in the mountainside, according to Bilal Sarwary, an Afghan journalist who visited the area last year.

---

Carol E. Lee and Habib Khan Totakhil contributed to this article.

---

MOAB Was Aimed

At Deterrence, Too

The 'Mother of All Bombs' was intended to be used in combat, but it was also designed just to sit there. The mere existence of the weapon was supposed to serve as a psychological weapon, its sheer size acting to deter enemies.

The weapon is designed to explode in the air over a target, and doesn't penetrate into the ground before exploding. The Massive Ordnance Penetrator -- the largest nonnuclear weapon in the arsenal -- is designed to burrow into the ground on impact before detonating.

-- Ben Kesling



License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170414ed4e00029



World News: World Watch

547 words
14 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

CANADA

Bill Is Introduced

To Regulate Pot

Canada's Liberal government followed through on a 2015 campaign promise by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and introduced legislation aimed at regulating the sale and production of marijuana.

Details still need to be worked out, the government said Thursday, including how cannabis will be taxed and how provinces will regulate the retail network in which the product will be sold.

The main goal, the government said, is to control the production, distribution, sale and possession of marijuana, and keep it out of the hands of criminal organizations. Criminal offenses for illicit production and trafficking will remain in place.

If approved by both chambers of Parliament, it will be legal by mid-2018 in Canada for a person 18 or older to purchase cannabis from licensed producers and possess up to 30 grams (1.1 ounce) of the drug when in public.

The legal framework marks a significant pivot by a large, developed-world economy in dealing with the marijuana trade, and Canada would become the biggest national government to legalize marijuana.

-- Paul Vieira

---

RUSSIA

Government Faulted

In School-Siege Case

Europe's top human-rights court ruled that Russia failed to protect human lives during a botched 2004 attempt to rescue hostages from a school that left more than 330 people dead, including 180 children.

The European Court of Human Rights on Thursday ordered Russia to pay 3 million euros total ($3.2 million) to the families of hundreds of victims.

A few months after President Vladimir Putin started his second presidential term in September 2004, Chechen gunmen demanding independence took more than 1,100 hostages in the Russian town of Beslan and held them through a three-day siege.

In their ruling, the panel of judges said Russian authorities used tank cannons, grenade launchers and flamethrowers to storm the school, contributing to casualties among hostages.

The Russian government also failed to prevent the attack despite having "specific information of a planned terrorist attack in the area, linked to an educational institution," they said.

The Russian Ministry of Justice called the ruling "groundless," and promised to appeal.

-- Valentina Pop

---

GERMANY

Suspected Fighter

For ISIS Detained

An Iraqi man detained during the investigation into the bombing of the bus carrying the Borussia Dortmund soccer team is believed to have fought for Islamic State in Iraq, Germany's top prosecutor said, but added that no evidence has emerged showing the man participated in the attack.

Evidence suggested the 26-year-old man, identified as Abdul Beset A., joined Islamic State in Iraq around 2014 and led a 10-person unit that took part in kidnappings and killings, the prosecutor-general said. Abdul Beset A. moved to Germany in 2016 and continued to stay in contact with members of Islamic State, the prosecutor said.

A spokesman for the prosecutor said an initial clue suggested the man may have been involved in the attack, but subsequent investigation failed to bear that out.

Instead, new evidence emerged as part of the investigation that the man had been involved in Islamic State. Authorities detained the man Wednesday and searched his apartment as they hunted for clues in the bombing of the bus.

-- Anton Troianovski

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170414ed4e00024



US
U.S. Bomb Dropped on  ISIS  Tunnels in Afghanistan Built for Combat and as Psychological Deterrent; Weapon was pushed through production and tested during run-up to Iraq War

By Ben Kesling 
542 words
14 April 2017
01:59
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The mother of all bombs was intended to be used in combat, but it was also designed just to sit there. The mere existence of the 21,600-pound weapon was supposed to serve as a psychological weapon, its sheer size acting to deter U.S. enemies.

The GBU-43 made its debut in 2003 during the run-up to the Iraq War as the George W. Bush administration looked for ways to persuade Iraqi President Saddam Hussein to disarm voluntarily, while warning him of the threat of war. The bomb, known as the MOAB, or Massive Ordnance Air Blast, was pushed through production and tested as U.S. troops were on the verge of invading.

"There is a psychological component to all aspects of warfare," Donald Rumsfeld, then-secretary of Defense, said when asked by reporters about the weapon just days before the start of the war. "The goal is to not have a war."

When asked about the size of the weapon he replied: "This is not small."

The next day, the Iraqi ambassador to Russia, Abbas Khalaf Kunfuth, publicly criticized Mr. Rumsfeld.

"You will certainly have heard the U.S. Defense Secretary Rumsfeldraising a new bomb called the mother of all bombs," the ambassador said. "And he was not ashamed to speak about it, to threaten a small country such as Iraq and displaying his nature of an American cowboy who knows no limits and has no morals."

The U.S. never dropped the MOAB during the ensuing conflict. Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks told reporters soon after the launch of the war tactical considerations dictate the use of weapons, and no appropriate situation had arisen.

The weapon made its combat debut Thursday in eastern Afghanistan, becoming the largest nonnuclear bomb ever used on the enemy by U.S. forces, according to Ann Stefanek, an Air Force spokeswoman. The largest nonnuclear bomb in the arsenal has yet to be used in combat.

The MOAB is designed to explode in the air over a target, and doesn't penetrate into the ground before exploding. The Massive Ordnance Penetratorhe largest nonnuclear weapon in the arsenals designed to burrow into the ground on impact before detonating.

The MOAB replaced the BLU-82, known as the "Daisy Cutter," a 15,000-pound bomb which "could instantly clear jungles for helicopter landing zones in Vietnam," according to the Air Force.

The MOAB was rushed through production at the Air Force Research Laboratory and built from existing parts, so the cost isn't really known, said Ms. Stefanek.

A major difference between the Daisy Cutter and the MOAB is the addition of satellite guidance to enhance accuracy, along with the addition of a few thousand pounds of explosives.

"The most amazing thing about MOAB is it's the most powerful bomb ever built and has done its jobeterring the enemyimply because they know about it," Robert Hammack, a team chief at the Air Force lab, said in 2008.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170413ed4d00c9p



Politics
Trump Administration Takes Steps to Stabilize Health-Insurance Market; Move comes as president says he is considering discontinuing payments to insurers

By Michelle Hackman 
909 words
14 April 2017
00:43
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTONhe Trump administration took steps on Thursday to stabilize the Affordable Care Act's individual health-care market, as insurers demand more certainty from the administration before deciding whether to remain in the law's marketplaces next year.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, a division of the Department of Health and Human Services, published its final rule aimed at steadying the individual market, which has seen large premium increases and insurers retreating from unprofitable markets across the country.

President Donald Trump's administration is pitching the move as a temporary fix, while it continues to work with Congress to strike an elusive deal to dismantle large portions of the health law known as Obamacare. But after GOP leaders yanked their health plan off the House floor late last month, the administration's moves to either bolster or undercut the existing health-care law have come under increased scrutiny.

"We are pleased to see the steps the administration is taking to stabilize the marketplace," said Justine Handelman, a senior vice president at the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association. "These rules are important to ensuring people maintain their coverage year-round, which is critical to hold down costs for everyone."

The final rule doesn't address the cost-sharing subsidies paid by the government to insurers, the fate of which has been a primary source of anxiety for insurers as they weigh their options for 2018.

The rule introduces several targeted changes aimed at curbing some of the losses insurers have faced in the law's exchanges. It shortens the 2018 open enrollment sign-up period to six weeks from three months and introduces stricter limits on when people can obtain coverage through the exchanges outside of that open enrollment period. It also ends a practice advanced by former President Barack Obama's administration of allowing people to sign up for new coverage if they have overdue premium payments.

The federal government would end its review of health plans on the exchange to ensure they have broad enough network coverage, leaving that oversight to the states. And in a controversial move, it would give insurers more flexibility to cover less of consumers' total-benefit costs. Critics say that will hurt enrollment and could spur lawsuits over the rule.

Those moves could help increase predictability for insurers and provide them more income from customers who sign up. It also creates some political cover for Republicans, who recognize that any future unraveling in the health-care market could carry political repercussions.

Timothy Jost, a law professor at Washington and Lee University and an expert on the health law, said the move to curtail the open enrollment period may deter younger consumers, the precise population insurers are trying to entice, because they historically sign up toward the end of the window.

"This very well may make things worse rather than better for consumers and for insurers," he said.

But any reassuring signal the rule might send has been overshadowed by comments from Mr. Trump, who told The Wall Street Journal in an interview on Wednesday that he is considering discontinuing the health law's payments to insurers, which are projected to total $7 billion in 2017, as leverage to force Democrats to negotiate a larger health-care overhaul package. Abruptly stopping the payments would likely trigger an insurance meltdown.

"Obamacare is dead next month if it doesn't get that money," Mr. Trump said. "I haven't made my viewpoint clear yet."

The payments, which the administration sends directly to insurers to lower out-of-pocket costs for low-income consumers, are the subject of litigation brought by House Republican leadership against Mr. Obama's administration.

A federal judge ruled in 2016 that the payments were unconstitutional, but allowed them to continue while Mr. Obama's administration pursued an appeal. After Mr. Trump's election in November, Republicans requested and received a delay in the case. The court is slated to revisit the lawsuit on May 22.

Meanwhile, an array of health-care industry groups representing insurance companies, hospitals, doctors and employers is ratcheting up pressure on the administration to continue the payments unabated. Insurers have said they need clarity on the issue before filing 2018 rates and plans with regulators in the next couple of months. Without the payments, the lobbying groups warn that premiums could rise sharply and many more insurers may pull out altogether.

"We are committed to working with you to deliver the short-term stability we all want and the affordable coverage and high-quality care that every American deserves. But time is short and action is needed," the groups wrote in a Wednesday letter to the president.

Stephanie Armour contributed to this article.

Write to Michelle Hackman at Michelle.Hackman@wsj.com

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* U.S. Drops other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0  Tunnels in Afghanistan

* Donald Trump's Recent Policy Reversals Reflect Business Influence

* Trump Threatens to Withhold Payments to Insurers to Press Democrats on Health Bill

* U.S. Braces for Next Provocation From North Korea

* Trump Shifts Back to Health Care

* Trump Administration Takes Steps to Stabilize Health-Insurance Market

* In Ex-Im Bank Impasse, Trump Sides With Business Establishment

Document WSJO000020170413ed4d00b6t



U.S. Markets
Markets
Stocks Fall as Bonds Extend Rally; Dollar bounces back, after slumping the prior day on comments from President Donald Trump

By Akane Otani and Mike Bird 
590 words
13 April 2017
23:08
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Major indexes slid for a second consecutive week, as investors dumped shares of financial and industrial companies while picking up haven assets.

Stock declines on Thursday were broad, with all 11 sectors of the S&P 500 ending lower.

Concerns over flaring tensions in North Korea, Russia and Syria, as well as light trading ahead of the long weekend, contributed to the tepid moves in stocks, analysts and investors said. Major indexes' declines steepened Thursday afternoon after the U.S. military dropped its largest nonnuclear bomb on an ISIS tunnel complex in Afghanistan.

"We're in a wait-and-see mode at the moment," said Kate Warne, a principal and investment strategist at Edward Jones.

While investors appear to have dialed back some of their initial expectations for policy changes from the Trump administration, "the fundamentals have and will continue to drive the market," Ms. Warne said. A raft of upbeat corporate earnings could lift stocks in coming weeks, she added.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 138.61 points, or 0.7%, on Thursday to 20453.25, the S&P 500 dropped 15.98 points, or 0.7%, to 2328.95, and the Nasdaq Composite lost 31.01 points, or 0.5%, to 5805.15. U.S. markets will be closed Friday in observance of Good Friday.

For the week, the Dow industrials lost 1%, the S&P 500 fell 1.1% and the Nasdaq shed 1.2%.

Investors backed off postelection bets that initially led them to pile into financial and industrial stocks while selling government bonds.

The KBW Nasdaq Bank Index, a benchmark of 24 of the biggest U.S. lenders, posted a 3.2% weekly loss. The index fell 1.4% on Thursday after a trio of major banks reported earnings results, with J.P. Morgan Chase falling $1, or 1.2%, to $84.40.

Shares of industrial companies in the S&P 500 lost 1.6% for the week. The sector fell 0.7% Thursday, with Alaska Air Group losing 2.33, or 2.6%, to 86.33.

"It's unlikely legislation will provide a big catalyst to stocks over the next several months," said Jim McDonald, chief investment strategist at Northern Trust. "The issues [the administration] is facing are really thorny, and that means they'll take longer to progress."

Havens gained. Gold for April delivery rose 2.5% for the week to $1,285.90 an ounce, for the best weekly percentage gain since February.

U.S. government bonds strengthened for a fourth consecutive session Thursday. The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note fell to 2.237%, its lowest settlement since Nov. 16, from 2.294% on Wednesday. Yields fall as bond prices rise.

The WSJ Dollar Index, which measures the U.S. dollar against a basket of 16 others, rose 0.2% Thursday as investors moved to square up positions heading into the Easter holiday weekend. The dollar had slumped late Wednesday after President Donald Trump said it was "getting too strong."

Elsewhere, the Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.3% on Thursday.

Japan's Nikkei Stock Average slipped 0.7% to its lowest level since December. Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index was down 0.2%.

Write to Akane Otani at akane.otani@wsj.com and Mike Bird at Mike.Bird@wsj.com

Read More

* Trump Says Dollar etting Too Strong'

Document WSJO000020170413ed4d000rt



World
Splits Within Iraq's Three Communities Reshape Its Politics; The groups' internal rivalries could divide the country further, or bring the groups closer together

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
915 words
13 April 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraqonventional wisdom holds that Iraq is a nation starkly divided among its three main components: Shiite Arabs, Sunni Arabs and Kurds.

Yet, another dynamic is gaining importance. Each of these three groupss well as the smaller communities such as the Yazidis and Christianss also beset by deepening internal rivalries. These political cleavages could further destabilize the country. They also could bring it closer together, creating a new environment where political agendas trump the hard allegiances of sect and ethnicity.

"We now have splits within the Shiites, within the Sunnis, and within the Kurds. For an average citizen, this is not necessarily a bad thing," said Sajad Jiyad, managing director of the Al-Bayan Center for Planning and Studies, a Baghdad think tank. "It would help change the sectarian discourse and alignment that has been prevalent until last year."

The issue of how Iraq's political life develops after the ouster of Islamic State from its stronghold of Mosul is of critical importance to the rest of the Middle East. Several of Iraq's neighbors and allies have been drawn into the country's sectarian and ethnic conflicts that have reverberated far beyond its borders since the 2003 U.S. invasion.

One milestone looming is parliamentary elections scheduled for April 2018 that also will determine the fate of Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi. The fragmentation of the political scene makes it difficult to a form a strong government able to implement overdue changes. But at the same time, it could render the country more stable by preventing another sectarian overreach by the Shiite majorityr a long-mulled secession by the autonomous Kurdistan region in northern Iraq.

Among Iraq's Shiite community, the political rivalries run straight through the biggest Shiite party, Dawa, to which both Mr. Abadi and his main rival, former Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, belong.

Mr. Abadi has deftly used the Mosul campaign to strike an unlikely alliance with Kurdistan President Masoud Barzani and to position himself as a war leader.

Mr. Maliki, meanwhile, has reached out to Mr. Barzani's rivals in Kurdistan and to the Sunni speaker of parliament as he successfully pushed through no-confidence motions against the ministers of defense (a Sunni) and finance (a Kurd) last year. A third Shiite force, led by cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, engineered massive protests last year as it claimed to represent the will of the people while implicitly supporting Mr. Abadi.

One of Mr. Maliki's prominent allies, Shiite lawmaker Salah Abdul Razaq, said the time has come to unite representatives of Iraq's three main population groups behind a single political project and leadership.

"The nature of Iraq now requires that we move from ethnic and sectarian conflict to political competition inside parliament," he said. "We call for a political majority which covers a group of political blocs from all the components, with the Sunnis and the Shiites and the Kurds."

Regardless of whether Mr. Maliki, with his history of marginalizing Sunnis and Kurds, could lead such a project, few consider the emergence of a pan-Iraqi political movement likelyt least not before elections.

"In elections, Kurds will vote for the Kurds, Sunnis will vote for the Sunnis, and Shiites will vote for the Shiites. Not a single Kurd will vote for an Arab, not a single Sunni will vote for a Shiite, and not a single Shiite will vote for a Sunni," said Fuad Hussein, chief of staff of Kurdistan President Barzani. "But after elections, an alliance is a possibility."

Mr. Barzanihose term expired in 2015as been facing a major political challenge within Kurdistan itself. His party, which controls the regional capital Erbil, has physically prevented the region's parliament from naming a successor, essentially shuttering the legislature.

For now, that intra-Kurdish conflict combined with the global oil slump has muted the prospect of Kurdistan's independence from Iraq.

"We are on the threshold of another civil war here in the Kurdistan region," warned Yousif Sadiq, speaker of Kurdistan's parliament who hasn't been able to enter Erbil since 2015. "What we are doing in the Kurdistan region, especially by the region's dominant authorities, is the reverse of building a state."

With most of Iraq's Sunni areas devastated by war against Islamic State, the country's Sunni Arab political scene is even more fragmented. Turkey recently tried to bring these Sunni politicians together by sponsoring their meeting in Ankara. That, however, doesn't help with a more fundamental problem: Many Sunni Arabs blame their own community's traditional leaders for allowing Islamic State, also known as ISIS, to overrun their hometowns in the summer of 2014.

"Nobody represents us. When ISIS came to Iraq and destroyed the city, all these politicians abandoned us and fled to Erbil. We don't support any of them anymore," said shopkeeper Ghazi Mohammed whose grocery faces the ruins of Mosul's al-Salam hospital, the site of a major battle between Islamic State and Iraqi troops.

Homaid Jasem, a real-estate agent in a Mosul neighborhood that Islamic State had renamed after its founder Abu Musab al Zarqawi, agreed.

"When I will vote, I will vote for the new and the young ones," he said. "The politicians that we had did nothing for us."

Document WSJO000020170413ed4d0028l



Markets
U.S. Government Bonds Consolidate Gains Ahead of Long Weekend; Yields on 10-year note fall as low as 2.218% overnight, lowest intraday level since Nov. 17

By Sam Goldfarb 
722 words
13 April 2017
20:37
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. government bond yields are in retreat, leaving their previous range behind and falling back to levels not seen since shortly after the November election.

After bouncing back and forth between 2.3% and 2.6% since mid-December, the yield on the 10-year note is now comfortably below 2.3%.

President Donald Trump's comments that he favors a weaker dollar and low interest-rates caused yields to drop sharply Wednesday afternoon after normal U.S. trading hours. The 10-year yield fell to around 2.20% from 2.294% at its 3 p.m. settlement.

Overnight, the yield fell as low as 2.218%, its lowest intraday level since Nov. 17, and it settled Thursday at 2.237% as the bond market closed an hour early ahead of the long holiday weekend.

Yields fall when bond prices rise.

In an interview with The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Trump said the U.S. dollar "is getting too strong" and that he likes "low-interest policy." He also left open the possibility of renominating Federal Reserve Chairwoman Janet Yellen when her term runs out next year, a shift from his campaign when he said he would "most likely" not appoint her to a second term.

Mr. Trump's control over the Fed is officially limited to whom he nominates to its board of governors. Still, his interest in keeping rates low was still favorable to bonds, the values of which are diminished by higher interest rates.

Along with changing his position on Ms. Yellen, Mr. Trump also shifted his view on the U.S. Export-Import Bank, which he now supports, and on China, which he said wouldn't be labeled as a currency manipulator.

The abrupt reversals appeared to unsettle some investors, who have been betting that Mr. Trump can boost economic growth and inflation by following through on promises to cut taxes and increase spending on infrastructure.

"When you have that type of shift, the question becomes...how much more 180 degree turns are we going to have?" said Gene Tannuzzo, senior portfolio manager at Columbia Threadneedle,

Following the election, investors piled into assets that would benefit from rising growth and inflation while fleeing assets, such as government bonds, that would be hurt by those outcomes. The 10-year yield rose above 2% from 1.867% the day after the election and reached 2.6% by mid-December.

For much of this year, longer-term bond yields have been in a holding pattern, dipping when investors grew frustrated by the slow pace of policy-making in Washington and rising when it seemed like progress was being made in Congress or the Fed was ready to accelerate the pace of its interest-rate increases.

Over the past week, bonds have gotten an extra boost from geopolitical developments, including rising tensions between the U.S. and Russia over the Syrian conflict and between the U.S. and North Korea amid efforts to thwart that country's nuclear threat. Reports Thursday that the U.S. had dropped its largest nonnuclear bomb on an ISIS tunnel complex in Afghanistan added to anxieties, causing bonds to rally again after a modest selloff earlier in the day.

Investors have also become increasingly concerned about the state of France's presidential election, where the far-left candidate Jean-Luc Menchon has been rising in the polls, turning the contest into a four-way race in which two of the candidates are deeply skeptical of the European Union.

Some analysts and investors believe yields are bound to recover in the coming months, as long as there isn't a surprise in the French election and the Fed officials stick to their projection of two more rate increases this year.

"I'm inclined to think that we're in a temporary blip stage," said Thomas Simons, senior vice president and money-market economist in the fixed income group at Jefferies LLC. As the Fed's June policy meeting approaches, officials will likely try to prepare the market for another rate increase, causing yields to rise, Mr. Simons said.

Write to Sam Goldfarb at sam.goldfarb@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170413ed4d005em



World
Man Detained in Bomb Probe Is Suspected of Being  ISIS  Fighter; Prosector said evidence suggests suspect led a 10-person unit that took part in kidnappings and killings

By Anton Troianovski 
306 words
13 April 2017
12:08
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BERLINn Iraqi man detained during the investigation into the bombing of the bus carrying the Borussia Dortmund soccer team is believed to have fought for Islamic State in Iraq, Germany's top prosecutor said Thursday, but added that no evidence has emerged showing the man participated in the attack.

The prosector-general said in a statement that evidence suggested that the 26-year-old man, identified as Abdul Beset A. joined Islamic State in Iraq around 2014 and led a 10-person unit that took part in kidnappings and killings.

Abdul Beset A. moved to Germany in early 2016 and continued to stay in contact with members of Islamic State, the prosecutor said.

The prosecutor said that while it was now seeking an official arrest warrant against Abdul Beset A. because of his suspected participation in a terrorist group, there was no evidence linking him to the Dortmund attack.

A spokesman for the prosecutor said that an initial clue suggested the man may have been involved in the attack, but subsequent investigation failed to bear that out. Instead, new evidence emerged as part of Wednesday's investigation that the man had been involved in Islamic State.

"The investigation has until now uncovered no evidence that the accused man participated in the attack," the prosecutor's statement said.

Authorities detained the man on Wednesday and searched his apartment as they hunted for clues into the bombing of the bus that was carrying the Borussia Dortmund soccer team on Tuesday. The bombing seriously injured one player ahead of a UEFA Champions League quarter-final match.

Write to Anton Troianovski at anton.troianovski@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170413ed4d00231



World News: World Watch

377 words
13 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

UNITED KINGDOM

Wage Growth Slowest

In Nearly Three Years

Wages after inflation rose at their slowest pace in nearly three years in the three months through February, adding to signs that Britons are facing a squeeze in living standards despite a tightening labor market.

The figures highlight a potential drag on the U.K.'s economic growth just as it begins to negotiate its exit from the European Union, expected to last at least two years. Economic growth relies heavily on domestic demand, which is likely to falter as wages struggle to keep up with prices.

Adjusted for inflation, regular wages in the December-February period grew by 0.1%, the slowest pace since mid-2014, the Office for National Statistics said. Annual inflation stood at 2.3% in February and March, the fastest rate in more than three years, overshooting the Bank of England's 2% target.

Data showed that growth in wages faltered despite a robust labor market, with employment and the number of vacancies at record highs.

The unemployment rate was unchanged at 4.7%, in line with the expectations of analysts polled by The Wall Street Journal.

The unemployment rate was last lower in the summer of 1975, the ONS said. Official data suggest inflation is already souring British shoppers' moods.

-- Wiktor Szary and Jason Douglas

---

AFGHANISTAN

ISIS Suicide Bomber

Kills Five in Kabul

An Islamic State suicide bomber on foot detonated his vest near the gates of the Ministry of Defense in Kabul, an attack Afghan officials said killed at least five people and wounded three others.

Wednesday's assault was the latest in a string claimed in Afghanistan by the extremist group, which has expanded its presence in the country even as it loses territory to U.S.-backed forces in Iraq and Syria. Islamic State in recent months has claimed the majority of high-profile attacks in Afghanistan's capital, despite increased pressure by U.S. and Afghan forces on its stronghold in the country's east.

The group's Afghan affiliate said it had struck the gates of Afghanistan's presidential palace in a statement posted to its official Amaq news agency.

-- Jessica Donati and Habib Khan

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170413ed4d00012



Where Were the Pro-Refugee Protesters When Assad Gassed Syrians?

By Kassem Eid 
846 words
12 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A15
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

I know how painful it is to suffocate from nerve gas. I know the devilish terror that it triggers in the victim's mind. I know because I am a survivor of the Syrian regime's chemical massacre of Aug. 21, 2013.

On that morning, I nearly died after inhaling the deadly perfume that Bashar Assad unleashed upon my hometown of Moadhamiya, in the western suburbs of Damascus. I struggled to breathe as this silent killer hugged my chest and pressed my lungs until my heart stopped beating out of pain. The doctors gave up on me and left me for dead. I woke up 30 minutes later screaming in agony and surrounded by corpses.

But an even worse moment came when President Obama canceled his "red line" that had promised consequences for the use of chemical weapons. At the time I was gassed, I was a local media activist for the Syrian Revolution against Assad's brutal regime. For two years, I was trapped in Moadhamiya as the town endured government siege, starvation and savage bombardment.

I escaped Syria and came to the U.S. in 2014, hoping that my testimony would help persuade Mr. Obama to stop the genocide. But after two years of speaking to the media, think tanks, universities, the State Department, Congress, the Pentagon and the National Security Council, I was sure that nothing would change the president's mind -- not me, not the "Caesar report" published that year on the industrial-scale torture in Syria's prisons, and not the millions killed and displaced by Assad's genocide.

I left the U.S. a year ago out of disappointment and frustration. Even though I was a refugee who had made it to America, I was disgusted with myself for living a comfortable life while thousands of Syrians were still being slaughtered each day by Assad, Iran, Hezbollah, Russia and Islamic State. I now live in Germany among other Syrian refugees.

As I watched footage of the nerve-gas attack last week that killed more than 100 people, including children -- Assad's worst chemical massacre since 2013 -- I could not help but cry and feel outraged at each and every person who could have saved them but didn't.

Only two months ago, American airports became protest zones because President Trump attempted to bar entry temporarily to refugees and travelers from seven nations, including Syria. Where is all that outrage today? How come protesters didn't pack the streets in front of the White House and the United Nations last week to demand military action against Assad?

Syrians -- like the people in the other Arab Spring countries -- didn't rebel against the dictatorship as a way to gain entry to the U.S. as refugees. We rebelled because we wanted to live for the first time as equal citizens in our own nation. We wanted to stay home and make Syria a better place.

President Trump has done more with one strike to fight Islamic State than his predecessor did in six years. He has now given the Syrian people hope that the U.S. will stand for human rights and freedom. ISIS thrives on hopelessness and international passivity to convince its fighters to seek revenge instead of justice. It was on Obama's watch, due to his inaction, that ISIS formed and created a caliphate the size of Indiana.

I want to thank President Trump for his brave action in striking the Assad regime and holding it accountable for its massacre of civilians. This is the first step in saving the lives of Syrians being killed every day, helping them stay where they live, and allowing refugees like me to return home. But more needs to be done.

America, if you really care about refugees, then take to the streets, call your representatives, and ask for even further action against the murderer who displaced us. President Trump could order strikes to fully ground Assad's air force, whose bombing forces civilians to flee. The Assad regime still has more than a dozen operational military airports from which to continue its attacks. Help civilians by creating safe zones and no-fly zones.

If you really care about human rights, work to remove Assad, the tyrant who has killed, raped, gassed, burned, tortured and displaced millions of civilians. If you really care about eliminating Islamic State, oust the dictator who for years has supported extremist terrorist groups like al Qaeda, Hamas and Hezbollah and who buys oil from ISIS.

Please help us. Please stop Assad. Let the world know, let Syrians know, and let Assad know that there are consequences for his crimes. If you do not act, I fear that what happened on Aug. 21, 2013, and again on April 4, 2017, will repeat itself many times over.

---

Mr. Eid, who often uses a pseudonym, Qusai Zakarya, that he adopted while opposing the regime in Syria, now lives in Germany.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170412ed4c0001t



Global View
The Price of Obama's Mendacity

By Bret Stephens 
894 words
11 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A15
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Last week's cruise-missile strike against a Syrian air base in response to Bashar Assad's use of chemical weapons has reopened debate about the wisdom of Barack Obama's decision to forgo a similar strike, under similar circumstances, in 2013.

But the real issue isn't about wisdom. It's about honesty.

On Sept. 10, 2013, President Obama delivered a televised address in which he warned of the dangers of not acting against Assad's use of sarin gas, which had killed some 1,400 civilians in the Damascus suburb of Ghouta the previous month.

"If we fail to act, the Assad regime will see no reason to stop using chemical weapons," Mr. Obama said. "As the ban against these weapons erodes, other tyrants will have no reason to think twice about acquiring poison gas, and using them. Over time, our troops would again face the prospect of chemical weapons on the battlefield. And it could be easier for terrorist organizations to obtain these weapons, and use them to attack civilians."

It was a high-minded case for action that the president immediately disavowed for the least high-minded reason: It was politically unpopular. The administration punted a vote to an unwilling Congress. It punted a fix to the all-too-willing Russians. And it spent the rest of its time in office crowing about its success.

In July 2014 Secretary of State John Kerry claimed "we got 100% of the chemical weapons out." In May 2015 Mr. Obama boasted that "Assad gave up his chemical weapons. That's not speculation on our part. That, in fact, has been confirmed by the organization internationally that is charged with eliminating chemical weapons." This January, then-National Security Adviser Susan Rice said "we were able to get the Syrian government to voluntarily and verifiably give up its chemical weapons stockpile."

Today we know all this was untrue. Or, rather, now all of us know it. Anyone paying even slight attention has known it for years.

In June 2014 U.N. Ambassador Samantha Power noted "discrepancies and omissions related to the Syrian government's declaration of its chemical weapons program." But that hint of unease didn't prevent her from celebrating the removal "of the final 8% of chemical weapons materials in Syria's declaration" of its overall stockpile.

The following summer, The Wall Street Journal's Adam Entous and Naftali Bendavid reported "U.S. intelligence agencies have concluded that the [Assad] regime didn't give up all of the chemical weapons it was supposed to." In February 2016, Director of National Intelligence James Clapper confirmed the Journal's story, telling Congress "Syria has not declared all the elements of its chemical weapons program."

Why did Mr. Obama and his senior officials stick to a script that they knew was untethered from the facts? Let's speculate. They thought the gap between Assad's "declared" and actual stockpile was close enough for government work. They figured a credulous press wouldn't work up a sweat pointing out the difference. They didn't imagine Assad would use what was left of his chemical arsenal for fear of provoking the U.S.

And they didn't want to disturb the public narrative that multilateral diplomacy was a surer way than military action to disarm rogue Middle Eastern regimes of their illicit weapons. Two months after Mr. Obama's climb-down with Syria, he signed on to the interim nuclear deal with Iran. The remainder of his term was spent trying not to upset the fragile beauty of his nuclear diplomacy.

Now we're coming to grips with the human and strategic price of the Obama administration's mendacity. The sham agreement gave Assad confidence that he could continue to murder his opponents indefinitely without fear of Western reprisal. It fostered the view that his regime was preferable to its opponents. It showed Tehran that it could drive a hard diplomatic bargain over its nuclear file, given that the administration was so plainly desperate for face-saving excuses for inaction.

And it left Mr. Obama's successor with a lousy set of options.

Rex Tillerson and Nikki Haley erred badly by announcing, just days before last week's sarin attack, that the Trump administration had no plans to depose Assad. They gave the dictator reason to believe he had as little to fear from this U.S. president as he did from the last one.

But, unlike their predecessors, the secretary of state and U.N. ambassador deserve credit for learning from that mistake -- as does the president they serve. The core of the problem in Syria isn't Islamic State, dreadful as it is. It's a regime whose appetite for unlimited violence is one of the main reasons ISIS has thrived. To say there is no easy cure for Syria should not obscure the fact that there won't be any possibility of a cure until Assad falls.

Mr. Obama and his advisers will never run out of self-justifications for their policy in Syria. They can't outrun responsibility for the consequences of their lies.

---

Write bstephens@wsj.com.

(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: Strikes on Syria, Congress And Constitutional Powers" -- WSJ April 24, 2017)

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170411ed4b0000u



What Comes After the Syria Strikes

By Paul Wolfowitz 
953 words
11 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A17
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Strong American action can dramatically change the attitudes of other countries. It makes enemies more cautious, friends more supportive, and fence-sitters more cooperative. It provides leverage in negotiations and improves opportunities for coalition building. Last week President Trump demonstrated American resolve by retaliating against the Syrian government after Bashar Assad used chemical weapons. Now Mr. Trump must follow through with a broad diplomatic effort to end the country's bloodshed.

Among the most interesting reactions to the American strike were two from Iraqi Shiite leaders. Last Thursday Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, a moderate, and the cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, a firebrand, both called for Mr. Assad to step down. Mr. Sadr predictably denounced the American strike. Mr. Abadi indirectly praised it by noting how Iraqis had suffered from Saddam Hussein's chemical weapons.

These calls for Mr. Assad to step down might seem at odds with the conventional wisdom, which puts the Sunni-Shiite conflict at the heart of everything in the Middle East. Shouldn't Iraq's Shiites naturally side with Iran's Syrian proxy and approve of Mr. Assad's brutal treatment of Sunni opponents? Yet there are issues more important than the commonly noted sectarian divisions. The people of Iraq know well that the Assad regime has supported the insurgents and suicide bombers who have killed thousands of Iraqis, and hundreds of Americans, since 2003. The Bush administration largely turned a blind eye to that support, and President Obama did so even more.

In August 2009 then-Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki demanded that Syria hand over two Iraqis in Damascus who were believed to be connected to car bombings in Baghdad. The Obama administration, rather than support the Iraqi government -- or even demand an investigation -- said nothing for a week. The State Department then announced that the U.S. was officially neutral. Last week's decisive action was a different sort of American signal.

America can now lead the effort to bring some semblance of stability to Syria. Washington should recognize that peace is impossible with Mr. Assad still in power, but also that millions of Syrians -- particularly the Christian and Alawite minorities -- may feel endangered by the strongman's departure. The aim should be to replace Mr. Assad's regime with new governance arrangements that can provide assurance to these minorities while also ending the current government's oppression of the country's Sunni majority.

Fashioning such an outcome would require diplomacy of extraordinary creativity. But the U.S. starts with a distinct advantage. Unlike Iran and Russia, America has no interest in exercising control over or acquiring a military position in Syria. To the contrary, as long as the bleeding stops, the U.S. would be happiest to leave Syria to the Syrians. So how can Washington strengthen its diplomatic effort in Syria and at the same time weaken Iranian influence in Iraq?

First, the U.S. should use public diplomacy to highlight the responsibility of the Assad regime for the suffering of thousands of innocent Iraqis over the past 14 years. This effort should also explain, to the extent that evidence is available, Mr. Assad's efforts to strengthen Islamic State. The dictator has tried to make his regime seem like the only alternative to domination by terrorists. He has done this by attacking Syrian moderates and freeing imprisoned extremists who went on to become ISIS leaders.

The U.S. should encourage Saudi Arabia to play a constructive role in Iraq by using its considerable economic weight to counterbalance Iranian influence. The Saudis have in the past shown a willingness to treat Iraq as an Arab partner and not a Shiite adversary. That realism, which was evident under an earlier Saudi leadership, seems to be re-emerging. Two months ago Saudi Foreign Minister Adel al-Jubeir visited Baghdad, the first such trip in 27 years.

The Trump administration should also counter the mistaken belief that Saudi Arabia prevented the U.S. from supporting the Shiite uprising against Saddam Hussein after the liberation of Kuwait in 1991. Many Iraqis, and even some reputable historians, still believe this. Yet the truth is exactly the opposite. The U.S. should make public the record of Saudi efforts to persuade the first President Bush and President Clinton to support anti-Saddam Shiite rebels. It will be difficult for Saudi-Iraqi relations to develop without countering the belief that Saudi Arabia is partly responsible for mass graves of Iraqi Shiites.

American diplomats should seek to engage the regional Arab players in addressing the difficult challenge of postconflict reconciliation. This will confront Syria in the aftermath of any peace settlement, and it will become important in Iraq once Mosul is liberated. Reconciliation processes that are suited to local cultures and deal with the horrific legacy of totalitarian Arab regimes cannot be overseen by outsiders. But the diplomatic effort should emphasize their importance regardless.

These political and diplomatic actions could complement and reinforce more-concrete measures to change facts on the ground in Syria, such as creating safe zones or imposing some kind of no-fly zone. These efforts will not be simple, nor will they yield immediate results. But this framework would go a long way in addressing the common danger of radical extremism and in stemming the flow of refugees that has become a humanitarian disaster and a threat to U.S. interests.

---

Mr. Wolfowitz, a scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, has served as deputy defense secretary and ambassador to Indonesia.

(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: Syria, the Will to Act and Intelligence Failure" -- WSJ April 14, 2017)

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170411ed4b0000e



Opinion
Where Were the Pro-Refugee Protesters When Assad Gassed Syrians? Trump has given my people hope, but if Americans truly care they can help remove Syria's tyrant.

By Kassem Eid 
857 words
11 April 2017
23:38
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

I know how painful it is to suffocate from nerve gas. I know the devilish terror that it triggers in the victim's mind. I know because I am a survivor of the Syrian regime's chemical massacre of Aug. 21, 2013.

On that morning, I nearly died after inhaling the deadly perfume that Bashar Assad unleashed upon my hometown of Moadhamiya, in the western suburbs of Damascus. I struggled to breathe as this silent killer hugged my chest and pressed my lungs until my heart stopped beating out of pain. The doctors gave up on me and left me for dead. I woke up 30 minutes later screaming in agony and surrounded by corpses.

But an even worse moment came when President Obama canceled his "red line" that had promised consequences for the use of chemical weapons. At the time I was gassed, I was a local media activist for the Syrian Revolution against Assad's brutal regime. For two years, I was trapped in Moadhamiya as the town endured government siege, starvation and savage bombardment.

I escaped Syria and came to the U.S. in 2014, hoping that my testimony would help persuade Mr. Obama to stop the genocide. But after two years of speaking to the media, think tanks, universities, the State Department, Congress, the Pentagon and the National Security Council, I was sure that nothing would change the president's mindot me, not the "Caesar report" published that year on the industrial-scale torture in Syria's prisons, and not the millions killed and displaced by Assad's genocide.

I left the U.S. a year ago out of disappointment and frustration. Even though I was a refugee who had made it to America, I was disgusted with myself for living a comfortable life while thousands of Syrians were still being slaughtered each day by Assad, Iran, Hezbollah, Russia and Islamic State. I now live in Germany among other Syrian refugees.

As I watched footage of the nerve-gas attack last week that killed more than 100 people, including childrenssad's worst chemical massacre since 2013 could not help but cry and feel outraged at each and every person who could have saved them but didn't.

Only two months ago, American airports became protest zones because President Trump attempted to bar entry temporarily to refugees and travelers from seven nations, including Syria. Where is all that outrage today? How come protesters didn't pack the streets in front of the White House and the United Nations last week to demand military action against Assad?

Syriansike the people in the other Arab Spring countriesidn't rebel against the dictatorship as a way to gain entry to the U.S. as refugees. We rebelled because we wanted to live for the first time as equal citizens in our own nation. We wanted to stay home and make Syria a better place.

President Trump has done more with one strike to fight Islamic State than his predecessor did in six years. He has now given the Syrian people hope that the U.S. will stand for human rights and freedom. ISIS thrives on hopelessness and international passivity to convince its fighters to seek revenge instead of justice. It was on Obama's watch, due to his inaction, that ISIS formed and created a caliphate the size of Indiana.

I want to thank President Trump for his brave action in striking the Assad regime and holding it accountable for its massacre of civilians. This is the first step in saving the lives of Syrians being killed every day, helping them stay where they live, and allowing refugees like me to return home. But more needs to be done.

America, if you really care about refugees, then take to the streets, call your representatives, and ask for even further action against the murderer who displaced us. President Trump could order strikes to fully ground Assad's air force, whose bombing forces civilians to flee. The Assad regime still has more than a dozen operational military airports from which to continue its attacks. Help civilians by creating safe zones and no-fly zones.

If you really care about human rights, work to remove Assad, the tyrant who has killed, raped, gassed, burned, tortured and displaced millions of civilians. If you really care about eliminating Islamic State, oust the dictator who for years has supported extremist terrorist groups like al Qaeda, Hamas and Hezbollah and who buys oil from ISIS.

Please help us. Please stop Assad. Let the world know, let Syrians know, and let Assad know that there are consequences for his crimes. If you do not act, I fear that what happened on Aug. 21, 2013, and again on April 4, 2017, will repeat itself many times over.

Mr. Eid, who often uses a pseudonym, Qusai Zakarya, that he adopted while opposing the regime in Syria, now lives in Germany.

Document WSJO000020170411ed4b008yc



Opinion
What Comes After the Syria Strikes; With American credibility restored, Trump should lead a diplomatic effort to replace Assad.

By Paul Wolfowitz 
940 words
11 April 2017
19:18
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Strong American action can dramatically change the attitudes of other countries. It makes enemies more cautious, friends more supportive, and fence-sitters more cooperative. It provides leverage in negotiations and improves opportunities for coalition building. Last week President Trump demonstrated American resolve by retaliating against the Syrian government after Bashar Assad used chemical weapons. Now Mr. Trump must follow through with a broad diplomatic effort to end the country's bloodshed.

Among the most interesting reactions to the American strike were two from Iraqi Shiite leaders. Last Thursday Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, a moderate, and the cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, a firebrand, both called for Mr. Assad to step down. Mr. Sadr predictably denounced the American strike. Mr. Abadi indirectly praised it by noting how Iraqis had suffered from Saddam Hussein's chemical weapons.

These calls for Mr. Assad to step down might seem at odds with the conventional wisdom, which puts the Sunni-Shiite conflict at the heart of everything in the Middle East. Shouldn't Iraq's Shiites naturally side with Iran's Syrian proxy and approve of Mr. Assad's brutal treatment of Sunni opponents? Yet there are issues more important than the commonly noted sectarian divisions. The people of Iraq know well that the Assad regime has supported the insurgents and suicide bombers who have killed thousands of Iraqis, and hundreds of Americans, since 2003. The Bush administration largely turned a blind eye to that support, and President Obama did so even more.

In August 2009 then-Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki demanded that Syria hand over two Iraqis in Damascus who were believed to be connected to car bombings in Baghdad. The Obama administration, rather than support the Iraqi governmentr even demand an investigationaid nothing for a week. The State Department then announced that the U.S. was officially neutral. Last week's decisive action was a different sort of American signal.

America can now lead the effort to bring some semblance of stability to Syria. Washington should recognize that peace is impossible with Mr. Assad still in power, but also that millions of Syriansarticularly the Christian and Alawite minoritiesay feel endangered by the strongman's departure. The aim should be to replace Mr. Assad's regime with new governance arrangements that can provide assurance to these minorities while also ending the current government's oppression of the country's Sunni majority.

Fashioning such an outcome would require diplomacy of extraordinary creativity. But the U.S. starts with a distinct advantage. Unlike Iran and Russia, America has no interest in exercising control over or acquiring a military position in Syria. To the contrary, as long as the bleeding stops, the U.S. would be happiest to leave Syria to the Syrians. So how can Washington strengthen its diplomatic effort in Syria and at the same time weaken Iranian influence in Iraq?

First, the U.S. should use public diplomacy to highlight the responsibility of the Assad regime for the suffering of thousands of innocent Iraqis over the past 14 years. This effort should also explain, to the extent that evidence is available, Mr. Assad's efforts to strengthen Islamic State. The dictator has tried to make his regime seem like the only alternative to domination by terrorists. He has done this by attacking Syrian moderates and freeing imprisoned extremists who went on to become ISIS leaders.

The U.S. should encourage Saudi Arabia to play a constructive role in Iraq by using its considerable economic weight to counterbalance Iranian influence. The Saudis have in the past shown a willingness to treat Iraq as an Arab partner and not a Shiite adversary. That realism, which was evident under an earlier Saudi leadership, seems to be re-emerging. Two months ago Saudi Foreign Minister Adel al-Jubeir visited Baghdad, the first such trip in 27 years.

The Trump administration should also counter the mistaken belief that Saudi Arabia prevented the U.S. from supporting the Shiite uprising against Saddam Hussein after the liberation of Kuwait in 1991. Many Iraqis, and even some reputable historians, still believe this. Yet the truth is exactly the opposite. The U.S. should make public the record of Saudi efforts to persuade the first President Bush and President Clinton to support anti-Saddam Shiite rebels. It will be difficult for Saudi-Iraqi relations to develop without countering the belief that Saudi Arabia is partly responsible for mass graves of Iraqi Shiites.

American diplomats should seek to engage the regional Arab players in addressing the difficult challenge of postconflict reconciliation. This will confront Syria in the aftermath of any peace settlement, and it will become important in Iraq once Mosul is liberated. Reconciliation processes that are suited to local cultures and deal with the horrific legacy of totalitarian Arab regimes cannot be overseen by outsiders. But the diplomatic effort should emphasize their importance regardless.

These political and diplomatic actions could complement and reinforce more-concrete measures to change facts on the ground in Syria, such as creating safe zones or imposing some kind of no-fly zone. These efforts will not be simple, nor will they yield immediate results. But this framework would go a long way in addressing the common danger of radical extremism and in stemming the flow of refugees that has become a humanitarian disaster and a threat to U.S. interests.

Mr. Wolfowitz, a scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, has served as deputy defense secretary and ambassador to Indonesia.

Document WSJO000020170410ed4a00a1e



Page One
What's News: World-Wide

214 words
11 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

 The Trump administration held out the prospect of wider retaliation against Syria and signaled a new push to remove the country's divisive leader, as Tillerson prepared to head to Moscow. 

 U.S. special operations forces and rebel partners clashed with \b ISIS\b0  fighters in a close-quarters battle in Syria on Saturday. 

 Trump has told senior advisers to prioritize his agenda over infighting, as the White House focuses on accomplishments it can tout during the president's first 100 days. 

 Alabama Gov. Bentley resigned as a scandal stemming from an alleged extramarital affair mushroomed into a crisis that left him facing possible impeachment. 

 A federal judge ruled for a second time that Texas legislators intended to discriminate against minority voters through a voter-ID law. 

 A Russian arrested in Spain on accusations of cyber fraud is one of the world's most sophisticated hackers, U.S. authorities alleged. 

 Two adults and one child died in a shooting at an elementary school in San Bernardino, Calif., that was described as a murder-suicide. 

 Top global economic and finance institutions defended the role of the WTO, countering a Trump administration challenge. 

 French presidential candidate Le Pen faced strong criticism over comments playing down France's role in the Holocaust. 

Document WSJO000020170411ed4b000xd



World-Wide
What's News
World-Wide

220 words
11 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The Trump administration held out the prospect of wider retaliation against Syria and signaled a new push to remove the country's divisive leader, as Tillerson prepared to head to Moscow.

U.S. special operations forces and rebel partners clashed with ISIS fighters in a close-quarters battle in Syria on Saturday.

---

Trump has told senior advisers to prioritize his agenda over infighting, as the White House focuses on accomplishments it can tout during the president's first 100 days.

---

Alabama Gov. Bentley resigned as a scandal stemming from an alleged extramarital affair mushroomed into a crisis that left him facing possible impeachment.

---

A federal judge ruled for a second time that Texas legislators intended to discriminate against minority voters through a voter-ID law.

---

A Russian arrested in Spain on accusations of cyber fraud is one of the world's most sophisticated hackers, U.S. authorities alleged.

---

Two adults and one child died in a shooting at an elementary school in San Bernardino, Calif., that was described as a murder-suicide.

---

Top global economic and finance institutions defended the role of the WTO, countering a Trump administration challenge.

---

French presidential candidate Le Pen faced strong criticism over comments playing down France's role in the Holocaust.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170411ed4b0002f



World News: Terror Blast Sparks Close Battle

By Dion Nissenbaum and Noam Raydan 
540 words
11 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

After President Donald Trump ordered last week's airstrike against an Assad regime airfield, dozens of U.S. special operations forces in southern Syria left their small base to avoid possible retaliatory action, according to American-backed Syrian fighters and U.S. officials.

Then came the attack, but not from President Bashar al-Assad's military.

On Saturday, Islamic State extremists disguised as U.S.-backed rebels detonated a massive car bomb at the base entrance, a blast that allowed some of the militants to fight their way inside, Syrian fighters and American officials said on Monday.

Islamic State fighters wore uniforms similar to those used by the U.S.-backed rebels. Some had U.S.-made M-16s and vehicles they had seized from American-backed rebels in a previous battle.

As the fight intensified, U.S. special operations forces and their Syrian rebel partners who had taken up positions in a desert no-man's-land rushed back to the base to help repel the attack, which lasted for about three hours. Pilots with the U.S.-led military coalition battling Islamic State carried out airstrike after airstrike to repel the fighters.

While no Americans were killed or injured, the attack was a sign of the increasing risks U.S. forces face as the Trump administration sends more troops into Syria to help with the intensifying campaign to push Islamic State out of Raqqa, the extremist group's de facto capital.

"It was a serious fight," one U.S. military official said Monday as new details emerged about the rare close-quarters fight between Americans and Islamic State extremists. "It was a coordinated, complex attack. Whether or not it was a one-off, we will have to see."

The U.S. military trains Syrian rebels at al-Tanf, a small base close to the Jordanian border. U.S. forces have been beefing up their presence in southern Syria as part of the broader campaign against Islamic State, U.S. officials said.

Last week, after the U.S. cruise-missile strike on an Assad regime airfield believed to be home to Syrian pilots who carried out a suspected chemical weapons attack, U.S. forces pulled out of al-Tanf as they watched for a possible retaliatory strike by Syria or Russia, which works side by side with Mr. Assad's forces.

"Around 20 ISIS fighters attacked the base, and suicide bombers blew up the main gate, and clashes took place inside the base," said Tlass al-Salama, commander of the Osoud al Sharqiya Army, part of the U.S.-backed moderate rebel alliance.

As the attack intensified, U.S. forces had to fight their way back to the base.

"It was a close-in fight," said the U.S. official.

Members of Mr. Salama's force rushed to provide reinforcements, but came under attack as they tried to reach the base, he said. Two of his fighters were killed.

"We dispatched around six or seven vehicles but [ISIS] attacked us," Mr. Salama said. "They targeted the first vehicle in the convoy."

---

Maria Abi-Habib contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170411ed4b0001p



World News: Sweden Attack Places Focus on Central Asia

By David Gauthier-Villars and Drew Hinshaw 
476 words
11 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

STOCKHOLM -- The Uzbek nationality of the suspected terrorist in a truck attack that killed four here has Western security officials focusing on the former Soviet states of Central Asia, a geopolitically knotty source of extremists.

Before Friday's rampage in which a man drove a truck into a crowd, nationals from the region were suspected to have attacked a nightclub and an airport in Turkey last year, as well as a subway in St. Petersburg, Russia, this month.

No group has claimed responsibility for the attack here in which two Swedes, one Briton and a Belgian were killed. Authorities said the suspect in custody is a 39-year-old Uzbek who had been wanted since Feb. 24 for failing to comply with a deportation order. Swedish police said the man, identified as Rakhmat Akilov by local media, had applied for residency in 2014. He had been investigated over signs of extremism last year, and had voiced sympathy online for radical groups.

His trajectory from residency applicant to man in hiding highlights the challenge in detecting and tracking radicals hailing from the landlocked region.

Thousands of fighters from Central Asia have rallied to violent groups in Iraq and Syria. Many don't travel directly to the Middle East but rather are recruited in Russia, Turkey or Europe by networks that prey on emigrants who fled their own politically repressive regimes.

"There's been an underappreciated amount of Central Asians who have fought with ISIS in Syria and, since the beginning of the Russian airstrikes last year, they have been either returning to Afghanistan or Turkey and, in some cases, now seem to be deploying to Europe," said Jacob Zenn, an analyst at the Jamestown Foundation in Washington.

European officials have been trying to coordinate efforts to deport migrants who have been denied residency.

The issue came into stark focus last year when a failed asylum seeker from Tunisia who had been on a watch list allegedly drove a truck into a crowd at a Christmas market in Berlin, leaving 12 dead.

In Sweden, where about 200,000 people applied for asylum in the past two years, police have been overwhelmed by a steep rise in the number of deportation orders referred to them by immigration authorities. Police said that in the first 10 months of 2016, nearly 70% of the 6,647 people who were to be deported couldn't be located.

Confronting radicalized individuals from Central Asia comes with particular complications for European nations because they have nettlesome relations with Turkey and Russia, the two nations with some of the best intelligence on the region.

---

Neanda Salvaterra in London, Nathan Hodge in Moscow and Margaret Coker in Istanbul contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170411ed4b0000w



U.S. Rips Russia, Assad as Talks Near

By Felicia Schwartz and Dion Nissenbaum 
913 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Top U.S. officials dialed up their criticism of Moscow and blasted Syrian leader Bashar al-Assad Sunday, heightening tensions in advance of Secretary of State Rex Tillerson 's visit to Russia this week.

Mr. Tillerson said he would urge Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and other officials to rethink their support for Mr. Assad and to uphold Russia's commitments to ensure the elimination of Syria's chemical weapons stockpile following last week's attacks on civilians.

"Why Russia has not been able to achieve that is unclear to me," he said in an interview aired Sunday on ABC. "Clearly they've been incompetent, and perhaps they've just simply been outmaneuvered by the Syrians."

Nikki Haley, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, speaking on CNN , said "regime change is something that we think is going to happen, because all of the parties are going to see that Assad's not the leader that needs to be taking place for Syria."

Mr. Tillerson will travel to Moscow this week to press Russia on why the Syrian regime was allowed to stockpile chemical weapons nearly four years after Washington and the Kremlin agreed on a plan to eliminate the weapons that put the responsibility for doing so on Moscow.

The U.S.-Russian dispute over Syria is but one of a series of difficult subjects Mr. Tillerson will bring up on a trip that was seen as a potential first step in a rapprochement between the two nations. He also is expected to confront the Russians about alleged election meddling in the U.S. and other Western countries and about its continuing intervention in Ukraine.

The friction over Syria seems to have further dimmed President Donald Trump 's hopes for improved ties and greater cooperation with Moscow. U.S. officials had raised expectations for a meeting between Mr. Tillerson and Russian President Vladimir Putin , but such a meeting remains unconfirmed by either side.

After Mr. Trump responded to a suspected Syrian chemical attack last week with a barrage of cruise missiles, the two powers are at sharp odds over the future of Mr. Assad.

Russia continued to stand by him, while top U.S. officials on Sunday outlined a process of "regime change" that would take place through diplomatic processes in the international arena or through elections, not necessarily by force.

Alongside the tougher U.S. line in Syria, the Trump administration flexed U.S. muscle elsewhere. The U.S. aircraft carrier Carl Vinson and other ships were redirected from planned port stops in Australia to the Korean Peninsula, amid concerns that Pyongyang was planning new weapons tests.

Following the U.S. strike on Syria, Russia said it was suspending a 2015 agreement with the U.S. on coordinating military operations. Later, however, Russian foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said Moscow was open to dialogue with the U.S. and lawmakers, and said the attack wouldn't affect Mr. Tillerson's visit.

Before going to Moscow, Mr. Tillerson will stop for a meeting of the Group of Seven leading nations -- the U.S., U.K., France, Germany, Japan, Canada and Italy -- hosted by Italy. G-7 member nations were largely supportive of the U.S. military action. Russia was ousted from the group in 2014 after moving to annex Ukraine's Crimea region.

U.S. policy on Mr. Assad has remained unclear despite the suspected chemical weapons attack last week, which killed at least 89 people, including many children. Just days before last week's U.S. strike, the White House signaled that it wasn't interested in removing Mr. Assad from power.

Now, the U.S. believes Russia's support to Mr. Assad has harmed overall ties and that further chemical attacks would be "very damaging to U.S.-Russian relations," Mr. Tillerson said.

After using banned sarin gas in a 2013 attack that killed more than 1,000 of his own people, Mr. Assad agreed to destroy his chemical weapons stocks in the face of threats from then-President Barack Obama to attack. Moscow said it would ensure that Syria eliminated its entire chemical weapons stock, but Syria appeared to retain and store some at one base in northwestern Syria currently shared with Russian forces.

Despite the U.S. airstrike on Syria, Ms. Haley, Mr. Tillerson and Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, Mr. Trump's national security adviser, said on Sunday news programs that the administration's main goal in the country remains the defeat of Islamic State.

"Our priority is first the defeat of ISIS," Mr. Tillerson said on ABC. "Once we can eliminate the battle against ISIS, conclude that -- and it is going quite well -- then we hope to turn our attention to cease fire agreements between the regime and opposition forces."

Lt. Gen. McMaster, in an interview on Fox News with Chris Wallace, echoed Mr. Tillerson's comments.

Ms. Haley struck a tougher line on Mr. Assad, saying that he cannot remain the future leader of Syria, but she didn't veer sharply from the views of her administration colleagues, saying the U.S. can have "multiple priorities."

All three administration officials said that the U.S. sees no future for Mr. Assad in Syria, but seemed to point to diplomatic paths to Mr. Assad's eventual removal.

---

Ben Leubsdorf in Washington and Thomas Grove in Moscow contributed to this article.

Document J000000020170410ed4a0002c



World
U.S. Officials Fault Moscow on Syria Ahead of Tillerson Visit; Secretary of State expected to confront Russians on several thorny issues, including alleged election meddling

By Felicia Schwartz and Dion Nissenbaum 
1,152 words
10 April 2017
03:32
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTONop U.S. officials dialed up their criticism of Moscow and blasted Syrian leader Bashar al-Assad Sunday, heightening tensions in advance of Secretary of State Rex Tillerson 's visit to Russia this week .

Mr. Tillerson said he would urge Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and other officials to rethink their support for Mr. Assad and to uphold Russia's commitments to ensure the elimination of Syria's chemical weapons stockpile following last week's attacks on civilians.

"Why Russia has not been able to achieve that is unclear to me," he said in an interview aired Sunday on ABC. "Clearly they've been incompetent, and perhaps they've just simply been out-maneuvered by the Syrians."

Nikki Haley, the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, speaking on CNN , said "regime change is something that we think is going to happen, because all of the parties are going to see that Assad's not the leader that needs to be taking place for Syria."

Mr. Tillerson will travel to Moscow this week to press Russia on why the Syrian regime was allowed to stockpile chemical weapons nearly four years after Washington and the Kremlin agreed on a plan to eliminate the weapons that put the responsibility for doing so on Moscow.

The U.S.-Russian dispute over Syria is but one of a series of difficult subjects Mr. Tillerson will bring up on a trip that was seen as a potential first step in a rapprochement between the two nations. He also is expected to confront the Russians about alleged election meddling in the U.S. and other Western countries and about its continuing intervention in Ukraine.

The friction over Syria seems to have further dimmed President Donald Trump 's hopes for improved ties and greater cooperation with Moscow. U.S. officials had raised expectations for a meeting between Mr. Tillerson and Russian President Vladimir Putin , but such a meeting remains unconfirmed by either side.

After Mr. Trump responded to a suspected Syrian chemical attack last week with a barrage of cruise missiles, the two powers are at sharp odds over the future of Mr. Assad.

Russia continued to stand by him, while top U.S. officials on Sunday outlined a process of "regime change" that would take place through diplomatic processes in the international arena or through elections, not necessarily by force.

Alongside the tougher U.S. line in Syria, the Trump administration flexed U.S. muscle elsewhere. The U.S. aircraft carrier Carl Vinson and other ships were redirected from planned port stops in Australia to the Korean Peninsula, amid concerns that Pyongyang was planning new weapons tests.

Following the U.S. strike on Syria, Russia said it was suspending a 2015 agreement with the U.S. on coordinating military operations. Later, however, Russian foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said Moscow was open to dialogue with the U.S. and lawmakers, and said the attack wouldn't affect Mr. Tillerson's visit.

Before going to Moscow, Mr. Tillerson will stop for a meeting of the Group of Seven leading nationshe U.S., U.K., France, Germany, Japan, Canada and Italyosted by Italy. G-7 member nations were largely supportive of the U.S. military action. Russia was ousted from the group in 2014 after moving to annex Ukraine's Crimea region.

U.S. policy on Mr. Assad has remained unclear despite the suspected chemical weapons attack last week, which killed at least 89 people, including many children. Just days before last week's U.S. strike, the White House signaled that it wasn't interested in removing Mr. Assad from power.

Now, the U.S. believes Russia's support to Mr. Assad has harmed overall ties and that further chemical attacks would be "very damaging to U.S.-Russian relations," Mr. Tillerson said.

Despite the U.S. airstrike on Syria, Ms. Haley, Mr. Tillerson and Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, Mr. Trump's national security adviser, said on Sunday news programs that the administration's main goal in the country remains the defeat of Islamic State .

"Our priority is first the defeat of ISIS," Mr. Tillerson said on ABC. "Once we can eliminate the battle against ISIS, conclude thatnd it is going quite well hen we hope to turn our attention to cease fire agreements between the regime and opposition forces."

Lt. Gen. McMaster, in an interview on Fox News with Chris Wallace, echoed Mr. Tillerson's comments.

Ms. Haley struck a tougher line on Mr. Assad, saying that he cannot remain the future leader of Syria, but she didn't veer sharply from the views of her administration colleagues, saying the U.S. can have "multiple priorities."

All three administration officials said that the U.S. sees no future for Mr. Assad in Syria, but seemed to point to diplomatic paths to Mr. Assad's eventual removal.

At the G-7 , Mr. Tillerson is likely to find a supportive reception. The U.S. airstrike has received "almost surprisingly strong public support," said James Jeffrey, a former deputy national security adviser in the George W. Bush administration. "That is going to box in the Russians significantly when they make their argument that this was illegal aggression," Mr. Jeffrey said.

Experts and former officials have said Mr. Tillerson could use the strike as leverage with Russia to rein in Mr. Assad or revive political talks. Russia might use the military-to-military channel it said it suspended last week as a bargaining chip as well.

"The Russians now can look at this and determine that this administration is very different than the previous one, that they're much more confident in using military force and that's part of the mix," said Andrew Tabler, a Syria expert at the Washington Institute.

Secretary of State John Kerry made various overtures to Russia to cooperate on Syria, beginning with the 2013 chemical weapons deal in which Syria agreed to give up its chemical weapons stock. He later sought cooperation with Russia against Islamic State in Syria if Moscow would ground Mr. Assad's air force and maintain a cease fire, but the deals fell apart quickly.

Ben Leubsdorf in Washington and Thomas Grove in Moscow contributed to this article.

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal  is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* Capital Journal: Five Big Players Steer Trump's Foreign Policy 

* U.S. Officials Fault Moscow on Syria Ahead of Tillerson Visit 

* Democrats' Conditions for Tax Overhaul Make Bipartisan Deal Unlikely 

* Deputy National Security Adviser Kathleen McFarland Leaves White House 

* U.S. Hiring Freeze Stretching Federal Agencies 

* U.S. Says Goal in Syria Is to Defeat Islamic State 

Document WSJO000020170410ed4a000b6



Islam's Most Eloquent Apostate

By Tunku Varadarajan 
1,898 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A11
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Stanford, Calif. -- The woman sitting opposite me, dressed in a charcoal pantsuit and a duck-egg-blue turtleneck, can't go anywhere, at any time of day, without a bodyguard. She is soft-spoken and irrepressibly sane, but also -- in the eyes of those who would rather cut her throat than listen to what she says -- the most dangerous foe of Islamist extremism in the Western world.

We are in a secure room at a sprawling university, but the queasiness in my chest takes a while to go away. I'm talking to a woman with multiple fatwas on her head, someone who has a greater chance of meeting a violent end than anyone I've met (Salman Rushdie included). And yet she's wholly poised, spectacles pushed back to rest atop her head like a crown, dignified and smiling under siege.

Ayaan Hirsi Ali, born in Somalia in 1969, is Islam's most eloquent apostate. She has just published a slim book that seeks to add a new four-letter word -- dawa -- to the West's vocabulary. It describes the ceaseless, world-wide ideological campaign waged by Islamists as a complement to jihad. It is, she says, the greatest threat facing the West and "could well bring about the end of the European Union as we know it."

America is far from immune, and her book, "The Challenge of Dawa," is an explicit attempt to persuade the Trump administration to adopt "a comprehensive anti-dawa strategy before it is too late."

Ms. Hirsi Ali has come a long way from the days when she -- "then a bit of a hothead" -- declared Islam to be incapable of reform, while also calling on Muslims to convert or abandon religion altogether. That was a contentious decade ago.

Today she believes that Islam can indeed be reformed, that it must be reformed, and that it can be reformed only by Muslims themselves -- by those whom she calls "Mecca Muslims." These are the faithful who prefer the gentler version of Islam that she says was "originally promoted by Muhammad" before 622. That was the year he migrated to Medina and the religion took a militant and unlovely ideological turn.

At the same time, Ms. Hirsi Ali -- now a research fellow at Stanford's Hoover Institution, where I also work -- is urging the West to look at Islam with new eyes. She says it must be viewed "not just as a religion, but also as a political ideology." To regard Islam merely as a faith, "as we would Christianity or Buddhism, is to run the risk of ignoring dawa, the activities carried out by Islamists to keep Muslims energized by a campaign to impose Shariah law on all societies -- including countries of the West."

Dawa, Ms. Hirsi Ali explains, is "conducted right under our noses in Europe, and in America. It aims to convert non-Muslims to political Islam and also to push existing Muslims in a more extreme direction." The ultimate goal is "to destroy the political institutions of a free society and replace them with Shariah." It is a "never-ending process," she says, and then checks herself: "It ends when an Islamic utopia is achieved. Shariah everywhere!"

Ms. Hirsi Ali contends that the West has made a colossal mistake by its obsession with "terror" in the years since 9/11. "In focusing only on acts of violence," she says, "we've ignored the Islamist ideology underlying those acts. By not fighting a war of ideas against political Islam -- or 'Islamism' -- and against those who spread that ideology in our midst, we've committed a blunder."

There is a knock on the door. I hear hushed voices outside, presumably her bodyguard telling someone to come back later. To add to the mildly dramatic effect, a siren is audible somewhere in the distance, unusual for the serene Stanford campus.

Ms. Hirsi Ali is unfazed. "What the Islamists call jihad," she continues, "is what we call terrorism, and our preoccupation with it is, I think, a form of overconfidence. 'Terrorism is the way of the weak,' we tell ourselves, 'and if we can just take out the leaders and bring down al Qaeda or ISIS, then surely the followers will stop their jihad.' But we're wrong. Every time Western leaders take down a particular organization, you see a different one emerge, or the same one take on a different shape. And that's because we've been ignoring dawa."

Ms. Hirsi Ali wants us to get away from this game of jihadi Whac-a-Mole and confront "the enemy that is in plain sight -- the activists, the Islamists, who have access to all the Western institutions of socialization." She chuckles here: "That's a horrible phrase . . . 'institutions of socialization' . . . but they're there, in families, in schools, in universities, prisons, in the military as chaplains. And we can't allow them to pursue their aims unchecked."

America needs to be on full alert against political Islam because "its program is fundamentally incompatible with the U.S. Constitution" -- with religious pluralism, the equality of men and women, and other fundamental rights, including the toleration of different sexual orientations. "When we say the Islamists are homophobic," she observes, "we don't mean that they don't like gay marriage. We mean that they want gays put to death."

Islam the religion, in Ms. Hirsi Ali's view, is a Trojan horse that conceals Islamism the political movement. Since dawa is, ostensibly, a religious missionary activity, its proponents "enjoy a much greater protection by the law in free societies than Marxists or fascists did in the past."

Ms. Hirsi Ali isn't afraid to call these groups out. Her book names five, including the Council on American-Islamic Relations, which asserts -- and in turn receives in the mainstream media -- the status of a moderate Muslim organization. But groups like CAIR, Ms. Hirsi Ali says, "take advantage of the focus on 'inclusiveness' by progressive political bodies in democratic societies, and then force these societies to bow to Islamist demands in the name of peaceful coexistence."

Her strategy to fight dawa evokes several parallels with the Western historical experience of radical Marxism and the Cold War. Islamism has the help of "useful idiots" -- Lenin's phrase -- such as the Southern Poverty Law Center, which has denounced Ms. Hirsi Ali as an "extremist." She sees that smear as a success for dawa: "They go to people like the SPLC and say, 'Can we partner with you, because we also want to talk about what you guys talk about, which is civil rights. And Muslims are a minority, just like you.' So, they play this victim card, and the SPLC swallows it. And it's not just them, it's also the ACLU. The Islamists are infiltrating all these institutions that were historic and fought for rights. It's a liberal blind spot."

Western liberals, she says, are also complicit in an Islamist cultural segregation. She recalls a multiculturalist catchphrase from her years as a Somali refugee in Amsterdam in the early 1990s: " 'Integrate with your own identity,' they used to tell us -- Integratie met eigen identiteit. Of course, that resulted in no integration at all."

Ms. Hirsi Ali wants the Trump administration -- and the West more broadly -- to counter the dawa brigade "just as we countered both the Red Army and the ideology of communism in the Cold War." She is alarmed by the ease with which, as she sees it, "the agents of dawa hide behind constitutional protections they themselves would dismantle were they in power."

She invokes Karl Popper, the great Austrian-British philosopher who wrote of "the paradox of tolerance." Her book quotes Popper writing in 1945: "If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them."

I ask Ms. Hirsi Ali what her solution might be, and she leans once more on Popper, who proposed a right not to tolerate the intolerant. "Congress must give the president -- this year, because there's no time to lose -- the tools he needs to dismantle the infrastructure of dawa in the U.S."

Dawa has become an existential menace to the West, she adds, because its practitioners are "working overtime to prevent the assimilation of Muslims into Western societies. It is assimilation versus dawa. There is a notion of 'cocooning,' by which Islamists tell Muslim families to cocoon their children from Western society. This can't be allowed to happen."

Is Ms. Hirsi Ali proposing to give Washington enhanced powers to supervise parenting? "Yes," she says. "We want these children to be exposed to critical thinking, freedom, the Constitution, the Bill of Rights, the rights of women." She also suggests subjecting immigrants and refugees to ideological scrutiny, so as to deny entry, residence and naturalization to those "involved with, or supportive of, Islamism."

In effect, Ms. Hirsi Ali would modernize the "communism test" that still applies to those seeking naturalization. "I had to answer questions when I applied for citizenship in 2013: 'Are you, or have you ever been, a communist?' And I remember thinking, 'God, that was the war back then. We're supposed to update this stuff!' Potential immigrants from Pakistan or Bangladesh, for instance, should have to answer questions -- 'Are you a member of the Jamat?' and so on. If they're from the Middle East you ask them about the Muslim Brotherhood, 'or any other similar group,' so there's no loophole."

Might critics deride this as 21st-century McCarthyism? "That's just a display of intellectual laziness," Ms. Hirsi Ali replies. "We're dealing here with a lethal ideological movement and all we are using is surveillance and military means? We have to grasp the gravity of dawa. Jihad is an extension of dawa. For some, in fact, it is dawa by other means."

The U.S., she believes, is in a "much weaker position to combat the various forms of nonviolent extremism known as dawa because of the way that the courts have interpreted the First Amendment" -- a situation where American exceptionalism turns into what she calls an "exceptional handicap." Convincing Americans of this may be the hardest part of Ms. Hirsi Ali's campaign, and she knows it. Yet she asks whether the judicial attitudes of the 1960s and '70s -- themselves a reaction to the excesses of Joseph McCarthy in the 1950s -- might have left the U.S. ill-equipped to suppress threats from groups that act in the name of religion.

I ask Ms. Hirsi Ali if there's any one thing she would wish for. "I would like to be present at a conversation between Popper and Muhammad," she says. "Popper wrote about open society and its enemies, and subjected everyone from Plato to Marx to his critical scrutiny. I'd have liked him to subject Muhammad's legacy to the same analysis.

"But he skipped Muhammad, alas. He skipped Muhammad."

---

Mr. Varadarajan is a research fellow in journalism at Stanford University's Hoover Institution.

(See related letters: "Letters to the Editor: Is Dawa a Threat to Western Life and Law?" -- WSJE April 18, 2017)

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170410ed4a0000a



World
Islamic State Attack on Rebel Base in Syria Sparks Rare, Close Battle; U.S.-backed Syrian fighters and American forces clash with militants inside the base

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington and Noam Raydan in Beirut 
1,020 words
11 April 2017
01:49
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

After President Donald Trump ordered last week's airstrike against an Assad regime airfield, dozens of U.S. special operations forces in southern Syria left their small base to avoid possible retaliatory action, according to American-backed Syrian fighters and U.S. officials.

Then came the attack, but not from President Bashar al-Assad's military.

On Saturday, Islamic State extremists disguised as U.S.-backed rebels detonated a massive car bomb at the base entrance, a blast that allowed some of the militants to fight their way inside, Syrian fighters and American officials said on Monday.

Islamic State fighters wore uniforms similar to those used by the U.S.-backed rebels. Some had U.S.-made M-16s and vehicles they had seized from American-backed rebels in a previous battle.

As the fight intensified, U.S. special operations forces and their Syrian rebel partners who had taken up positions in a desert no-man's-land rushed back to the base to help repel the attack, which lasted for about three hours. Pilots with the U.S.-led military coalition battling Islamic State carried out airstrike after airstrike to repel the fighters.

While no Americans were killed or injured, the attack was a sign of the increasing risks U.S. forces face as the Trump administration sends more troops into Syria to help with the intensifying campaign to push Islamic State out of Raqqa, the extremist group's de facto capital.

"It was a serious fight," one U.S. military official said Monday as new details emerged about the rare close-quarters fight between Americans and Islamic State extremists. "It was a coordinated, complex attack. Whether or not it was a one-off, we will have to see."

The U.S. military trains Syrian rebels at al-Tanf, a small base close to the Jordanian border. U.S. forces have been beefing up their presence in southern Syria as part of the broader campaign against Islamic State, U.S. officials said.

Last week, after the U.S. cruise-missile strike on an Assad regime airfield believed to be home to Syrian pilots who carried out a suspected chemical weapons attack, U.S. forces pulled out of al-Tanf as they watched for a possible retaliatory strike by Syria or Russia, which works side-by-side with Mr. Assad's forces.

"Around 20 ISIS fighters attacked the base, and suicide bombers blew up the main gate, and clashes took place inside the base," said Tlass al-Salama, commander of the Osoud al Sharqiya Army, part of the U.S.-backed moderate rebel alliance.

As the attack intensified, U.S. forces had to fight their way back to the base.

"It was a close-in fight," said the U.S. official.

Members of Mr. Salama's force rushed to provide reinforcements, but came under attack as they tried to reach the base, he said. Two of his fighters were killed.

"We dispatched around six or seven vehicles but [ISIS] attacked us," Mr. Salama said. "They targeted the first vehicle in the convoy."

The decision to leave al-Tanf was one of several steps the American military took in Syria in the aftermath of the U.S.'s first intentional strike against Mr. Assad's forces.

The U.S.-led coalition scaled back airstrikes in Syria amid fears that Russia or Syria might try to shoot down American pilots. Officials at U.S. Central Command, which oversees the campaign against Islamic State, said it had temporarily curtailed offensive airstrikes and expected to soon return to normal operations.

On Monday, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said last Thursday's U.S. strike on Shayrat airfield had delivered a blow to Mr. Assad's air force. The strikes hit air defense systems, fuel depots and ammunition sites.

But the missiles didn't hit the runway, which allowed Syrian and Russian pilots to use it soon after the U.S. strike. Mr. Mattis said the strike took out 20 Syrian planes, or 20% of Mr. Assad's operational air force. That figure couldn't be independently verified and some analysts said it might overstate the impact.

"The Syrian government has lost the ability to refuel or rearm aircraft at Shayrat airfield and at this point, use of the runway is of idle military interest," Mr. Mattis said in a statement. "The Syrian government would be ill-advised ever again to use chemical weapons."

One senior U.S. official characterized the strike as more modest. "It was a symbolic strike," the official said.

U.S. officials have been working to determine what role, if any, Russian forces may have played in the Syrian chemical weapons attack, which killed at least 89 people and triggered the swift U.S. military response.

American officials say a Syrian pilot dropped a single bomb filled with some banned chemicalossibly sarinn Khan Sheikhoun, a village in northwestern Syria. Syria has denied using chemical weapons in the attack.

On Monday, the senior U.S. official said the U.S. military now believes a Russian drone flew overhead after the attack, a demonstration of Moscow's role that day. The drone flew over a makeshift rebel hospital, which was then targeted by a Russian-made jet, U.S. officials said.

It still isn't clear if a Russian or Syrian plane carried out the second attack, which U.S. officials said may have been an attempt to destroy evidence of the chemical-weapons use.

Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut contributed to this article.

Write to Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com

Related

* Islamic State Hits U.S.-Led Base in Southern Syria

* U.S. Strike in Syria Raises Tensions With Iran

* Trump's Syria Strike Sends Russia a Signal

* Rebels Hail U.S. Strike, Syria Says 16 Killed

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base in Response to Chemical Attack

Document WSJO000020170410ed4a00a19



Opinion
Trump Strikes Syria; A transcript of the weekend's program on FOX News Channel.

7,231 words
10 April 2017
20:26
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

President Donald Trump : Tonight, I ordered a targeted military strike on the airfield in Syria from where the chemical attack was launched. It is in this vital national security interest of the United States to prevent and deter the spread and use of deadly chemical weapons.

Paul Gigot: Welcome to "The Journal Editorial Report." I'm Paul Gigot.

That was President Donald Trump Thursday night following the launch of more than 50 cruise missiles at an air base in Syria, a response to this week's deadly chemical weapons attack on civilians there. The strikes came hours after Secretary of State Rex Tillerson pinned blame for Tuesday's sarin gas attack squarely on President Bashar al Assad and warned Russia to rethink its support for his regime.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson: There is no doubt in our minds and the information we have supports that Syria, the Syrian regime, the leadership of President Bashar al Assad, are responsible for this attack. And I think further, it is very important that the Russian government consider carefully their continued support for the Assad regime.

Gigot: Joining the panel this week, "Wall Street Journal" columnist and deputy editor, Dan Henninger; foreign affairs columnist, Bret Stephens; and editorial board member, Mary Kissel.

Bret, I gather you support this military action. Why?

Bret Stephens: First, it's retaliation for a barbaric attack, and one we should have conducted when the sarin gas attack started almost four years ago. Secondly, it's a very important signaling exercise for the Trump administration to distinguish itself, to our adversaries, from the Obama administration, to put Putin, the North Koreans, the Iranians and perhaps even the Chinese on notice this isn't a president who is going to wring his hands indefinitely before taking military action. But the most important thing is, is this a change in policy for the U.S. when it comes to Syria? Does this administration recognize that the root of our Syria problem is the Assad regime, not ISIS?

Gigot: I want to get into that. But as far as you are concerned, this is important because it signals, apart from a change of policy, but just on its own, saying, look, I'm not Barack Obama.

Stephens: It was morally and strategically right.

Gigot: OK.

All right, this is being received, Mary, by and large, around the world. But to Bret's point, a lot of people are saying this was proportionate. It didn't go overboard. It just responded to that one airfield where the Pentagon thinks the chemical attack came from. But what about the fact there are five other airfields that Assad uses that we didn't attack.

Mary Kissel: It was proportionate because it was where the chemical weapons attack was launched. It looks like the Trump administration took steps to avoid unnecessary casualties. Judging from the reporting, we gave Russia a heads up. So it's significant that Russians were at that airfield. Recall, Paul, that Russia has provided key support to the Assad regime and has targeted U.S.-backed forces there.

Look, what do we do about the other airfields? We'll see. A lot depends on how the Syrian regime and Putin and Iran respond. But have no doubt, this was certainly a warning that Trump means what he says.

Also, importantly, just to add to Bret's point, it's a sign Trump can learn while he's in office. Trump has never backed military action in Syria. He was against it before he became president. Now he's sitting in the Oval Office and it looks like's taking a more responsible approach.

Gigot: Dan, what about the Russian response? They denounced the attack, not surprising. They cut off coordination militarily that we have been working with them on in terms of the anti-Islamic State campaign in Raqqa and eastern Syria. Now we get reports there is a ship going into the Med, the Mediterranean. What do you make of the U.S.-Russian relationship here?

Dan Henninger: I guess you could call it a reset of a reset. Because whatever Donald Trump's relationship may or may not have been with Vladimir Putin, it's not the same as of this strike against Syria.

I think it was striking that his national security director, H.R. McMaster, who was with him in Mar-a-Lago when he made that announcement, said this is, quote, "a big shift." And I think that includes the Russians as well.

U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley's statements the last few days, especially on Friday, against the Russians, was absolutely blistering. I think the Russian ambassador sitting there was taken aback at the intensity of her remarks.

And what this allows I think Trump needs to send a message to our allies in the Middle East, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, perhaps Turkey, that we are going to take a leadership position, and that leadership position can be directed at suppressing Islamic State, perhaps removing Assad, and we don't need the Russians to do that if we have our Arab allies are willing to back us.

Gigot: But if there's any criticism I've seen, Bret, it's that this complicates that anti-Islamic State campaign because it means now Assad could decide to do something against American soldiers. The Russians could complicate things for our aircraft. Is this something we should be concerned about, the chances of --

Stephens: No. And the truth is that you can't solve your ISIS problem without solving your Assad problem and vice versa. As we said before, they're symbiotic enemies. One depends on the other for its legitimacy.

Gigot: But explain that when it comes to Assad because he claims --

Stephens: Because Assad's base of support within Syria and internationally is hate. I'm what's standing between you and ISIS. What is it that stands up ISIS among -- in Syria and the rest of the Arab world? Hey, we're the guys who are fighting this awful --

Stephens: We have two problems in Syria, one is Assad and one is ISIS. We have to fight both of them. Yeah, there will be tactical complications, not question about that. But the Russians have more to fear from our Air Force than we have to fear from theirs.

Gigot: So what is the next stage? What should the U.S. do not, the Trump administration do now if they want to advance that goal, the twin goals of our twin problems?

Kissel: You start to enforce the safe zones in the north, on the Turkish border, and in the south, on the Jordanian border.

Gigot: Syrians, themselves?

Kissel: Correct. You also start to address the problem of Sunni radicalism. Sunni moderates have had no place to go, because the Obama administration didn't support them. So if they are against Assad, the only choice they have is to go to a radicalized group, like the Islamic State, like al Qaeda. You can accomplish two things by creating safe zones. You can allow people to flee, sending a message to Assad, but you also to construct the internal support you need for a future freer democratic --

Stephens: We need to create a reputation of being a reliable friend and a terrible foe. We need to give people incentive to be on the side of the U.S. and to disincent the Irans, the Hezbollahs, the Russians and the Assad regime from opposing it. We should reward Israel by recognizing their possession of the Golan Heights. We should reward the Kurds who have been doing a lot of the fighting for us in northeastern Syria. We should finally start supporting elements of the Free Syrian Army that we can trust. Shrink the tumor.

Gigot: That would require quite a degree of intervention. I'm not sure that Donald Trump has quite bargained for yet, but we'll see where it goes.

Stephens: With time comes wisdom.

Gigot: Still ahead, after a bitter Senate showdown, Neil Gorsuch is confirmed to the Supreme Court. A look at the partisan path that took him there and what it means for future nominees.

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer: There's a reason to top the nuclear option. It's the most extreme measure with the most extreme consequences.

Gigot: After a bitter showdown in the Senate, President Trump's Supreme Court nominee, Neil Gorsuch, was confirmed Friday by a 54-45 vote a day after Senate Republicans broke a Democratic filibuster and triggered the so-called "nuclear option," voting Thursday to lower the threshold for advancing Supreme Court nominations from 60 votes to a simple majority.

We are back with Dan Henninger. And Washington columnist, Kim Strassel, and editorial board members, Joe Rago and Colin Levy, also join the panel.

Colin, big, big victory not only for Donald Trump and Neil Gorsuch, but also Mitch McConnell, the majority leader of the Senate, who kept all Republicans together not only for the support for Gorsuch but to break the filibuster.

Colin Levy: For sure, Paul. No question. This is really a legacy for Mitch McConnell, the way he managed to keep everyone together. Even while there were rumblings of some sort of deal that might have been going on, he kept it together. I think getting rid of the filibuster, in the long run, there is a lot of hooting and hollering now about how this is a big change, but in the end, you will see this will bring the judicial confirmation process back to what it used to be, back to something a little more normal. It will take it out of this extreme partisan wrangling we have seen the past year. So I think that's good.

Gigot: You mentioned something about a deal. Behind the scenes, there were some Republicans negotiating with Democrats. Chuck Schumer said, oh, we can't have a filibuster here and we don't want to break the filibuster, so let's cut a deal that would have given Chuck Schumer and Democrats some leverage over Donald Trump's future appointments.

Levy: That's right. It would have basically said we'll get Judge Gorsuch through in exchange for an agreement not to filibuster the next one. That just would have been a terrible deal for Republicans. And President Trump has to be looking at this one now as a significant victory. This is a great judge. He will be great on the court for many years. On a political level, this is something good the administration has gotten done. And judges are something that unite the Republican coalition across the board. So that's important.

Gigot: Kim, did Schumer miscalculate here? Because now the filibuster is gone for Supreme Court nominations. Next time Trump makes an appointment, it's 51 votes.

Kim Strassel: Yeah. If this was Mitch McConnell's shining hour, it was Chuck Schumer's Alamo or Waterloo. Choose your metaphor. Had Chuck Schumer played it cool, had it recognized this was an extremely qualified judge, had he not rallied his Democrats instantly to go out and filibuster, not join the resistance, there is a chance he could have peeled off some Republicans to come over and made the deal Colin was talking about. Instead, by being unrelenting in opposition, it made it clear and Mitch McConnell was able to make the point to his members, though they would prefer not to do this, there was no choice, Democrats were leaving them no choice, and he aided Mitch McConnell in keeping Republicans united.

Gigot: Dan, what's the political lesson here for Trump?

Henninger: For Trump?

Gigot: Yeah.

Henninger: Well, that you can trust Mitch McConnell, for one thing. He wonders who can trust in Congress.

I think another political lesson is to see the reality of what's going on with the Democrats. Yes, Chuck Schumer probably should have let this one through. But the question is, who is in charge of the Democratic Party right now? It doesn't look to me like Chuck Schumer. He was leaned on heavily by the left, by progressives, who did not want to do a deal like this. They decided they need to make the Supreme Court a bigger political issue.

Gigot: So they did this for their own partisan reasons.

Henninger: Absolutely.

Gigot: To fire up their base.

Henninger: Absolutely.

Gigot: The resistance base says you must oppose all things Trump and we'll give you what you want, even if it makes it more likely that there is another Neil Gorsuch coming if there's another Supreme Court opening.

Henninger: That part of logic doesn't hold up to me, but that's what they are thinking. Within seconds of that filibuster being broken, a fundraising letter went out from some left-wing groups saying, because of this, you have to send us money. They are going to run on the Supreme Court now.

Gigot: One of the things here, Joe, this was a subcontracting operation to some extent. Leonard Leo, from the Federal Society - who we're going to hear from soon -- he gave that list to Donald Trump, with Don McGann (ph), general council at the White House. Gorsuch was off the list. It worked.

Joe Rago: It did work. It's a lesson for Trump that sometimes doing things in the conventional manner can actually succeed and produce results. I think going forward, you know, the more normal part of the Trump administration maybe will get some more power out of this.

Gigot: You really think so?

Rago: Certainly. And we might have another Supreme Court opening very soon. Justice Anthony Kennedy is 80. Ruth Bader Ginsburg is 84. There's a chance the next pick could change the intellectual coloration of the Supreme Court in a much more consequential way.

Gigot: Colin, do you see the next pick coming from this list of 21 they prepared for Trump, that Gorsuch came off of?

Levy: Yeah. There are a lot of great names on that list. Obviously, that could change. But another thing we should talk about, Paul, it's great Judge Gorsuch will be sworn in Monday. We have big cases coming up at the Supreme Court just the second week after that. So a big religious liberty case coming called Trinity Lutheran. We know Judge Gorsuch had strong opinions in the Hobby Lobby case on religious liberty. So it's great he will be on the court now and be there sitting for those cases.

Gigot: Who on the court does he most resemble, Judge Gorsuch, as a judge?

Levy: I would say somewhere between Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas. He has Justice Thomas' principles, originalism and opinions. But he has that flair, that gift for argument that is able to engage lawyers and law students like Justice Scalia did. So I think he's somewhere between the best parts of both of them.

Gigot: That sounds pretty good to me.

All right, thank you, Colin.

Much more to come on this week's Supreme Court showdown and the future of the court under President Trump. What kind of justice will Neil Gorsuch be? And who could be the next nominee? We will ask one of President Trump's Supreme Court advisors, next.

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell: Our Democratic colleagues have done something today that is unprecedented in the history of the Senate. Unfortunately, it has brought us to this point. We need to restore the norms and traditions of the Senate and get past this unprecedented partisan filibuster.

Gigot: Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, just before Republicans voted to break the Democratic filibuster of Supreme Court Justice Neil Gorsuch. It was a history making vote and one that will likely shape the Supreme Court for decades to come.

Leonard Leo is currently on leave from the Federalist Society where he is executive vice president. He is an advisor to President Trump on the Supreme Court.

So welcome, Leonard. Good to see you.

Leonard Leo: Good to see you, Paul.

Gigot: So what's your biggest lesson, the lesson you take away from this battle over Neil Gorsuch?

Leo: Well, I think it's very important that the president and the Republican Party continue to pick individuals for the Supreme Court who are committed to the kind of ideals Justice Scalia stood for. Those play well with the American people. Those are the right ideals for bringing the court forward. And that worked. It worked very effectively. Judge Gorsuch was an incredibly forceful advocate for the idea that our structural constitution, the separation of powers and so forth are inextricably intertwined to the preservation of freedom and human dignity. I think he stood for all the principles that are so important to our court.

Gigot: OK, here's -- given all of that -- and I certainly agree with you on the merits -- but here's the question. You only got three Democrats. Why only three Democrats? I know you were trying and the White House was trying and the Republicans were trying to get more. Gorsuch met with most of them. He visited them. Why so much trouble getting Democrats?

Leo: Well, because much of the Democrat Party is in line with the hard- left groups that understand all too well that their policy agenda depends on the court being a super legislature. As long as the Democrat Party represents values that aren't going to be largely adopted by a Republican Congress or the states, they will have to fight tooth and nail to make sure the court doesn't become more conservative or constitutionalist. That's really what it's all about.

Gigot: How much of it was bitterness over the fact that Merrick Garland never had a vote?

Leo: That was a little bit of it. You saw some of that during the filibuster they staged. I think it was probably a combination of that and the simple fact they desperately need the court. They need the court for their agenda, particularly looking at the next couple of years.

Gigot: Privately, you say we need to get Judge Gorsuch confirmed and we don't want him filibustered, but, you know what, for the next pick, it's not so bad, from the point of view of the president, that the filibuster is gone, is it?

Leo: As far as I'm concerned, the world is still spinning on its axis, Paul.

The nuclear option has not caused the nuclear winter everyone thought it would. We'll get back to simple majority up-or-down votes on the Supreme Court. Senators will always fight it out with Supreme Court seats. They're highly coveted. But the fact of the matter is things will move forward. President Trump will have the opportunity to nominate people like Neil Gorsuch, who believe in originalism and textualism and the structural Constitution. That's a good thing for the country. I think the majority of the American people embrace that, at least in a general way, because they believe in self-government. I think this is very good for our country, actually.

Gigot: Doesn't the president now have a freer hand?

Leo: Oh, yes.

Gigot: What he really needs now is basically say, look, if I can get all of the Republicans to support my next nominee, then he or she is confirmed.

Leo: He has a freer hand, there's no doubt about that. There will always be a few moderate Democrats -- sorry --- moderate Republicans you have to be careful with, but that's OK. That's something that can be worked through. It's been worked through in other confirmation proceedings. So, yes, he's much freer to appoint the kinds of people that reflect the Scalia jurisprudence and legacy.

Gigot: Is the choice going to come off that list of 21, now 20 I guess with Neil Gorsuch off the list, or are you going to expand that list, look at some other names, maybe fiddle with it?

Leo: I think the president promised during the campaign he would pick from the list. But I don't see a reason why the president can't refresh and expand the list. It's been a year since the list was developed. I think he's -- given the success of this particular confirmation process, he has some running room to refresh and expand it if he wants.

Gigot: Neil Gorsuch going Monday to the Supreme Court. He will start hearing cases right away. What kind of justice should we expect him to be? How is he going to change the court?

Leo: What you get is what you saw, Paul. This is a man who really cares very deeply about the traditional judicial role, originalism, textualism. And most important, from my standpoint, he understands the relationship between the separation of powers, federalism, limited and enumerated powers, and the preservation of freedom. That was really, when you think about it, the legacy of Justice Antonin Scalia, the idea that the structural Constitution matters and, you know, that any dictatorship can have a Bill of Rights but, ultimately, what you need is a structural Constitution. He did a fine job presenting those principles. I think that's what you're going to see on the court from him.

Gigot: Some skepticism, perhaps, about executive power and agency power to interpret statutes.

Leonard Leo, thank you for coming in. We appreciate it.

Leo: Thank you so much.

Gigot: When we come back, Susan Rice unmasked. We'll look at what we now know about President Obama's national security advisor and her role in surveilling the Trump transition team.

Gigot: Two major developments this week in the investigation into Russia's interference in the 2016 election with news that Obama's national security advisor, Susan Rice, unmasked the identity of at least one Trump transition official who was listed in U.S. intelligence reports. This, as House Intelligence Committee Chair Devin Nunes stepped aside Thursday from his panel's Russia probe amid criticism by Democrats that he is too close to the White House and cannot lead an impartial inquiry and after the House Ethics Committee announced he was under investigation for mishandling classified information.

We're back with Dan Henninger, Kim Strassel and Joe Rago.

So, Kim, let's start with Susan Rice. Why does this unmasking news matter?

Kim Strasel: It matters because Susan Rice was the national security advisor. And the thing people need to understand is White House officials don't conduct investigations. They don't run sting operations out of the White House. So normally, when you have law enforcement unmasking American citizens, requesting the identities of those caught up in surveillance with foreign officials, it's done as part of an investigation to see if there is some sort of counterterrorism or espionage problem with the American in question. Susan Rice was unmasking Trump transition official names. People who have seen the document suggest that maybe there was valuable information in there about the Trump team and its policies and its intentions when it got in. So this is potentially the Obama administration snooping on an incoming administration.

Gigot: Do we know who she unmasked?

Strassel: We don't know who she unmasked. And separately we - but we know it's an official other than Michael Flynn. Whether she also unmasked Michael Flynn, we don't know. But this is yet another transition official in addition to Michael Flynn.

Gigot: But the critics say, of people who have covered this story, including us, oh, no big deal, this is a routine operation for national security advisors. They do this all the time. No news here.

Strassel: Most of the people I have spoken to on this say this is not routine at all. It's quite odd she would be doing this. See, there is also the news, Paul, people -- Devin Nunes, who did see these documents, also saw some dozens more that seemed to have lots of details about the Trump transition team and what it was doing, but had nothing to do with Russia. Remember, this was their argument, that this was why Susan Rice would be looking at papers like this, because government was conducting a probe about Russian interference in the election. But they appear to have been monitoring Trump transition officials' conversations that had nothing to do with Russia.

Gigot: Now, Susan Rice has said -- she all but admitted she unmasked these names. But she said she never did it for political purposes and she didn't leak any of the names. So let's concede the point on this. But does the political purposes-line wash?

Henninger: No, I don't think so as all. She told NPR she had no idea what Devin Nunes was talking about, she had nothing to do with any of that.

Gigot: This was a couple of weeks ago.

Henninger: A couple of weeks ago. We've proved a lot further than that.

And obviously, there was something political going on. The whole point of this is whether somebody was meddling in the U.S. election, the politics of the U.S. election. And we are also talking about this because, going back at least a couple of months, there were a torrent of stories in the press and the media based on anonymous sources. Leaks.

Gigot: Right.

Henninger: The leaks don't drop from heaven, Paul. They come from the government or former government officials. And --

Gigot: You mean that what we covered as journalists, somebody gives information to us?

Henninger: Well, that's right.

Henninger: Here is the problem with that. If the source of a lot of these leaks were, in fact, say, Susan Rice or former Obama administration officials, why is the press going to chase that story, because that would involve exposing their own sources? I think the Obama people were shrewd here in more or less immunizing themselves from being chased by anyone covering this story.

Gigot: So even if Susan Rice didn't leak it, the fact that it was unmasked and widely distributed could have made it easier for other people to do it.

Henninger: We know Obama administration had distributed what the NSA was looking at to 16 other intelligence agencies. That's a sieve.

Gigot: All right, what about Devin Nunes, Joe? Why did he recuse himself, and should he have done so?

Rago: Yeah, so Nancy Pelosi set up something in Congress where outside groups can make ethics complaints about specific measures. This office was deluged with complaints that Nunes had improperly leaked classified information in the course of his investigation.

Gigot: But there is no evidence he did that.

Rago: There's no evidence of this but it became a distraction. The investigation will still be in capable hands, Trey Gowdy and so forth.

Gigot: This is the Russia probe?

Rago: But he's been run out of town on a rail for doing his job.

Gigot: And, Kim, should he have recused himself? If every time somebody makes a political accusation against you in Washington, you recuse yourself, you won't last at any job very long.

Strassel: It's a pity he recused himself. As Joe said, he was doing his job. If the measure of whether or not you're talking about classified information is that you have to recuse yourself, then everyone that mentioned Michael Flynn's name in that transcript should be recusing themselves from Washington.

Gigot: All right.

Still ahead, a closer look at a disappointing March jobs report. What's behind the hiring slowdown and what can the Trump administration do to reverse it? We will ask former fast-food executive Andy Puzder, next.

Gigot: U.S. hiring slowed sharply in March with the economy adding just 98,000 new jobs, down from 235,000 in February. The unemployment rate still falling to 4.5 percent.

Andy Puzder is the former chief executive of CKE Restaurants. He withdrew in February as President Trump's nominee for Labor secretary.

Andy Puzder, welcome. Great to see you again.

Andy Puzder: Good to see you, Paul.

Gigot: What's going on with the economy? How do you read this jobless report for March? A real slowdown.

Puzder: It was a slowdown in the establishment report. It really was the tale of two surveys. If you look at the household survey, it was good. The employment rate went down to 4.5 percent. It went down for the right reasons. Labor participation didn't drop. It held consistent. We created -- 472,000 more people were employed. 326,000 fewer people were unemployed. So when you look at the establishment survey, with 98,000 jobs, it was a big departure from ADP. So I'm hoping that number will be adjusted up. Again, it was a tale of two surveys.

Gigot: I think the backdrop economically, we have had a lot of soft data and some hard data, strong data for a time, and then some of the softer stuff. Are we in another economic slow patch as everybody waits to see what kind of policy changes we are going to get out of this new government?

Puzder: There's that. There's policy changes and what's going to happen with interest rates. In "The Journal," there was an article on a week or so ago, how the return on the 10-year treasury had exceeded the return on the S&P 500, which impacted the stock market.

Gigot: Right.

Puzder: So we've got a lot - there's a lot going on in this economy. Hiring is difficult because labor costs have been driven up so high it's eliminating a lot of lower-wage jobs. We've got people buying on the Internet, so you have got retail suffering in that respect. You see a lot of companies closing outlets. A lot of companies in trouble, like Sears, who aren't able to compete with Amazon.

Gigot: Right.

Puzder: There's a lot of things going on in the economy. If you look at it that way, these jobs numbers this month weren't that bad. They just weren't the establishment survey number, 98,000, just nowhere near as high as we would have liked it to have been.

Gigot: As I read these numbers, it puts a premium on the Republicans to get something done on tax reform, to keep going with their deregulation agenda, to start repealing some of these rule that raise the costs of business. They've really got to get that done.

Puzder: You were mentioning the 2015 election with respect to what happened with Obamacare. If they don't get tax reform done and Obamacare, if they don't get the ACA repealed and replaced or at least amended so it has less of a negative impact on the economy, they will be in trouble as a party. This is part of the Republicans learning how to govern. They haven't had the pressure to learn how to govern in the House and Senate with President Obama because he would veto whatever they did. Now they have to govern and that takes compromise. And the Freedom Caucus better come to grips with that in a big hurry or else they're going to be in a lot of trouble.

Gigot: I want to talk to you about the op-ed you wrote for us this week, which was interesting, which -- you said that minimum wage should be called the Robot Employment Act.

Tell us what you meant by that.

Puzder: Well, if you look at what happened over the past year, McDonald's is now rolling out 14,000 ordering kiosks in its restaurants. Wendy's is rolling out 1,000. There is a highly automated restaurant company out of San Francisco, not coincidentally, called Eatsa, that's now in four cities, all of which are going to a $15 minimum wage in the next 24 to 36 months. Then you have a company called Kelly Burger, which invented a burger- flipping machine that it's going to roll out to its 50 restaurants worldwide. So you really see automation -- and this automation is an indication that labor costs are getting to the point where it's worth it to spend the capital and to assume the risk that your consumers won't like it, and to assume the risk you'll be able to keep it in good repair, it's worth all those risks to try and replace to keep your labor costs down.

Gigot: You are telling me it's not just -- in the restaurant industry, it's not just the kiosks or where you order that is going to have robots or automatic, it will be the people making the food.

Puzder: Yeah. In fact, I want to make it clear, I got criticized pretty roundly for people who thought I was promoting automation because I explained the up sides of it. I'm not promoting automation. I'm complaining that when you take actions that drive up the cost of hiring people, particularly entry level employees, you really hurt young Americans. I'm saying this trend towards automation is bad for young Americans because they are not trained for the jobs that exist now. We need to get them trained. And while we are trying to train our workforce to take the jobs of the 21st century, we shouldn't be trying to kill jobs they can get currently, which is exactly what we're doing.

Gigot: But a lot of people, people on the left might say, look, these are low-wage jobs anyway. They don't feed -- they don't support your family, and they're not a living wage, so why do these anyway? Why not turn them over to the robots?

Puzder: That's a good point. Janet Yellen gave a speech last week where she talked about the importance of young Americans getting job skills in low-income communities. If you look at Chicago, 40 percent of young African-American males are both unemployed and not in school. That number is 30 percent in New York, 30 percent in Los Angeles. We need to get these kids into jobs so they understand what it means to show up on time, how you deal with people socially, how you learn the skills of working as a team. And there is a program that's being tested -- she kind of praised this program -- in Summerville, Massachusetts, they call Pocket Change --

Gigot: All right, Andy --

Puzder: -- which gives kids these jobs. But why not let the private sector do it? Why do you need another government program?

Gigot: Andy Puzder, thank you very much for being here. Appreciate it.

Puzder: Thank you.

Gigot: When we come back, some last-minute maneuvering in the House this week as Republicans struggle to move forward on a health care bill. So are they close to a deal on repeal and replace?

House Speaker Paul Ryan : We have made some real progress this week. That's why we are all here today. We have come together on a new amendment that we all believe will lower premiums and provide added protections for those facing real challenges getting access to affordable care. This brings us closer to the final agreement that we all want to achieve.

Gigot: House Speaker Paul Ryan Thursday insisting that Republicans are making real progress on a health care agreement two weeks after he was forced to pull the bill to replace and repeal Obamacare amid objections from the conservative House Freedom Caucus.

We are back with Dan Henninger, Kim Strassel and Joe Rago.

So, Joe, you heard the speaker. Are we really any closer than we were two weeks ago?

Rago: No. I think the chances of a bill passing are higher than zero, but that's all I'll say.

Gigot: Not a lot higher?

Rago: Not a lot higher.

Rago: We have a pretty intractable divide within the Republican conference. On the one hand, you have repeal and replace, what they campaigned on, what they promised, willing to make progress and compromise. I think you have another faction that's repeal only, or specializing, insisting on the impossible.

Gigot: This is the Freedom Caucus?

Rago: This is the Freedom Caucus.

Gigot: They don't want to replace at all.

Rago: No, a lot of them don't. They don't want to create an entitlement. Now, to be fair, there is a part of the Freedom Caucus that has been very constructive. They helped develop the amendment that Speaker Ryan rolled out this week, but the amendment really doesn't resolve this split within the Republican Party.

Gigot: Kim, you are talking to some of the groups, talking to the Freedom Caucus, and you are getting more optimistic noise out of them. What are they telling you?

Strassel: A lot more optimistic. A lot of these groups, their hang up was they believed the original bill, the one Ryan pulled, did not do enough to reduce premium prices. Their particular grief was that it didn't get rid of some of the regulations in the bills, things like guaranteed issues and community ratings, and they wanted that pulled. The problem was the moderates in the caucus were concerned about this. They're coming up -- the whole point of this amendment Paul Ryan put forward to create high-risk pools was to reassure some of the moderates there is a way to reduce premium price and still provide help for some of the sickest Americans out there. Also put in something to get rid the regulations. They feel as though they are getting much closer to getting moderates and conservatives on board with this.

Gigot: Here's the thing, Joe -- and you have done this reporting -- every time the leadership or Trump would make a concession to the Freedom Caucus, it's, oh, sorry, got another one. Make that concession, got another one. And then you have people saying, oh, I just want to do repeal only. Do they really, really want to get to yes or is this just a ruse to shift political blame?

Rago: I wonder, because the previous bill had high-risk pools. The previous bill had -- Tom Price, at the Health and Human Services Department, has the regulatory authority to relax these regulations they are talking about. And the previous bill did a lot to reduce premiums. They didn't get any credit for it from the congressional scorekeepers. But there was a lot in that bill that would have stabilized the health insurance markets and started to bring things down.

Gigot: Their argument would be, OK, fine, Price can do that. But if you get a Democrat coming in, in four years, they can reverse it. But, on the other hand, four years is a long time

Rago: Four years is quite a long time. It's enough time to fix the problem, provide a tangible solution in people's lives.

Gigot: Meanwhile, in Iowa, real problems with the market. People are leaving the market, Dan, the exchanges, and you could end up with a market place with higher prices, fewer choices, and the Republicans blamed because they did nothing about it.

Henninger: Yeah. I think this is the reality that some of the members of the Freedom Caucus, it seems to be, have not come to grips with, that Donald Trump is right, Obamacare is a disaster and catastrophe happening right before our eyes, in places like Iowa, involving real people who have insurance policies that need to be addressed. I think the problem is, if you don't get the legislative piece that Joe is talking about, it all falls on Tom Price. Yes, he can do something with the regulations but, ultimately, he will be patching and fixing it the same way Hillary Clinton's HHS secretary would have been doing.

Gigot: The conceit that the Freedom Caucus indulges in is, oh, we can blame it all on the Democrats, we can blame, oh, it's all Obamacare. But in 2018, they will have been in power for two years --

Henninger: Yeah.

Gigot: -- the Republicans, and the voters might hold them responsible.

We have to take one more break. When we come back, "Hits Misses" of the week.

Gigot: Time now for our "Hits Misses" of the week.

Dan, start us off.

Henninger: Well, Paul, I'm giving a hit -- or a miss to the guy in New York who's on trial for planting bombs last year in lower Manhattan and New Jersey. This is Ahmad Rahini (ph), who now says he can't get a fair trial in Manhattan, so he would like the trial transferred to Burlington, Vermont. Which I would find very embarrassing if I lived in Burlington. If I'm a terrorist, send me to Burlington for trial? Doesn't work.

Gigot: All right.

Colin?

Levy: Paul, a hit to Arizona Governor Doug Ducey, who signed a bill this week expanding the state's school choice program to 1.1 million school children. That lets all those parents apply to get their public-school money sent to the school of their choice. These sorts of things really annoy the teachers' unions, because it breaks up their public-school monopoly, but they're great for kids. So let's hope it's a trend.

Gigot: All right, cool.

Kim?

Strassel: Wednesday morning, a fighter pilot with the D.C. Air National Guard gets in his F-16 for a routine training mission and, within moments, has total mechanical failure. He could have just ejected, but he looked out, he was over acres of Maryland's suburban houses. He manages to jettison his jet tanks, land the plane in a wooded area, only ejected at the very last moment. So this is a hit, again, to all of our brave servicemembers who are so well trained and self-sacrificing.

Gigot: Thanks, Kim.

Joe?

Rago: Paul, a hit this week to the life of Don Rickles, who died at 90. The comedy legend got his start in the 1960s by insulting his audience, and it was hilarious. It was also a real contrast with modern comedy, which seems to exist to flatter the sensibilities of the audience. The only people you can insult are Republicans.

So Don Rickles, all right --

Gigot: You can still insult Catholics.

What about -- do you remember Rickles? You're too young for that, Joe.

Rago: No, he was on Letterman.

Gigot: That's right. And you love, love David Letterman.

All right. And remember, if you have your own hit or miss, be sure to tweet it to us on, @JERonFNC.

That's it for this week's show. Thanks to my panel. Thanks to you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. Hope to see you right here next week.

Document WSJO000020170410ed4a00795



World News: World Watch

364 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

AFGHANISTAN

U.S. Soldier Killed

In Anti-ISIS Fight

A U.S. special-forces soldier was killed during a combat operation targeting Islamic State in eastern Afghanistan, the U.S. military said.

The soldier died of wounds sustained during a joint mission with Afghan forces in the eastern province of Nangarhar. The U.S. military didn't provide any further details on the circumstances of the death.

The American soldier was the second to die fighting Islamic State in Afghanistan since the U.S. expanded its operations against the group in January last year.

-- Jessica Donati

---

AUSTRALIA

Investment Review

Panel Chief Named

Australia appointed a former director of its spy agency to head the committee that reviews proposed investments from abroad, indicating a sharpened focus on national-security issues related to such deals.

Deals by Chinese suitors are frequently contested in Australia because many Chinese companies have close ties to the government in Beijing.

In a statement announcing David Irvine's appointment as Foreign Investment Review Board chief, Treasurer Scott Morrison didn't mention investment from China. However, Mr. Irvine is familiar with Beijing, having served as an ambassador there.

-- Rob Taylor

---

INDIA

Call-Fraud Organizer

Arrested in Mumbai

Indian police arrested the alleged mastermind behind a network of scam call centers that stole millions of dollars from Americans by fooling them into thinking they were in trouble with the taxman.

Sagar "Shaggy" Thakkar, who police say started facilities in Mumbai and elsewhere, had fled the country and traveled to Dubai and Bangkok. Police said he was arrested at the Mumbai airport as he re-entered the country early Saturday morning.

-- Corinne Abrams and Debiprasad Nayak

---

INDONESIA

Police Kill 6 Suspects

In East Java Firefight

Police killed six suspected Islamic militants in a gunbattle in a village in East Java, the National Police said Sunday.

The firefight took place Saturday in a paddy field after police chased and cornered a fleeing car whose occupants had earlier opened fire on a small police station in a village in Tuban district. Police said they found a box of ammunition in the car.

-- Anita Rachman

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170410ed4a0002f



World News: Attack Puts Focus on Central Asia Radicals --- Officials cite difficulties in tracking individuals like Uzbek arrested in Stockholm assault

By David Gauthier-Villars and Drew Hinshaw 
678 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

STOCKHOLM -- The Uzbek nationality of the suspected terrorist in a truck attack that killed four here has Western security officials focusing on the former Soviet states of Central Asia, a geopolitically knotty source of extremists.

BeforeFriday'srampage in which a man drove a truck into a crowd, nationals from the region were suspected to have attacked a night club and an airport in Turkey last year, as well as a subway in St. Petersburg, Russia, this month.

No group has claimed responsibility for the attack here in which two Swedes, one Briton and a Belgian were killed. Authorities said the suspect in custody is a 39-year-old Uzbek who had been wanted since Feb. 24 for failing to comply with a deportation order. Swedish police said the man, identified as Rakhmat Akilov by local media, had applied for residency in 2014. He had been investigated over signs of extremism last year, and had voiced sympathy online for radical groups, such as Islamic State.

His trajectory from residency applicant to man in hiding highlights the challenge in detecting and tracking radicals hailing from the landlocked region.

Thousands of fighters from Central Asia have rallied to violent groups in Iraq and Syria. Many don't travel directly to the Middle East but rather are recruited in Russia, Turkey or Europe by networks that prey on emigrants who fled their own politically repressive regimes.

"There's been an underappreciated amount of Central Asians who have fought with ISIS in Syria and, since the beginning of the Russian airstrikes last year, they have been either returning to Afghanistan or Turkey and, in some cases, now seem to be deploying to Europe," said Jacob Zenn, an analyst at the Jamestown Foundation in Washington.

European officials have been trying to coordinate efforts to deport migrants who have been denied residency.

The issue came into stark focus last year when a failed asylum seeker from Tunisia who had been on a watch list allegedly drove a truck into a crowd at a Christmas market in Berlin, leaving 12 dead.

In Sweden, where about 200,000 people applied for asylum in the past two years, police have been overwhelmed by a steep rise in the number of deportation orders referred to them by immigration authorities. Police said that in the first 10 months of 2016, nearly 70% of the 6,647 people who were to be deported couldn't be located.

Confronting radicalized individuals from Central Asia comes with particular complications for European nations because they have nettlesome relations with Turkey and Russia, the two nations with some of the best intelligence on the region.

Some European countries want to overlook their differences with Russia to rekindle cooperation on counterterrorism. Others say that approach is futile.

"I doubt that anybody can get useful intelligence from Russia," said Anders Aslund, a former Swedish diplomat who is a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council in Washington. "They have a lot of intelligence but I don't think they would share it with anybody because they are extremely secretive."

The Kremlin maintains that the West has often disregarded its overtures to cooperate on fighting terrorism.

In recent days, Russia has been ramping up arrests and surveillance of suspected extremists from the former Soviet states in Central Asia.

Several such individuals were arrested following last week's bombing in the St. Petersburg subway in which 14 people died, including the perpetrator.

Russian investigators claim the suspects had been involved in recruiting migrant workers from the republics of Central Asia for jihadist groups, including the al Qaeda-linked Nusra Front and Islamic State.

"It's very clear that there is a serious danger of [radical] recruitment in Russia," said Arkady Dubnov, a Central Asia expert, saying recruiters prey on impoverished migrant laborers working in Russian cities. "It's not even a matter of argument."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170410ed4a0001d



Trump's Target in Syria Is Still  ISIS  --- Recent airstrikes don't mean administration plans to remove Assad from power

By Dion Nissenbaum and Ben Leubsdorf 
926 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration saidits focus in Syria is the defeat of Islamic State, not pushing President Bashar al-Assad from power.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and national security adviser H.R. McMaster, in separate interviews on Sunday, said the administration's decision last week to strike an Assad regime airfield wasn't a sign that the U.S. is now focused on toppling the Syrian leader.

"Our priority is first the defeat of ISIS," Mr. Tillerson told George Stephanopoulos on ABC. "Once we can eliminate the battle against ISIS, conclude that -- and it is going quite well -- then we hope to turn our attention to cease-fire agreements between the regime and opposition forces."

Lt. Gen. McMaster echoed Mr. Tillerson's comments in an interview on Fox News with Chris Wallace.

Questions about U.S. policy arose after President Donald Trump ordered airstrikes on a regime air base in northwestern Syria believed to be home to pilots that carried out a chemical weapons attack that killed at least 85 people, including 27 children.

Until last week, Mr. Trump and the administration had talked of Mr. Assad as a potential partner in the fight against Islamic State.

That all changed on Tuesday when Mr. Assad's regime used suspected chemical weapons. Mr. Trump said the graphic images of dead and dying Syrian children changed his views of Mr. Assad and triggered his decision to strike.

On Sunday, though, Mr. Tillerson said America's primary focus in Syria is destroying Islamic State, also known as ISIS, which is the focus of an intensifying U.S. military campaign targeting the extremist group's de facto capital in Raqqa.

His remarks came a day after, Islamic State militants attacked a U.S.-led coalition base in al-Tanf, a town in southern Syria along the Jordan border used by American special-operation forces and Syrian rebels working with the U.S. coalition, triggering a fierce fight that required coalition airstrikes to repel, U.S. military officials said.

The president and secretary of state, along with United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley, said the U.S. sees no future for Mr. Assad in Syria.

"Regime change is something that we think is going to happen, because all of the parties are going to see that Assad's not the leader that needs to be taking place for Syria,"Ms. Haley said on CNN.

The U.S. is looking into what Russia may have known about last week's attack. Russian forces operate side by side with Syrian forces at the Shayrat Airfield, which was targeted by the U.S. strike.

U.S. military officials said last week that they were trying to determine if a Russian pilot hit a rebel field hospital where victims of the chemical-weapons attack were taken for treatment.

While U.S. military officials said they have no firm evidence that Russia was involved in the strike, Ms. Haley said Moscow either knew about the use of chemical weapons, or it is dangerously ignorant of what its Syrian ally is doing.

The U.S. military estimates it destroyed 20 Syrian regime aircraft when it fired nearly 60 cruise missiles at the Syrian airfield on Thursday.

But the U.S. strikes didn't destroy the runway, an intentional decision that allowed the regime to resume airstrikes against rebel forces within hours of the attack.

Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.) said the resumption of flights from the base appeared to be a crude message to the U.S. "Assad's telling Trump by flying from this base: 'F-you,' " Mr. Graham said on Sunday on NBC. "And I think he's making a serious mistake."

Mr. Graham and Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.) have called on the U.S. to strike all of Mr. Assad's airfields to cripple his ability to carry out airstrikes on regime forces.

The U.S. military looked at taking that step, Mr. McCain said, but Mr. Trump ultimately embraced the modest strike on the single airfield.

---

Assad Regime Keeps

Up Airstrikes

The Syrian regime, emboldened by support from allies Russia and Iran, stepped up airstrikes against the opposition over the weekend, according to antigovernment activists who alleged the government had launched more attacks with chemical weapons. President Bashar al-Assad's government showed no sign it was deterred by the U.S. cruise missile strike on one of its air bases last week in retaliation for an alleged chemicals weapons attack on the opposition-held town of Khan Sheikhoun that killed at least 89 people -- many of them children.

Mr. Assad said Sunday the U.S. failed in achieving the goal of the attack and affirmed that the Syrian military was determined to eliminate terrorism in every part of the country, according to state media. The Syrian regime refers to most of its opponents as terrorists. "The Iranian people are still standing by the Syrian nation," Iranian President Hassan Rouhani told Mr. Assad in a phone call, according to the official Islamic Republic News Agency. In a call with Russian President Vladimir Putin, Mr. Rouhani pledged closer cooperation with Syria and Russia, according to the Iranian president's official website. "In such an atmosphere, strengthening cooperation among Iran, Russia and Syria in the confrontation with violence and terror is necessary," he said.

-- Raja Abdulrahim and Noam Raydan

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170410ed4a0001q



World News:  ISIS  Bombs Kill Dozens In Two Egypt Churches --- Worshipers on Coptic Christian Palm Sunday had packed churches in Tanta, Alexandria

By Dahlia Kholaif in Cairo and Tamer El-Ghobashy in Erbil, Iraq 
677 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Twin blasts claimed by Islamic State struck Egyptian churches during Palm Sunday services, killing at least 47 people in an escalating campaign of terrorism against the country's Christian population.

The attacks raise fresh questions about the ability of President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi's government to protect the minority group, and come just weeks ahead of an expected first visit to Egypt by Pope Francis.

The first explosion targeted the Mar Girgis Church in the Nile Delta city of Tanta, some 60 miles north of Cairo, as worshipers attended morning services. Security officials said an assailant planted a bomb under a seat in the main hall.

The ensuing blast killed 29 people and wounded another 69, a health ministry official told state media. Footage aired on state television showed bloodstains on the floor of the church hall, shattered furniture and bloodied palm fronds as victims and survivors wailed in shock and grief.

Shortly afterward, a suicide bomber attempted to enter Saint Mark's Orthodox Cathedral in the center of the coastal city of Alexandria, blowing himself up at the entrance after being stopped by police, the interior ministry said.

The cathedral is a landmark in the city and had been the historic seat of the Coptic Pope.

Surveillance videos broadcast on Egyptian networks showed the purported bomber -- wearing a jacket and with a bright blue garment draped around his shoulders -- approaching an open church gate before being directed to a nearby metal detector. Pausing in front of the metal detector, he triggered the blast as two female police officers stood nearby.

The incident took place as Pope Tawadros, the head of the Coptic church, led a Palm Sunday service. He was unharmed but at least 18 people were killed and 40 others wounded, the interior ministry said.

Three of the dead were police officers, including one who physically prevented the bomber from entering, according to the interior ministry. A second bomb was later discovered and defused by officers on the cathedral grounds, the ministry said.

Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attacks but offered no further details, in a brief statement by Amaq, its official media arm. In a later statement, it described the attackers as a "covert cell."

Prime Minister Sherif Ismail said he had telephoned Pope Tawadros to offer condolences, and vowed to bring the planners of the attacks to justice.

Tanta's provincial security chief, Hossam Khalifa, was fired Sunday after reports emerged that a bomb had been found and defused at the same church last month, according to state newspaper Al Ahram. The interior ministry said in a statement that Mr. Khalifa had been reassigned, along with another senior officer.

Egypt's Al-Azhar, the highest Sunni Muslim Islamic authority, condemned the bombings, as did Pope Francis and other Middle Eastern and European nations.

President Donald Trump posted two tweets condemning the attacks and expressed confidence in Mr. Sisi. "So sad to hear of the terrorist attack in Egypt. U.S. strongly condemns. I have great. . .confidence that President Al Sisi will handle situation properly," he said.

Islamic State's Egyptian affiliate, Sinai Province, has since 2014 carried out hundreds of attacks on police and military personnel, mostly in the restive north Sinai Peninsula. It recently began targeting Egypt's Christians, who make up some 10% of the country's 92 million population and remain the largest Christian community in the Middle East.

The wave of violence has provoked rare criticism of Mr. Sisi by Copts, who said he hadn't upheld a promise to protect them made when he came to power through a 2013 military coup.

Egypt's Christians largely had supported his ascent, fearful of persecution under then-President Mohammed Morsi, a senior official of the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood and the nation's first democratically elected president.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170410ed4a0001i





307 words
10 April 2017
03:03
 ()
WSJCT
Chinese - Traditional
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

FORD WILLIAMS/ASSOCIATED PRESS(Islamic State, ISIS)(Bashar al-Assad)

(Rex Tillerson)H.R. McMaster(American Broadcasting Company, ABC)ISISISIS

McMaster(Fox News)Dion Nissenbaum / Ben Leubsdorf



Document WSJCT00020170410ed4a00001



U.S. Moves Warships Toward Korea --- Navy is sending strike group as a show of force after Pyongyang carried out missile tests

By Dion Nissenbaum 
495 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The U.S. Navy has canceled planned port calls in Australia for the USS Carl Vinson and is instead sending the aircraft carrier toward the Korean Peninsula amid concerns about possible new weapons tests by North Korea, military officials said.

The Vinson strike group, including the carrier and two guided-missile destroyers, is being dispatched to operate in the Western Pacific Ocean in response to Pyongyang's recent missile tests.

There is widespread speculation, based on satellite imagery and analysis, that North Korea might try to carry out another weapons test in the coming days as it prepares for its most important national holiday -- the anniversary of the birth of the country's founder, Kim Il-sung, on April 15.

North Korea carried out three missile tests in the past month, including a Scud missile launch on April 5 that triggered a terse response from the Trump administration.

"The United States has spoken enough about North Korea," Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said in a two-sentence statement after that test. "We have no further comment."

Now, one official said, the Navy is sending the strike group as a show of force.

The Trump administration has issued a series of warnings to North Korea about its missile tests.

Last month, during a visit to South Korea, Mr. Tillerson said the U.S. "policy of strategic patience has ended" and that "all options are on the table."

At their summit Thursday and Friday in Florida, President Donald Trump pressed President Xi Jinping of China to do more to curb North Korea's nuclear program. Mr. Tillerson said the two leaders agreed during meetings at held at Mr. Trump's Mar-a-Lago golf club to work together on the issue, but there was no pact on concrete steps to deter North Korea's nuclear ambitions.

The decision to send the Vinson toward the Korean Peninsula comes as Mr. Trump is taking a more aggressive American military posture around the world.

Mr. Trump on Thursday ordered America's first direct military strike against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. The U.S. fired nearly 60 cruise missiles at a Syrian regime airfield believed to be home to pilots who carried out a suspected chemical weapons attack that killed more than 85 people, including 27 children.

U.S. leaders said the one-time strike, which did modest damage to the airfield, was meant to deter Mr. Assad from using chemical weapons again.

The U.S. also added to its forces in Iraq and Syria as the military tries to drive Islamic State from its biggest strongholds: Mosul in Iraq and Raqqa, the militant group's de facto capital in Syria.

(See related article: "Trump's Target in Syria Is Still ISIS" -- WSJA April 10, 2017)

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170409ed4a0001o



U.S. Moves Warships Toward Korea --- Trump's Target in Syria Is Still  ISIS 

By Dion Nissenbaum and Ben Leubsdorf 
925 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration said Sunday that its focus in Syria is the defeat of Islamic State, not pushing President Bashar al-Assad from power.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and national security adviser H.R. McMaster, in separate interviews, said that the administration's decision last week to strike an Assad regime airfield wasn't a sign that the U.S. is now focused on toppling the Syrian leader.

"Our priority is first the defeat of ISIS," Mr. Tillerson told George Stephanopoulos on ABC. "Once we can eliminate the battle against ISIS, conclude that -- and it is going quite well -- then we hope to turn our attention to cease-fire agreements between the regime and opposition forces."

Lt. Gen. McMaster echoed Mr. Tillerson's comments in an interview on Fox News with Chris Wallace.

Questions about U.S. policy arose after President Donald Trump ordered airstrikes on a regime air base in northwestern Syria believed to be home to pilots that carried out a chemical weapons attack that killed at least 85 people, including 27 children.

Until last week, Mr. Trump and the administration had talked of Mr. Assad as a potential partner in the fight against Islamic State.

That all changed Tuesday when Mr. Assad's regime used suspected chemical weapons. Mr. Trump said the graphic images of dead and dying Syrian children changed his views of Mr. Assad and triggered his decision to strike.

On Sunday, though, Mr. Tillerson said America's primary focus in Syria is destroying Islamic State, also known as ISIS, which is the focus of an intensifying U.S. military campaign targeting the extremist group's de facto capital in Raqqa.

The two men, along with United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley, said the U.S. sees no future for Mr. Assad in Syria.

"Regime change is something that we think is going to happen, because all of the parties are going to see that Assad's not the leader that needs to be taking place for Syria,"Ms. Haley said on CNN.

The U.S. is looking into what Russia may have known about last week's attack. Russian forces operate side by side with Syrian forces at the Shayrat Airfield, which was targeted by the U.S. strike. U.S. military officials said last week that they were trying to determine if a Russian pilot hit a rebel field hospital where victims of the chemical weapons attack were taken for treatment.

While U.S. military officials said they have no firm evidence that Russia was involved in the strike, Ms. Haley said that Moscow either knew about the use of chemical weapons, or it is dangerously ignorant of what its Syrian ally is doing.

"Russia's got to tell us which one it is. Either they knew that there were chemical weapons and they knew there was going to be chemical weapons use and they just hid it from the international community, or they're being played for fools by Assad by him having chemical weapons and they're just in the dark and they don't know anything about it," she said.

The U.S. military estimates that it destroyed 20 Syrian regime aircraft when it fired nearly 60 cruise missiles at the Syrian airfield Thursday. But the U.S. strikes didn't destroy the runway, an intentional decision that allowed the regime to resume airstrikes against rebel forces within hours of the attack.

Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.) said the resumption of flights from the base appeared to be a crude message to the U.S. "Assad's telling Trump by flying from this base: 'F-you,' " Mr. Graham said Sunday on NBC's "Meet the Press." "And I think he's making a serious mistake."

Mr. Graham and Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.) have called on the U.S. to strike all of Mr. Assad's airfields to cripple his ability to carry out airstrikes on regime forces.

The U.S. military looked at taking that step, Mr. McCain said, but Mr. Trump ultimately embraced the modest strike on the single airfield.

---

Syrian Regime

Keeps Up Airstrikes

---

Activists allege some of the

latest attacks used chlorine gas

The Syrian regime, emboldened by unwavering support from allies Russia and Iran, stepped up the pace of airstrikes against the opposition over the weekend, according to antigovernment activists who alleged the government had launched more attacks with chemical weapons.

President Bashar al-Assad's government showed no sign that it was deterred by the U.S. cruise missile strike on one of its air bases last week in retaliation for an alleged chemical weapons attack on the opposition-held town of Khan Sheikhoun, which killed at least 89 people, many of them children.

Mr. Assad said Sunday that the U.S. failed in achieving the goal of the attack and affirmed that the Syrian military was determined to eliminate terrorism in every part of the country, according to state media. The Syrian regime refers to most of its opponents as terrorists.

"The Iranian people are still standing by the Syrian nation," Iranian President Hassan Rouhani told Mr. Assad in a phone call, according to the official Islamic Republic News Agency.

-- Raja Abdulrahim and Noam Raydan

(See related article: "Navy is sending strike group as a show of force after Pyongyang carried out missile tests" -- WSJA April 10, 2017)

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170409ed4a0001n



World News: U.S. Soldier Killed in Afghan Clash With  ISIS 

By Jessica Donati 
305 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A U.S. special-forces soldier was killed during a combat operation targeting Islamic State in eastern Afghanistan, the U.S. military said Sunday.

The soldier died of wounds sustained during a joint mission with Afghan forces in the eastern province of Nangarhar. The U.S. military didn't provide any further details on the circumstances of the death.

U.S. and Afghan forces have been engaged in a large-scale operation in the east for several weeks targeting Islamic State and Taliban strongholds there.

The American soldier was the second to die fighting Islamic State in Afghanistan since the U.S. expanded its operations against the group in January last year.

Islamic State began to lay roots in Nangarhar and the surrounding areas as most foreign forces were leaving the country, and has since proved difficult to dislodge despite sustained operations and U.S. airstrikes.

Last year, the extremist group began claiming responsibility for high-profile attacks in the capital, Kabul, including an assault on a hospital last month that killed nearly 40 people.

The U.S. military has escalated its efforts in support of Afghan government forces in recent weeks ahead of the Taliban's expected annual spring offensive announcement, which usually heralds an uptick in violence.

Last year, the Taliban threatened to overrun some half a dozen provinces and were largely held back by U.S. airstrikes and joint U.S. and Afghan special-forces operations. The escalating conflict is claiming record numbers of Afghan civilian and military lives, with no end in sight.

U.S. airstrikes have been particularly intense in recent days, targeting both Islamic State and Taliban strongholds around the country.

---

Ehsanullah Amiri contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170409ed4a0001i



World
Tillerson Meeting Hangs Over Russia's Criticism of U.S. Strike in Syria; Moscow offers measured response to missile strike ahead of Sergei Lavrov's meeting with Secretary of State

By Thomas Grove 
646 words
9 April 2017
17:50
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSCOWussia responded to a U.S. missile attack on a Syrian air base  with stern words over the weekend but has kept a long-awaited visit to Moscow by U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson on track.

Mr. Tillerson and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov spoke by telephone Saturday about the changed situation in Syria  following last week's missile attack, the Russian foreign ministry said in a statement.

"The attack on a country whose government is fighting terrorism only plays into the hands of extremists and creates additional threats for regional and global security," the statement cited Mr. Lavrov as saying.

Russia has supported the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad but also has looked to repair ties with the United States. Mr. Tillerson's coming visit has been cast by Russian officials as a step in establishing good working relations with the administration of President Donald Trump .

Rhetoric aside, Russia's response to the strikes has been measured. Within hours of Russia's promise to suspend a 2015 agreement on military coordination of strikes in Syria  in retaliation for the strike, Russian foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said Moscow was open to dialogue with the United States, and Russian lawmakers said the attack wouldn't affect Mr. Tillerson's visit to Moscow Wednesday.

"[For Russia,] Syria is less important as an issue in and of itself and more important as a lever in its relationship with the West," said Andrey Kortunov, director of the Russian International Affairs Council in Moscow.

Russia has faced international isolation over its involvement in the crisis in Ukraine, but Russian President Vladimir Putin 's intervention in Syria in 2015 made his country an indispensable player in the Middle East.

Moscow denies Syrian government involvement in the chemical attack in Syria's Idlib province  that spurred U.S. strikes . Russia's defense ministry said Saturday Syria's Shayrat base, which was struck by U.S. missiles, had no chemical weapons and that the strikes resembled the run-up to the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003.

While Mr. Tillerson's trip is scheduled to proceed as planned, U.K. Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson canceled a planned trip for Russia, his office said Saturday.

Mr. Johnson had been due to fly to Moscow Monday to meet with Mr. Lavrov, but canceled that trip following consultation with Mr. Tillerson to prioritize attendance at a coming meeting of the Group of Seven advanced economies in Lucca, Italy.

Developments in Syria have changed the situation fundamentally," Mr. Johnson said, adding that the U.S. secretary of state "will visit Moscow as planned and, following the G-7 meeting, will be able to deliver that clear and co-ordinated message to the Russians."

Russia dismissed the news and mocked the British government , saying that the United Kingdom likely wanted to align its position with the U.S. The Russian embassy in London, which maintains a combative presence on Twitter , called Mr. Johnson's cancellation " theatrics for lack of argument ."

Jason Douglas in London contributed to this article.

Write to Thomas Grove at thomas.grove@wsj.com 

Related Coverage

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base 

* Trump's Syria Strike Sends Russia a Signal

* Syria Says Strike Kills 16, Damages Air Base 

* Nikki Haley Warns U.S. Prepared to o More' in Syria 

* Timeline: First Major Military Campaigns by U.S. Presidents 

* Strike on Syria Angers Moscow, Shaking Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight 

* U.S. Probes Possible Russian Role in Attack by Syria 

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Unlikely to Endanger Assad Rule 

* How the Trump Administration's Language Shifted Quickly on Assad 

* President Trump's Syria Statement 

Document WSJO000020170409ed49001p5



World
U.S. Says Syria Goal Is to Defeat Islamic State, not to Push Out Assad; Trump administration says its objective hasn't changed despite recent airstrikes

By Dion Nissenbaum and Ben Leubsdorf 
860 words
9 April 2017
22:59
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTONhe Trump administration said its focus in Syria is the defeat of Islamic State, not pushing President Bashar al-Assad from power.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and national security adviser H.R. McMaster, in separate interviews on Sunday, said the administration's decision last week to strike an Assad regime airfield wasn't a sign that the U.S. is now focused on toppling the Syrian leader.

"Our priority is first the defeat of ISIS," Mr. Tillerson told George Stephanopoulos on ABC. "Once we can eliminate the battle against ISIS, conclude thatnd it is going quite wellhen we hope to turn our attention to cease-fire agreements between the regime and opposition forces."

Lt. Gen. McMaster echoed Mr. Tillerson's comments in an interview on Fox News with Chris Wallace.

Questions about U.S. policy arose after President Donald Trump ordered airstrikes on a regime air base in northwestern Syria believed to be home to pilots that carried out a chemical weapons attack that killed at least 85 people, including 27 children.

Until last week, Mr. Trump and the administration had talked of Mr. Assad as a potential partner in the fight against Islamic State.

That all changed on Tuesday when Mr. Assad's regime used suspected chemical weapons. Mr. Trump said the graphic images of dead and dying Syrian children changed his views of Mr. Assad and triggered his decision to strike.

On Sunday, though, Mr. Tillerson said America's primary focus in Syria is destroying Islamic State, also known as ISIS, which is the focus of an intensifying U.S. military campaign targeting the extremist group's de facto capital in Raqqa.

His remarks came a day after, Islamic State militants attacked a U.S.-led coalition base in al-Tanf, a town in southern Syria along the Jordan border used by American special-operation forces and Syrian rebels working with the U.S. coalition, triggering a fierce fight that required coalition airstrikes to repel, U.S. military officials said.

The president and secretary of state, along with United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley, said the U.S. sees no future for Mr. Assad in Syria.

"Regime change is something that we think is going to happen, because all of the parties are going to see that Assad's not the leader that needs to be taking place for Syria," Ms. Haley said on CNN.

The U.S. is looking into what Russia may have known about last week's attack. Russian forces operate side by side with Syrian forces at the Shayrat Airfield, which was targeted by the U.S. strike.

U.S. military officials said last week that they were trying to determine if a Russian pilot hit a rebel field hospital where victims of the chemical-weapons attack were taken for treatment.

While U.S. military officials said they have no firm evidence that Russia was involved in the strike, Ms. Haley said Moscow either knew about the use of chemical weapons, or it is dangerously ignorant of what its Syrian ally is doing.

"Russia's got to tell us which one it is. Either they knew that there were chemical weapons and they knew there was going to be chemical-weapons use and they just hid it from the international community, or they're being played for fools by Assad by him having chemical weapons and they're just in the dark and they don't know anything about it," she said.

The U.S. military estimates it destroyed 20 Syrian regime aircraft when it fired nearly 60 cruise missiles at the Syrian airfield on Thursday.

But the U.S. strikes didn't destroy the runway, an intentional decision that allowed the regime to resume airstrikes against rebel forces within hours of the attack.

Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.) said the resumption of flights from the base appeared to be a crude message to the U.S. "Assad's telling Trump by flying from this base: -you,' " Mr. Graham said on Sunday on NBC. "And I think he's making a serious mistake."

Mr. Graham and Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.) have called on the U.S. to strike all of Mr. Assad's airfields to cripple his ability to carry out airstrikes on rebel forces.

The U.S. military looked at taking that step, Mr. McCain said, but Mr. Trump ultimately embraced the modest strike on the single airfield.

Write to Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com and Ben Leubsdorf at ben.leubsdorf@wsj.com

Related

* Islamic State Hits U.S.-Led Base in Southern Syria

* Trump, Jolted by Images, Forged Decision to Launch Airstrikes in Syria

* Trump's Syria Strike Sends Russia a Signal

* Nikki Haley Warns U.S. Prepared to o More' in Syria

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base in Response to Chemical Attack

* President Trump's Syria Statement: onight, I Ordered a Targeted Military Strike'

Document WSJO000020170409ed49001md



World
U.S. Soldier Killed in Fight Against Islamic State in Afghanistan; American soldier is second to die fighting Islamic State in Afghanistan since expansion of U.S. operations

By Jessica Donati 
345 words
9 April 2017
16:02
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A U.S. special-forces soldier was killed during a combat operation targeting Islamic State in eastern Afghanistan, the U.S. military said Sunday.

The soldier died of wounds sustained during a joint mission with Afghan forces in the eastern province of Nangarhar. The U.S. military didn't provide any further details on the circumstances of the death.

U.S. and Afghan forces have been engaged in a large-scale operation in the east for several weeks targeting Islamic State and Taliban strongholds there.

The American soldier was the second to die fighting Islamic State in Afghanistan since the U.S. expanded its operations against the group in January last year.

Islamic State began to lay roots in Nangarhar and the surrounding areas as most foreign forces were leaving the country, and have since proved difficult to dislodge despite sustained operations and U.S. airstrikes.

Last year, the extremist group began claiming responsibility for high-profile attacks in the capital, Kabul, including a hospital assault last month that killed nearly 40 people.

The U.S. military has escalated its efforts in support of Afghan government forces in recent weeks ahead of the Taliban's expected annual spring offensive announcement, which usually heralds an uptick in violence.

Last year, the Taliban threatened to overrun some half a dozen provinces and were largely held back by U.S. airstrikes and joint U.S. and Afghan special-forces operations. The escalating conflict is claiming record numbers of Afghan civilian and military lives, with no end in sight.

U.S. airstrikes have been particularly intense in recent days, targeting both Islamic State and Taliban strongholds around the country.

Ehsanullah Amiri contributed to this article.

Write to Jessica Donati at Jessica.Donati@wsj.com

Related

* Dozens Killed in \b ISIS\b0  Attack on Kabul Military Hospital (March 8)

* A New U.S. Front in Afghanistan? (Nov. 18, 2016)

Document WSJO000020170409ed49000jh



U.S. Strikes Syria: Airstrike Raises Tensions With Tehran --- Iranian officials say Trump administration violated international law with operation

By Jay Solomon 
587 words
8 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The U.S. airstrikes on Syria stoked new tensions with Iran and generated calls in Tehran for increased military support for President Bashar al-Assad's regime.

Iranian officials said on Friday the U.S. strike violated international law and accused President Donald Trump of siding with Islamic State and al Qaeda in Syria.

"Not even two decades after 9/11, [the] U.S. military is fighting on same side as al-Qaeda & ISIS in Yemen & Syria," Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif tweeted on Friday. "Time to stop hype and coverups."

But Mr. Trump and his advisers have already taken steps in recent months to try to roll back Iranian influence in the Middle East, despite the landmark nuclear agreement forged between Tehran and global powers in 2015.

Many Middle East analysts said Iran could seek to mobilize even more military support for Mr. Assad in coming months. This is in addition to the thousands of Shiite fighters it has already deployed in Syria since civil war broke out in the country in 2011.

Syria serves as Iran's closest regional ally and the land bridge for Iranian supplies going to Lebanese and Palestinian militias at war with Israel.

"The key question now is, what's the Iranian response to the attack? Do they double down," said Andrew Tabler, a Syria expert at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

Iranian experts said the government has no choice, given the billions of dollars it has already invested in Mr. Assad over the past six years.

"Iran and Russia have paid a high cost in Syria, both financially and in human life, and Iran has lost even more than Russia," said Foad Izadi, a professor at Tehran University. "Therefore, Iran will not sit back indifferent."

Mr. Trump, a Republican, campaigned last year against former President Barack Obama's diplomatic outreach to Iran and the nuclear deal, which constrained Tehran's capabilities but also released billions of dollars in frozen Iranian assets.

Since taking office, Mr. Trump has signaled he will abide by the agreement. But he has also taken steps to try to constrain Tehran's military capabilities and presence across the Mideast.

Mr. Trump's administration has sanctioned dozens of Iranian companies since January for allegedly aiding Tehran's development of ballistic missiles. And it has also increased support for a military coalition led by Saudi Arabia that is fighting an Iranian-backed militia in Yemen.

Military analysts said Mr. Assad may have deployed chemical weapons on Tuesday because his troops have been stretched thin by the civil war.

Iran has mobilized as many as 10,000 militiamen from Lebanon, Iraq and Afghanistan in a largely successful military effort to buttress Mr. Assad's defenses.

But U.S. and Arab officials believe the Syrian government has inadequate forces to hold territory it has reclaimed in recent months from rebel militias.

U.S. officials have said in recent days that they believe Thursday's airstrikes will renew pressure on Damascus and potentially serve as a warning that Mr. Trump's administration won't tolerate future chemical weapons attacks. Shutting down chemical attacks, they argue, will force Iran and Russia to either pour more resources into Syria or to engage in a diplomatic process to end the Syrian civil war.

---

Aresu Eqbali in Tehran contributed to this article.



License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170408ed480002z



World
Iran Seeks Stronger Russia Alliance After U.S. Strikes in Syria; Tehran looks to fortify alliance supporting Syrian President Assad ahead of potential deeper U.S. involvement in conflict

By Asa Fitch 
772 words
8 April 2017
23:41
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

DUBAIollowing a U.S. strike on a Syrian air base, Iran has sought to buttress ties with a key ally: Russia.

On Saturday, several Iranian military officials and diplomats discussed the conflict in Syria with Russian counterparts, after dozens of U.S. Tomahawk cruise missile strikes on Thursday targeted the Shayrat Airfield near Homs, Syria.

The U.S. strikes marked the first time during Syria's civil war that the U.S. directly targeted the regime of Iran's close ally, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, and represented the most significant display of American military force under President Donald Trump.

The Syrian regime has remained defiant. Its warplanes continued to take off from the Shayrat Airfield on Friday following hasty repairs there, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a U.K.-based monitoring group.

On Saturday, Syrian or allied warplanes again carried out a strike in the rebel-held town of Khan Sheikhun, the observatory said. That is in the Idlib province, where a deadly chemical attack blamed on the Syrian regime took place Tuesday.

In a Saturday telephone conversation between the head of Iran's army, Maj. Gen. Mohammad Baqeri, and his Russian counterpart, Gen. Valery Gerasimov, the officials described the U.S. strike on the Syrian government air base as a violation of Syrian sovereignty and a boon for terrorist groups, according to Iran's official news agency. The sides agreed to "continue and intensify" the fight against terrorism in Syria rubric under which the Syrian government and many of its allies include both Islamic State terrorists and groups considered legitimate rebel factions by the West.

The generals also vowed to continue cooperating "until the full defeat of terrorists and their supporters," the Iranian state news agency said.

The contacts show Iran seeking to strengthen the alliance supporting Mr. Assad ahead of a potential deepening of U.S. involvement in the conflict.

In addition to the discussion between the Iranian and Russian generals, at least two other high-ranking Iranian officials held discussions with Russian counterparts about Syria's civil war, a complex six-year-old conflict in which both countries have dispatched forces in support of Mr. Assad.

Tehran has sent thousands of military advisers and proxy forces to fight for the Syrian government against a patchwork of rebel groups and terrorists, while Russia has carried out airstrikes in the country since late 2015.

The involvement of Russia's large and sophisticated military is crucial for Tehran, which wants to keep Mr. Assad in power to expand Iran's sphere of influence stretching across Iraq and Syria and into Lebanon, where its most cherished proxy, the Shiite militia Hezbollah, is based. Moscow is less committed to Mr. Assad, but wants to reassert its power in the Middle East and secure access to the Mediterranean via the Syrian coast.

The U.S. attack Thursday was a response to a chemical attack allegedly carried out by the Syrian government in Khan Sheikhun that killed dozens of people. Graphic images of dying civilians, apparently from exposure to a nerve agent, led to calls for a U.S. response.

Among other Tehran-Moscow contacts Saturday in the aftermath of the strikes, the secretary of Iran's Supreme National Security Council, Ali Shamkhani, talked by phone with the secretary of the Security Council of Russia, Nikolai Patrushev, to discuss tighter cooperation on Syria, official Iranian media reported. Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, an Iranian parliamentary adviser on foreign affairs, met with Russia's ambassador in Tehran and discussed closer ties.

Iranian officials including President Hassan Rouhani have sharply condemned the U.S. strikes and suggested terrorist stores of chemical agents could have been responsible. In a speech Saturday, Mr. Rouhani called for an independent fact-finding body to investigate the attack, casting the U.S. response as premature.

"When the issue is still not clear, Americans who suppose themselves to be the world police, leader and judge, launched a midnight missile attack on a Syrian airfield and killed innocent people," he said, according to the Iranian news agency.

Write to Asa Fitch at asa.fitch@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* Attack Raises Tensions With Iran

* Capital Journal: President Sends a Global Message

* Nikki Haley Warns U.S. Prepared to o More' in Syria

* Timeline: First Major Military Campaigns by U.S. Presidents

* Strike on Syria Angers Moscow, Shaking Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight

* Trump, Jolted by Images, Forged Decision to Respond

Document WSJO000020170408ed48001rx



World
U.S. Strikes Against Syria Heighten Iraq's Difficulty; Prime minister relying on American might in fight against Islamic State for Mosul, even as he maintains deep ties with Iran, a chief backer of the Syrian regime

By Tamer El-Ghobashy 
1,322 words
9 April 2017
00:51
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq.S. military strikes in Syria are pushing Iraq's pro-American prime minister into an awkward balancing act between two crucial allies helping Baghdad drive Islamic State from its last significant stronghold in his country.

Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi is relying on American air power and ground troops to support Iraqi security forces in a bloody fight with Islamic State for Mosul, Iraq's second-biggest city. Iraq also maintains deep ties with Iran, a chief backer of the Syrian regime and funder of many of the Iraqi Shiite militias that have proved instrumental in turning the tide against the extremist group. Now, some of these same militias are signaling future U.S. strikes against the Assad regime won't be tolerated, and will possibly lead to retaliation.

In response, the Iraqi prime minister has steered toward nonconfrontational middle ground. In a phone call with Vice President Mike Pence, Mr. Abadi appealed for an urgent resumption of international efforts to forge a political solution to Syria's civil war, according to a statement from Mr. Abadi's office released on Saturday. In the conversation with Mr. Pence, the Iraqi prime minister also called for a credible investigation into who was responsible for the deadly chemical attack in Idlib that killed at least 85 people and triggered Thursday's U.S. strike on a Syrian air base.

Mr. Pence's office confirmed Saturday that the call had taken place, but offered a different description of what had been said in it.

Mr. Abadi had told Mr. Pence that the chemical weapons attack was "a major escalation to the conflict in Syria, and agreed that those responsible needed to be held accountable," Mr. Pence's office said. The Iraqi prime minister also "expressed solidarity with the innocent victims in Syria, and reflected on the horrible chemical weapons attacks the former Baathist regime perpetrated against the Iraqi people."

Mr. Pence's office said the vice president had commended Iraqi Security Forces for their progress in western Mosul and thanked Prime Minister Abadi "for the sacrifices of the Iraqi people in our shared fight against ISIS, " and that both leaders also "reaffirmed their commitment to the long-term partnership between the U.S. and Iraq."

The White House also said Saturday that President Donald Trump had spoken a day earlier with King Salman bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia and that the king "reaffirmed strong Saudi support for the U.S.' military strike."

On Friday, Mr. Abadi foreign ministry staked out ground even closer to the Syrian regime. It said Iraq considered the U.S. strikes "a grave escalation." The ministry also indicated it didn't support the Trump administration's assertion that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad had launched the chemical attack.

Mr. Assad has denied launching a chemical attack and Russia has said the deadly agent was released when Syrian jets bombed an alleged rebel chemical warehouse near the town of Khan Sheikhoun. There has been no evidence that Syrian rebels fighting the Assad regime possess the capability to produce chemical weapons.

And on Saturday, jet fighters bombed the same town, killing one woman, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group in Britain. Late Friday, the group said Syrian jets had resumed taking off from the same airfield the U.S. struck.

Mr. Abadi's awkward balancing act is a matter of survival for his government. There are 5,000 U.S. troops fighting in Iraq to roll back the gains of Islamic State, which once controlled about one third of the country. Mr. Adabi has also coordinated with the Assad regime to strike Islamic State targets inside Syria.

So far the Iraqi prime minister has managed to avoid major conflicts between the U.S. and Iran, mainly by maintaining a buffer between American troops and the Shiite militias. Despite their eagerness for a bigger role in the Mosul offensive, Shiite militias have agreed to stay out of the Sunni-majority city as part of efforts to tamp down sectarian tensions.

Still, two of the largest and most powerful Iran-backed Iraqi militiasoth of which have a presence in Syria and have fought U.S. forces after the 2003 invasionondemned the U.S. strike as an unlawful attack on Syria's sovereignty. They suggested they would support military action against U.S. interests if a bombing campaign against the Assad regime escalates.

"We will respond to such an escalation in the time and place that we choose," said Abu Taleb al-Saaedi, a senior member of one of the militias, Kataeb Hezbollah.

Naeem al-Aboudi, the spokesman for another militia, Asaeb Ahl al-Haq, said the strikes were a political ploy by Mr. Trump to shore up his sagging support in the U.S. He said the strikes were the clearest signal yet of a budding alliance between the U.S., Israel and the Gulf monarchiesll of which oppose Iran.

Iran itself has refrained from issuing any threats after the U.S. airstrikes in Syria. While Iranian leaders including President Hassan Rouhani and Foreign Minister Javad Zarif have condemned the strikes, Tehran's response hasn't moved beyond rhetoric. Both Iran and Russia, despite their deep involvement in the Syrian conflict, are wary of escalating hostilities with the U.S.

One factor in Iran's decision-making is its nuclear deal, an accord reached in 2015 with six world powers including the U.S. The deal freed Iran from sanctions that had constrained its economy for years in exchange for new restrictions on its nuclear program.

Some Iraqi Shiite groups, also sympathetic to the Assad regime, are also concerned that the U.S. missile strikes could cause blowback in Iraq.

"This is worrying because anything that happens in Syria, has an equivalent impact in Iraq," said Moeen al-Kadhemi, a senior official for the Badr Organization, one of the largest Iran-backed paramilitary groups in Iraq and counts Iraq's interior minister among its top leadership.

Mr. Abadi is mindful of the potential political impact. The U.S. strikes in Syria, if they continue, could provoke Iran to throw its support behind pro-militia figures in local elections scheduled for September.

Following the American strikes in Syria, Nouri al-Maliki, Mr. Abadi's predecessor and one of Iraq's three largely ceremonial vice presidents who is seen as a potential future challenger for the prime minister's seat, issued a blistering critique that appeared to take a swipe at his successor.

"The use of force against terrorists could be justified, but against nations, it is considered risky," Mr. Maliki said. The U.S., the former Iraqi prime minister added, uses force to impose its will on "frightened" leaders in the region.

Also, in a break with traditional Shiite orthodoxy in Iraq, cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, long an opponent of the U.S. involvement in the region who still holds sway over a significant constituency in Iraq, on Saturday called on Mr. Assad to step down while warning Mr. Trump that further military strikes against the Assad regime would become a Vietnam-like quagmire.

Asa Fitch, Ghassan Adnan, Ali A. Nabhan and Louise Radnofsky contributed to this article.

Write to Tamer El-Ghobashy at tamer.el-ghobashy@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* U.S. Military Strategy Altered in Syria

* Trump's Syria Strike Fuels Russia Tensions

* Capital Journal: Strike Sends Russia a Signal

* Trump, Jolted by Images, Forged Decision to Launch Airstrikes in Syria

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Probably Won't Endanger Assad Rule

* Strike Raises Tensions With Iran

* Haley Warns U.S. Prepared to o More' in Syria

Document WSJO000020170408ed48001e1



Strike Fuels Russia Tensions

By Paul Sonne, Felicia Schwartz and Carol E. Lee 
1,060 words
8 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Donald Trump's quick-fire decision to strike a Syrian regime air base sent a shot across Russia's bow, signaling that his administration is more willing to use force than its predecessor, even if it means riling the Kremlin and its allies.

For months, officials in the Trump administration have been saying the U.S. must approach Russia from a position of strength, before improving relations with Moscow. When deciding how to respond to this week's chemical-weapons attack, which the U.S. military blamed on Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's forces, the 11-week-old administration also considered what message Mr. Trump wanted to send to the rest of the world in one of his earliest foreign-policy tests.

"This is bigger than Syria," a senior administration official said. "It's representative of how he wants to be seen by other world leaders. It is important that people understand this is a different administration. "

Mr. Trump said he undertook the military strike to prevent and deter Mr. Assad from using chemical weapons. While it appeared to be a one-time action, U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley warned more could be forthcoming.

The unilateral strike represented a relatively modest intervention, U.S. officials said, small enough to avoid an intractable rift with Russia ahead of Secretary of State Rex Tillerson's first official trip to Moscow next week. It crippled 20 of Mr. Assad's jet fighters, according to the Pentagon, but didn't target the air base's runway. Local media reported Syrian planes were using the runway later Friday, though U.S. officials didn't confirm that.

The strikes didn't come with any clear new policy doctrine on Syria, which experts say would be required to alter the course of the broader war Mr. Assad is winning thanks to Russia's support.

Still, the symbolic impact of the first direct U.S. strike on Mr. Assad since the beginning of the Syrian conflict has altered the dynamic between U.S. and Russia over Syria. For years Russian President Vladimir Putin was able to take advantage of a strictly limited appetite for risk in Washington -- something the strike shows has now changed.

One immediate result was Moscow's declaration on Friday that it had suspended an agreement to coordinate military flights over Syria with Washington. U.S. officials said lines of communication remained open, but a weakening of such exchanges could heighten the risk of an incident over Syria, where U.S. jet fighters fly regularly in the campaign against Islamic State. The U.S. strikes could also lead to unpredictable reactions by Mr. Assad and his backers, in particular Iran and its Lebanese ally Hezbollah.

Despite such dangers, allies of Mr. Trump said they hoped the show of resolve marked the beginning of a change in Washington's broader negotiating stance with Moscow.

"Hopefully, this is something that very much changes the type of conversation that will take place between Putin and Tillerson when they meet," said Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Bob Corker (R., Tenn.). Mr. Corker said the operation showed "the kind of pushback" Mr. Putin understands.

It could also complicate Mr. Tillerson's visit, at a moment when hopes for a quick U.S.-Russian rapprochement already had faded.

"There's a question of how well that visit will go," said a senior administration official, who questioned whether Mr. Putin's calculus has changed. "I doubt it, but we'll see. The early Russian response isn't encouraging."

In addition to the Syria conflict, Mr. Tillerson heads to Russia to raise other U.S. concerns, including Russia's intervention in Ukraine, what the U.S. has called a violation of a Cold War-era pact that bans intermediate-range missiles, and Moscow's alleged interference in the 2016 campaign.

Despite the new strains, Moscow still planned to host Mr. Tillerson on his official visit next week. And even as Trump administration officials hit out at Mr. Assad, Russia's longtime ally, the White House said the U.S. still wants to cooperate with Russia.

"I think that there can be a shared commitment to defeat ISIS and also agree that you can't gas your own people," White House press secretary Sean Spicer said. "There is a mutual level of human decency that I think we can expect out of everybody."

Mr. Corker said one question Mr. Tillerson may try to answer in the visit is why the Assad regime had access to these chemical weapons despite a 2013 deal between the U.S. and Russia to remove Mr. Assad's stockpile.

The strikes have raised questions about Mr. Trump's Syria policy and what next steps his administration plans to take. In the course of a few days, the administration went from Mr. Tillerson saying the Syrian people should decide the fate of Mr. Assad -- a line the Kremlin has promoted -- to Mr. Trump suggesting obliquely Mr. Assad should go. Mr. Tillerson said Thursday that Mr. Assad's actions make clear there's "no role for him to govern the Syrian people."

Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said Friday that additional sanctions on Syria likely were forthcoming, signaling a hardening line that Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis has also been promoting.

For years, Obama administration officials at the State Department and the Pentagon expressed frustration with White House unwillingness to use greater force in Syria, leaving former Secretary of State John Kerry with little leverage in his negotiations with Russia. Many of them approved of Thursday's decision to strike Mr. Assad.

Mr. Putin has been able to undertake risky military gambits in places such as Syria and Ukraine in part because he has a lock on domestic politics in Russia, with little criticism or opposition, a luxury the White House doesn't enjoy.

"I think they calculate that if this is a game of chicken, that we'll probably be the first ones to swerve to the side of the road," said Michael Carpenter, the former U.S. deputy assistant secretary of defense for Russia under Mr. Obama. "They calculate that. It remains to be seen if that's the case."

---

Alan Cullison contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170408ed4800035



US
Trump, Jolted by Images, Forged Decision to Launch Airstrikes in Syria; The president had a transformative moment when he saw searing televised images of a chemical weapons attack in Syria, a senator says

By Carol E. Lee and Eli Stokols 
797 words
8 April 2017
01:51
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications President Donald Trump's first name was incorrectly omitted on first reference in an earlier version of this article. (April 12, 2017)

WASHINGTONresident Donald Trump was in the Oval Office Tuesday morning as images of lifeless  children who had been gassed in Syria  were displayed on the medium he favors most: television.

He decided to respond, but had no clear plan.

What transpired over the next 57 hours was a series of decisions by a new president with no military or elected-office experience, leading to the first U.S. airstrikes  against the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad since the civil war began six years ago. The moment was a searing and potentially game-changing one for Mr. Trump, who has struggled to transform his success as a candidate into governing since he took office in January.

"That moment the other day was in some ways transformative," said Sen. Bob Corker (R., Tenn.), who spoke with Mr. Trump Thursday night after the U.S. launched 59 Tomahawk missiles onto an air base in northern Syria. "It was very evident to me that there became a real connection from him to what happened in Syria in a very personal way," Mr. Corker said. "I think he felt like he had no choice."

Mr. Trump's approach was a dramatic departure from the one his predecessor undertook when confronted with atrocities in Syria. President Barack Obama rarely showed emotion in public over Syria, let alone drew such a connection between his personal reaction to events and his decisions as commander-in-chief. Mr. Trump displayed both.

Details of the chemical weapons attack were first explained to Mr. Trump Tuesday around 10:30 a.m. during his daily intelligence briefing in the Oval Office. Later that morning, he saw the images unfold on TV, according to aides. "He immediately began to contemplate what this would mean going forward," a senior administration official said. "He wanted to be presented with a lot of options."

Mr. Trump spent several hours on Tuesday in meetings and on the phone working through a response. He met with his military advisers around 8 p.m. On Wednesday morning, Mr. Trump met again with his team, and then welcomed King Abdullah II of Jordan  to the White House. Around 3 p.m., after lunch with the king, Mr. Trump returned to the Situation Room, the secure facility in the White House, and told aides he wanted a "proportional response."

At that meeting, Mr. Trump narrowed the scope to three options : two militaryne more aggressive than the othernd a third, nonmilitary option involving a package of diplomatic and economic measures. He told his advisers he wanted more information about each.

On Thursday, at a meeting around 1:30 p.m. on Air Force One, Mr. Trump narrowed his options to two, and ultimately chose the less-aggressive military option. Mr. Trump arrived at his Florida estate around 4 p.m., met with his team again, and ordered the strike. The advisers with the most sway with him were Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis , Secretary of State Rex Tillerson , National Security Adviser H.R. McMaster, Vice President Mike Pence and Jared Kushner , Mr. Trump's son-in-law and senior White House adviser, according to aides.

Mr. Trump's chief strategist Steve Bannon  argued against military strikes, two senior administration officials said. A separate senior official said no one argued in favor of the more-robust military option.

By 7:10 p.m., Mr. Trump had put on a tuxedo and, with first lady Melania Trump, went to dinner with Chinese President Xi Jinping , his wife and some cabinet officials and senior aides. As they dined on dry-aged New York strip steak, roasted root vegetables and chocolate cake, the U.S. military began firing missiles into Syria.

Senior officials moved between dinner and a nearby secure room , called a Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility, or SCIF, that the White House set up and where the operation was monitored. By the time Mr. Trump said goodbye to Mr. Xi, the missiles had hit. He informed the Chinese president as he walked him out and proceeded to the SCIF.

Write to Carol E. Lee at carol.lee@wsj.com 

Related Coverage

* Syria Strike Sends Russia a Signal 

* Nikki Haley Warns U.S. Prepared to o More' in Syria 

* Timeline: First Major Military Campaigns by U.S. Presidents 

* Strike on Syria Angers Moscow, Shaking Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight 

* Congress Backs Trump, Debates Its Own Role In Military Strikes 

* U.S. Probes Possible Russian Role in Attack by Syria 

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Unlikely to Endanger Assad Rule 

Document WSJO000020170407ed4700bhx



World
U.S. Airstrikes on Syria Divide Middle East; Saudi Arabia and Israel cheer missile strikes; Iran condemns them

By Rory Jones in Tel Aviv, Margherita Stancati in Dubai and Aresu Eqbali in Tbilisi, Georgia 
780 words
7 April 2017
13:22
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Syria's staunchest foes in the Middle Eastaudi Arabia and Israelheered the U.S. missile strikes on a Syrian air base early Friday, saying they sent a clear message that the international community wouldn't tolerate chemical weapons.

However, Iran, which is a key military and financial backer of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, condemned the attack as a move that would deepen the chaos in Syria and strengthen armed opposition groups.

"Tehran considers using this excuse to take unilateral measures dangerous, destructive and a violation of international laws," Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Bahram Ghasemi said, according to the official Islamic Republic News Agency.

The U.S. military launched dozens of Tomahawk cruise missiles overnight against the Shayrat air base near the city of Homs in Syria, following this week's suspected chemical weapons attack on a rebel-held town. The U.S. strikes were intended to cripple the base's airfield and other infrastructure, and to indicate that the chemical attack was unacceptable to the U.S.

Saudi Arabia, which is an important ally of the Syrian antigovernment opposition, declared its full support for Washington's operation.

"The Syrian regime brought this military operation upon itself," said a statement attributed to a foreign ministry official and carried by the official Saudi Press Agency. "The brave decision taken by the U.S. president in response to these crimes should be hailed when the international community has been unable to put a stop to such actions by the Syrian regime."

Riyadh and other Gulf monarchies have long pushed for more decisive U.S. action against forces loyal to Mr. Assad, who is backed by Tehranaudi Arabia's rival for regional influence.

"Everyone was waiting for the U.S. to act against Bashar al-Assad," said Ibrahim al-Marie, a retired Saudi colonel and security analyst based in Riyadh. "The Trump administration is also saying: we will be a big player in Syria, not like the Obama administration."

For Iran, the strikes represent a blow and new challenge in a conflict that appeared to be tilting in its direction following Russia's decision to intervene militarily on behalf of Mr. Assad in late 2015.

Foad Izadi, a professor at Tehran University, said Iran wouldn't sit back as the tide turned against Mr. Assad, even if it wasn't yet clear how Tehran would respond.

Iran has sent hundreds of military advisers and proxy forces to fight alongside Mr. Assad, although it withdrew some of its own personnel in 2016 after suffering heavy losses.

"Iran and Russia have paid a high cost in Syria, both financially and in human life, and Iran has lost even more than Russia," Mr. Izadi said. "Therefore, Iran will not sit back indifferent."

Saudi Arabia had grown frustrated with former U.S. President Barack Obama's refusal to either increase support for Syrian rebels or strike Syrian government forces, particularly after Mr. Assad used chemical weapons in a 2013 attack that left 1,400 people dead in Damascus.

A more muscular U.S. approach in Syria could strengthen the rebel position in possible political negotiations aimed at ending the conflict.

"This limited operation will make the regime more flexible," Mr. Marie said.

Israeli Prime Minister  Benjamin Netanyahu  said the strikes sent a "strong and clear message" that the use and proliferation of chemical weapons wouldn't be tolerated. t the time of the 2013 attack, Israeli officials accused Mr. Obama's administration of being too weak in responding.

The U.S. informed Israel of Friday's strikes ahead of time, an Israeli official said.

"Israel fully supports President Trump's decision and hopes that this message of resolve in the face of the Assad regime's horrific actions will resonate not only in Damascus, but in Tehran, Pyongyang and elsewhere," Mr. Netanyahu said.

Asa Fitch in Dubai contributed to this article.

Write to Rory Jones at rory.jones@wsj.com and Margherita Stancati at margherita.stancati@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base

* With Strike on Syria, Trump Sends a Global Message

* Strike Shakes Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight

* Trump Didn't Have to Contemplate a Power Vacuum in Damascus

* Syria Says Strike Kills 16, Damages Air Base

* How the Trump Administration's Language Shifted Quickly on Assad

* Congress Supports U.S. Airstrikes Against Syria, Debates What Happens Next

* Trump Shows He Is Willing to Act Forcefully, Quickly

* President Trump's Syria Statement

Document WSJO000020170407ed47001jl



World
U.S. Strike on Syria Shakes Up  ISIS  Fight; Airstrike angers Moscow, posing a new complication for Trump administration's push against extremists

By Thomas Grove in Moscow, Nour Malas in Istanbul and Maria Abi-Habib  in Beirut 
1,164 words
7 April 2017
23:16
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S. missile attack on a Syrian air base has created rifts in a calibrated international campaign against Islamic State and threatens military cooperation between the U.S. and Russia.

In an example of the new complications, Moscow said Friday it had suspended an agreement with Washington for military coordination in Syrian skies, but U.S. officials later said the line of communication remained open.

The Kremlin, the Syrian regime's closest ally, called the U.S. salvo of cruise missiles "aggression against a sovereign government" carried out under false pretenses. Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev said that the strike, conducted in retaliation for a suspected regime chemical attack on a Syrian village in Idlib province, took the U.S. to "the verge of a military clash with Russia."

Russia's response threatens to derail the delicate alliances that have allowed a multination campaign against Islamic State to churn along, despite political disagreements between the U.S., Russia, and Turkey on parts of the fight, including on whether Syrian President Bashar al-Assad should stay in power.

The U.S. attack could also lead to unpredictable reactions by Mr. Assad and his backers, in particular Iran and its Lebanese ally Hezbollah, to the U.S. strikes.

President Donald Trump's praise of Russian President Vladimir Putin during his presidential campaign had raised hopes in Moscow of warming relations, but these have faded amid investigations into alleged Russian interference in the U.S. elections.

Some Russian lawmakers expressed hope that a trip by Secretary of State Rex Tillerson to Moscow next week would help Moscow and Washington coordinate positions.

"Tillerson must be received and (we must) try to exchange positions, lead Washington to common sense," said Leonid Slutsky, head of the Russian parliamentary committee on foreign affairs.

The U.S. and Russia have sought to overcome mutual mistrust to work together to secure a resolution to the Syrian war. A cease-fire last year was seen by both sides as an opportunity to break new diplomatic ground, but it unraveled as Syria violated successive truce attempts.

Military coordination has been more successful. The risks of miscommunication in a crowded battlespace are clear. Hundreds of U.S. military and special-operations forces are rotating through Syrian battlefields. U.S. and Russian jets are flying parallel sortieshe U.S. against Islamic State targets, and Russia mainly against anti-Assad rebelsnd there have been several close calls.

In September, a U.S. airstrike accidentally struck Syrian forces. A Russian airstrike near Manbij, Syria last month hit forces being trained by the U.S. to fight Islamic State.

"If there's no communication it just adds burdens to [U.S.] pilots and to military planners, if you don't have that safety valve," said Aaron Stein, a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council think tank.

Military chiefs from the U.S., Russia and Turkey met a month ago to boost coordination with the specific aim of avoiding conflict among their forces and their proxies on the Syrian battlefield.

A collapse of coordination or surge in hostility among regime allies, including Iranian-backed militias both in Syria and Iraq, could endanger U.S.-backed forces in both countries and potentially put thousands of American forces on the ground in harm's way, according to Arab and U.S. officials.

Among the questions being debated in the quick run-up to Friday's strikes, a U.S. military official said: "Will we lose traction? How will this change the dynamics around Raqqa and Mosul?"slamic State strongholds in Syria and Iraq.

The official said a strike carries a risk of an unpredictable reaction from Iran, which has at times diverged with Russia in its coordination with the Assad regime.

Advisors to Saudi Arabia's government said they hoped the U.S. strikes would force Damascus to the negotiating table. Riyadh has long pushed for Syrian regime change in a political transition, while also supplying rebels with arms and cash to pressure Damascus militarily to force a negotiated settlement.

Russia's military entered the Syria conflict in 2015, and the U.S. subsequently shied away from more aggressive military action, worried in part about the potential for military escalation with Moscow.

Diplomats in the region said Damascus and its allies could now retaliate against American forces stationed in Syria and Iraq as a deterrent against further U.S. military action.

"The risk of escalation is real," said Faisal bin Farhan al-Saud, an informal adviser to the Saudi Royal Court.

Yet Arab and Western officials in the Middle East said that so far they anticipate a calibrated response from Russia.

If U.S.-Russia tensions rise no further, the current clash is unlikely to derail cooperation in the war against Islamic State, said Sami Askari, an Iraqi former parliamentarian who still advises the Iraqi government on military issues. "Embroiling the coalition and the Syrians in a war amongst each other is most certainly to the benefit of Daesh," he said, using an Arabic acronym to refer to Islamic State.

Kheder Khaddour, a Syria scholar at the Carnegie Middle East Center, said it is unlikely the Syrian regime has "the military capability or appetite for an escalation" that would target American forces in Syria.

The U.S. choice of target, the Shayrat airfield, could also reflect an American effort to contain potential fallout, Mr. Khaddour said, because it isn't a base that is key to protecting regime strongholds or areas of strategic significance.

Pro-Syrian government media and analysts characterized the airfield as a major hub for operations against Islamic State in central and eastern Syria.

Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov compared the strikes to former U.S. President George W. Bush's invasion of Iraq in 2003.

"It's obvious to any specialist that the decision in Washington to carry out strikes was taken before the events in Idlib, which were used as a pretext for a demonstration of force," a foreign ministry statement said. Moscow backs Syria's claims that it has no chemical weapons.

James Marson in Moscow contributed to this article.

Write to Thomas Grove at thomas.grove@wsj.com, Nour Malas at nour.malas@wsj.com and Maria Abi-Habib at maria.habib@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* U.S. Probes Possible Russian Role in Attack by Syria

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Unlikely to Endanger Assad Rule

* U.S. Airstrikes on Syria Divide Middle East 

* With Strike on Syria, Trump Sends a Global Message

* Trump Didn't Have to Contemplate a Power Vacuum in Damascus

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base

* Syria Says Strike Kills 16, Damages Air Base

* Trump's Syria Strikes Corner Congress

* President Trump's Syria Statement

Document WSJO000020170407ed47001b9



Opinion
Trump's Syria Opportunity; The President orders a military strike that the world's thugs will notice.

971 words
7 April 2017
21:29
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

President Trump inherited the Syrian catastrophe from Barack Obama, and his initial instincts were to accept the awful status quo. But Bashar Assad's latest chemical attack has galvanized his Administration to think anew, and Mr. Trump's decision Thursday to launch a retaliatory missile strike is an important first step to save lives, enforce global order, and improve the strategic outlook for the U.S. and its allies.

Mr. Trump starts with the reality that Mr. Obama's long abdication has left the U.S. with far less leverage than it had when the civil war began in 2011. Iran has become Mr. Assad's protector on the ground via arms supplies and Hezbollah, and Russia has moved in as a military patron and patroller of the skies. The Muslim opposition the U.S. has been feebly trying to train and arm has been degraded while Mr. Assad and the Russians leave Islamic State to the Kurds and the U.S.-led coalition.

As recently as last week Mr. Trump seemed willing to surrender to this circumstance and do nothing beyond defeating ISIS in Syria's east. This was reflected in Secretary of State Rex Tillerson's comments last week that Mr. Assad was here to stay and the future of Syria would be "decided by the Syrian people." That's John Kerry-speak for capitulation, and it may have led Mr. Assad to believe he could unleash more chemical hell.

Mr. Trump also seemed to be courting an accommodation with Russia in Syria, but that road leads to more strategic retreat. Vladimir Putin's price for restraining Mr. Assad would be steep: U.S. recognition of his conquests in Ukraine and the end of sanctions. This would erode the U.S.-Europe alliance and make Mr. Putin look like a hero back home. Iran might not cooperate in any case, and its goal is an arc of Shiite power from Tehran through Iraq and Syria to the Mediterranean.

The alternative to this surrender is to reassert U.S. influence with diplomacy and military force, and Mr. Assad's chemical attack is the opening. Mr. Trump may understand this as he ordered an attack on the air base from which the chemical attack was launched, and Mr. Tillerson said Thursday that Mr. Assad has no future in Syria.

The quickest way to punish Mr. Assad for his aerial chemical attacks, and to ensure they won't happen again, is to destroy his air power. This is the plan that Mr. Obama flinched at in 2013 when he let Mr. Assad cross his "red line." He has now crossed that line againhis time after having promised to destroy his chemical stockpiles.

On Thursday the U.S. struck only a single airfield, though Mr. Assad has six active airfields used in the war. The U.S. used cruise missiles from outside Syrian air space, which avoided engagement with Russian-manned air defenses. The Pentagon provided the firepower, though we wish Arabs and Europeans could have been included to show the international rejection of Mr. Assad's war crimes.

Mr. Putin could escalate and engage U.S. forces. But Mr. Obama used that excuse to talk himself into doing nothing, and our guess is that Mr. Putin would shrink from fighting the U.S. lest he risk the humiliation of major losses. As for Russians on the ground, a U.S. source told the press they were forewarned about the attack to avoid casualties.

A stronger attack would have destroyed Syria's entire air force, and another good step would be for the U.S. and its allies to create the "safe zones" inside Syria that Mr. Trump promised during the campaign. This would be enforced by U.S. and allied air sorties plus renewed military supplies for the opposition. The humanitarian effort would show the U.S. purpose includes protecting the Syrian people. An international force could provide support for havens in multiple locations near the Turkish and Jordanian borders.

***

Every military operation carries risks but this one could also have major political and strategic benefits if Mr. Trump follows the air strike with some forceful diplomacy. The demonstration of renewed U.S. purpose in the region could have an electrifying impact across the Middle East. The Saudis, the Gulf Sunni states and Turkey would begin to rethink their accommodation to the Russia-Assad-Iran axis of dominance that none of them wants.

Mr. Trump also needs to make Russia and Iran begin to pay a price for their support for Mr. Assad's depredations. They have had no incentive to negotiate an end to the civil war because they see themselves on the road to a relatively cost-free victory. That calculus may change if it looks like the costs of intervening are rising and Mr. Assad is no longer a sure winner.

The Trump Administration has to think about the kind of long-term solution it would like in Syriaerhaps a partition into ethnic enclavesut the chances of getting there are better if the opposition has safe zones and Mr. Assad can't maraud with impunity.

The larger point for Mr. Trump to recognize is that he is being tested. The worldriend and foes watching to see how he responds to Mr. Assad's war crime. His quick air strike on the evening he was having dinner with Chinese President Xi Jinping makes clear that the Obama era is over. If he now follows with action to protect Syrian civilians and construct an anti-Assad coalition, he may find that new strategic possibilities open up to enhance U.S. interests and make the Middle East more stable.

Document WSJO000020170406ed4600bhx



World
Trump's Syria Strike Sends Russia a Signal; First direct U.S. strike on Assad regime has altered the dynamic between U.S. and Russia

By Paul Sonne, Felicia Schwartz and Carol E. Lee 
1,317 words
8 April 2017
01:39
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTONresident Donald Trump's quick-fire decision to strike a Syrian regime air base sent a shot across Russia's bow, signaling that his administration is more willing to use force than its predecessor, even if it means riling the Kremlin and its allies.

For months, officials in the Trump administration have been saying the U.S. must approach Russia from a position of strength, before improving relations with Moscow. When deciding how to respond to this week's chemical-weapons attack, which the U.S. military blamed on Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's forces, the 11-week-old administration also considered what message Mr. Trump wanted to send to the rest of the world in one of his earliest foreign-policy tests.

"This is bigger than Syria," a senior administration official said. "It's representative of how he wants to be seen by other world leaders. It is important that people understand this is a different administration. "

Mr. Trump said he undertook the military strike to prevent and deter Mr. Assad from using chemical weapons. While it appeared to be a one-time action, U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley warned more could be forthcoming.

The unilateral strike represented a relatively modest intervention, U.S. officials said, small enough to avoid an intractable rift with Russia ahead of Secretary of State Rex Tillerson's first official trip to Moscow next week. It crippled 20 of Mr. Assad's jet fighters, according to the Pentagon, but didn't target the air base's runway. Local media reported Syrian planes were using the runway later Friday, though U.S. officials didn't confirm that.

The strikes didn't come with any clear new policy doctrine on Syria, which experts say would be required to alter the course of the broader war Mr. Assad is winning thanks to Russia's support.

Still, the symbolic impact of the first direct U.S. strike on Mr. Assad since the beginning of the Syrian conflict has altered the dynamic between U.S. and Russia over Syria. For years Russian President Vladimir Putin was able to take advantage of a strictly limited appetite for risk in Washingtonomething the strike shows has now changed.

One immediate result was Moscow's declaration on Friday that it had suspended an agreement to coordinate military flights over Syria with Washington. U.S. officials said lines of communication remained open, but a weakening of such exchanges could heighten the risk of an incident over Syria, where U.S. jet fighters fly regularly in the campaign against Islamic State. The U.S. strikes could also lead to unpredictable reactions by Mr. Assad and his backers, in particular Iran and its Lebanese ally Hezbollah.

Despite such dangers, allies of Mr. Trump said they hoped the show of resolve marked the beginning of a change in Washington's broader negotiating stance with Moscow.

"Hopefully, this is something that very much changes the type of conversation that will take place between Putin and Tillerson when they meet," said Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Bob Corker (R., Tenn.). Mr. Corker said the operation showed "the kind of pushback" Mr. Putin understands.

It could also complicate Mr. Tillerson's visit, at a moment when hopes for a quick U.S.-Russian rapprochement already had faded.

"There's a question of how well that visit will go," said a senior administration official, who questioned whether Mr. Putin's calculus has changed. "I doubt it, but we'll see. The early Russian response isn't encouraging."

In addition to the Syria conflict, Mr. Tillerson heads to Russia to raise other U.S. concerns, including Russia's intervention in Ukraine, what the U.S. has called a violation of a Cold War-era pact that bans intermediate-range missiles, and Moscow's alleged interference in the 2016 campaign.

Despite the new strains, Moscow still planned to host Mr. Tillerson on his official visit next week. And even as Trump administration officials hit out at Mr. Assad, Russia's longtime ally, the White House said the U.S. still wants to cooperate with Russia.

"I think that there can be a shared commitment to defeat ISIS and also agree that you can't gas your own people," White House press secretary Sean Spicer said. "There is a mutual level of human decency that I think we can expect out of everybody."

Mr. Corker said one question Mr. Tillerson may try to answer in the visit is why the Assad regime had access to these chemical weapons despite a 2013 deal between the U.S. and Russia to remove Mr. Assad's stockpile.

The strikes have raised questions about Mr. Trump's Syria policy and what next steps his administration plans to take. In the course of a few days, the administration went from Mr. Tillerson saying the Syrian people should decide the fate of Mr. Assad line the Kremlin has promotedo Mr. Trump suggesting obliquely Mr. Assad should go. Mr. Tillerson said Thursday that Mr. Assad's actions make clear there's "no role for him to govern the Syrian people."

Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said Friday that additional sanctions on Syria likely were forthcoming, signaling a hardening line that Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis has also been promoting.

For years, Obama administration officials at the State Department and the Pentagon expressed frustration with White House unwillingness to use greater force in Syria, leaving former Secretary of State John Kerry with little leverage in his negotiations with Russia. Many of them approved of Thursday's decision to strike Mr. Assad.

Russia's avowed cancellation Friday of the military channel between Moscow and Washington is one way the Russians can make any future U.S. unilateral strikes more difficult, said Michael Kofman, a Russian defense expert and research analyst at the Virginia-based Center for Naval Analyses

"They want to make sure that we don't have a channel where we can call them and announce we are bombing somewhere in Syria," he said.

Future U.S. actions against Mr. Assad also risk prompting blowback that could jeopardize U.S. troops in the region or raise the cost of involvement for the Trump administration to a degree that makes Washington balk.

Mr. Putin has been able to undertake risky military gambits in places such as Syria and Ukraine in part because he has a lock on domestic politics in Russia, with little criticism or opposition, a luxury the White House doesn't enjoy.

"I think they calculate that if this is a game of chicken, that we'll probably be the first ones to swerve to the side of the road," said Michael Carpenter, the former U.S. deputy assistant secretary of defense for Russia under Mr. Obama. "They calculate that. It remains to be seen if that's the case."

Alan Cullison contributed to this article.

Write to Paul Sonne at paul.sonne@wsj.com, Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com and Carol E. Lee at carol.lee@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base

* Syria Says Strike Kills 16, Damages Air Base

* Capital Journal: President Sends a Global Message

* Nikki Haley Warns U.S. Prepared to o More' in Syria

* Timeline: First Major Military Campaigns by U.S. Presidents

* Trump Gets Rare Bipartisan Backing for Syria Strike

* Strike on Syria Angers Moscow, Shaking Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight

* Attack Raises Tensions With Iran

* Trump, Jolted by Images, Forged Decision to Respond

* Congress Backs Trump, Debates Its Own Role In Military Strikes

* U.S. Probes Possible Russian Role in Attack by Syria

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Unlikely to Endanger Assad Rule

Document WSJO000020170407ed4700bf5



Politics
Donald Trump Considers Major Shake-up of Senior White House Team; Crisis in Syria has sharpened president's desire to cut some of the drama out of West Wing

By Carol E. Lee, Peter Nicholas and Michael C. Bender 
1,278 words
8 April 2017
01:07
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTONresident Donald Trump is considering a major shake-up of his staff, a senior administration official said Friday, as he looks to build a more cohesive operation after a tumultuous start in the White House.

As he turned to the Syrian crisis that prompted the White House to adopt a war footing culminating in Thursday's missile strike, Mr. Trump was increasingly unhappy over the feuding that has run through the West Wing and is determined to see it end, the official said.

Mr. Trump is specifically evaluating whether to keep his chief of staff, Reince Priebus, and his chief strategist, Steve Bannon, in their current positions.

Two people close to the White House said Mr. Trump has been talking to confidants about Mr. Priebus's performance and has asked for names of possible replacements.

Mr. Trump is "trying out different names with his friends," one of those people said.

While Mr. Trump has made clear he has affection for Mr. Priebus, the chief of staff has emerged as a target because he is in overall command of a White House operation that has struggled.

Mr. Trump's approval ratings are in the low 40s, an all-out White House effort to pass a health-care overhaul fell short, and two executive orders barring certain travelers from entering the U.S. are tied up in court. Mr. Priebus has absorbed some of the blame for these early missteps.

Another top aide who could be removed or reassigned in a staff reshuffle is Mr. Bannon, a figure who represents an economic nationalist, "America first" perspective that was central to Mr. Trump's electoral victory, the other person said. Though that message resonates strongly with the president's core voters, Mr. Bannon has sparred both with Jared Kushner, the president's son-in-law and senior adviser, and with Gary Cohn, one of the president's top economic advisers.

Mr. Trump has privately questioned the performance of his aides in the past yet in the end left his staff intact. It is possible he could do that here, while sending a message that the infighting needs to stop.

Messrs. Kushner and Cohn spring from an internationalist, establishment wing that isn't a natural fit with Mr. Bannon's more pugnacious nationalism.

The Syrian strike also has elevated the influence of senior military officers in the administration. Those officers have been courting Mr. Kushner, who holds a broad portfolio of international assignments ranging from peace in the Middle East to preparations for the summit between Mr. Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping at the Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida, which wrapped up Friday.

Continued infighting has "a very short life cycle," the administration official said, adding that the president is expected to make a decision soon.

Asked about possible staff changes, White House spokeswoman Lindsay Walters said such reports are "driven by people who want to distract from the success taking place in this administration." Citing Mr. Trump's military strike on a Syrian air base and other issues, she said: "The only thing we are shaking up is the way Washington operates as we push the president's aggressive agenda forward."

A senior staff shake-up could redefine a Trump presidency that has struggled in the early going, with a promised health-care overhaul collapsing last month in the House of Representatives. It also could reposition Mr. Trump as a more centrist figure to the degree that Mr. Bannon is marginalized while aides such as Mr. Cohn ascend, potentially opening an avenue to better relations with Democrats who have strongly opposed almost all of Mr. Trump's agenda.

Mr. Trump scored a major victory Friday, however, with the confirmation of his Supreme Court pick Neil Gorsuch, who will be sworn in next week.

Possible candidates for Mr. Priebus's job include Mr. Cohn, a former Goldman Sachs Group Inc. executive, people familiar with the matter said. It is also possible Mr. Trump would bring in an outsider, the people said. Mr. Cohn has told the president he would be an eager and able chief of staff, people familiar with the matter said.

Mr. Cohn said the reports about a shake-up are "completely false."

"Reince is leading our team effectively," Mr. Cohn said.

The prospect of a shake-up was reported Friday by Axios, an online news site.

The president himself at times has fueled the internal acrimony, according to people familiar with the matter. He started asking friends to rate the performance of his top aides following the failure in March to pass a health-care bill through the Republican-controlled House, the people said.

Mr. Bannon has been at Mr. Trump's side since August when he was brought in as part of the campaign's third leadership team. Mr. Bannon's allies say any internal battles he is involved in are over policy and the direction of the president's agenda.

He has tussled most frequently with Mr. Cohn, the people said. The two men, both with blue-collar backgrounds, have jockeyed over where they sit in meetings. But the bigger issue between them has been changes to the federal tax code and international trade, the people said.

Mr. Cohn has suggested the possibility of a carbon tax, which Mr. Bannon views as anathema to the "economic nationalism" that he infused into Mr. Trump's campaign, the people said. "Steve is willing to go to war on policy," one person said, adding he was determined to cede no ground to Mr. Cohn.

Mr. Bannon has also found himself on the opposite side of internal policy debates with Mr. Kushner, who encouraged his father-in-law to bring Mr. Bannon into the presidential campaign in the final months of the race.

The two worked closely during the campaign, and in the first days of the administration. When the president's team divvied up desks inside the White House, Messrs. Bannon and Kushner decided to take down a wall separating their two offices and replace it with a door.

One friend of Mr. Bannon said Mr. Trump would be wise to keep him in his current role, describing him as someone who will stay true to the insurgent, outsider spirit that drove the campaign.

"Steve Bannon has been the protector of the flame," said Pat Caddell, who served as a pollster for former President Jimmy Carter's 1976 campaign.

Still, Mr. Bannon's role has seemed narrower in recent days. He was removed earlier this week from the National Security Council. He was also intended to help lead an internal consultancy that relies on outside groups and business leaders to reshape the federal government. Now known as the Office of American Innovation, that project has just one boss: Mr. Kushner.

Eli Stokols and Jay Solomon contributed to this article.

Write to Carol E. Lee at carol.lee@wsj.com, Peter Nicholas at peter.nicholas@wsj.com and Michael C. Bender at Mike.Bender@wsj.com

Read More

* Steve Bannon Removed From National Security Council

* Opinion: A Presidential Honeymoon From Hell

* With Strike on Syria, Trump Sends a Global Message

* Trump's Syria Decision Shows He Is Willing to Act Forcefully, Quickly

* Jared Kushner Flies to Iraq for Briefing on Anti-\b ISIS\b0  Strategy (April 3)

* Ten Weeks In, Trump Has Racked Up Few Victories (April 1)

* President Trump's Advisers Made Big Money, Disclosures Show (March 31)

Document WSJO000020170407ed470070u



US
U.S. Strike in Syria Raises Tensions With Iran; Officials in Iran accuse White House of violating international law and siding with Islamic State

By Jay Solomon 
680 words
8 April 2017
01:19
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTONhe U.S. airstrikes on Syria stoked new tensions with Iran and generated calls in Tehran for increased military support for President Bashar al-Assad's regime.

Iranian officials said on Friday the U.S. attack violated international law and accused President Donald Trump of siding with Islamic State and al Qaeda in Syria.

"Not even two decades after 9/11, [the] U.S. military is fighting on same side as al-Qaeda & ISIS in Yemen & Syria," Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif tweeted on Friday. "Time to stop hype and coverups."

But Mr. Trump and his advisers have already taken steps in recent months to try to roll back

Iranian influence in the Middle East, despite the landmark nuclear agreement forged between Tehran and global powers in 2015.

Many Middle East analysts said Iran could seek to mobilize even more military support for Mr. Assad in coming months. This is in addition to the thousands of Shiite fighters it has already deployed in Syria since civil war broke out in the country in 2011.

Syria serves as Iran's closest regional ally and the land bridge for Iranian supplies going to Lebanese and Palestinian militias at war with Israel.

"The key question now is, what's the Iranian response to the attack? Do they double down," said Andrew Tabler, a Syria expert at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

Iranian experts said the government has no choice, given the billions of dollars it has already invested in Mr. Assad over the past six years.

"Iran and Russia have paid a high cost in Syria, both financially and in human life, and Iran has lost even more than Russia," said Foad Izadi, a professor at Tehran University. "Therefore, Iran will not sit back indifferent."

Mr. Trump, a Republican, campaigned last year against former President Barack Obama's diplomatic outreach to Iran and the nuclear deal, which constrained Tehran's capabilities but also released billions of dollars in frozen Iranian assets.

Since taking office, Mr. Trump has signaled he will abide by the agreement. But he has also taken steps to try to constrain Tehran's military capabilities and presence across the Mideast.

Mr. Trump's administration has sanctioned dozens of Iranian companies since January for allegedly aiding Tehran's development of ballistic missiles. And it has also increased support for a military coalition led by Saudi Arabia that is fighting an Iranian-backed militia in Yemen.

Military analysts said Mr. Assad may have deployed chemical weapons on Tuesday because his troops have been stretched thin by the civil war.

Iran has mobilized as many as 10,000 militiamen from Lebanon, Iraq and Afghanistan in a largely successful military effort to buttress Mr. Assad's defenses.

But U.S. and Arab officials believe the Syrian government has inadequate forces to hold territory it has reclaimed in recent months from rebel militias.

U.S. officials have said in recent days that they believe Thursday's airstrikes will renew pressure on Damascus and potentially serve as a warning that Mr. Trump's administration won't tolerate future chemical weapons attacks. Shutting down chemical attacks, they argue, will force Iran and Russia to either pour more resources into Syria or to engage in a diplomatic process to end the Syrian civil war.

U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson is scheduled to visit Moscow next week for a meeting with President Vladimir Putin of Russia. The Syrian conflict is expected to top their agenda.

Aresu Eqbali in Tehran contributed to this article.

Write to Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com

Related Stories

* Trump's Syria Strike Sends Russia a Signal

* Nikki Haley Warns U.S. Prepared to o More' in Syria

* Strike Alters U.S. Military Strategy in Syria

* U.S. Strike, Unlike in 2013, Probably Won't Endanger Assad Rule

* Attack Shakes Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight

* Trump Gets Rare Bipartisan Backing for Strike

Document WSJO000020170407ed4700b9l



World
Key Developments and Players in the Syrian Conflict; U.S. strike against Syrian air base is latest chapter in six-year clash

By Karen Leigh, Raja Abdulrahim and Noam Raydan 
827 words
7 April 2017
23:45
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The conflict in Syria has claimed more than 400,000 lives and forced millions to flee their homes since it began more than six years ago. But President Bashar al-Assad has survived, retaining control of strongholds across the country.

U.S. President Donald Trump on Thursday sharply escalated the country's involvement in Syria, ordering direct strikes on a military air base in retaliation for a supposed chemical weapons attack carried out earlier this week by the regime. As the move further complicates the battle, we look at other key moments in the conflictnd those battling for supremacy.

A TIMELINE OF THE SYRIAN CONFLICT:

March 2011: Antigovernment demonstrations sweep across Syria, inspired by Arab Spring uprisings. Syrian regime violently cracks down on protesters, kicking off six-year civil conflict.

May 2011: The U.S. sanctions Mr. Assad and senior Syrian officials, an attempt to end escalating violence in the country.

August 2011: For the first time, U.S. President Barack Obama says Mr. Assad must step down. "We have consistently said that President Assad must lead a democratic transition or get out of the way," Mr. Obama said. "He has not led. For the sake of the Syrian people, the time has come for President Assad to step aside."

August 2013: A chemical attack on rebel-controlled Eastern Ghouta triggers calls for military action against Mr. Assad. Mr. Obama considers the move, but ultimately doesn't, triggering condemnation that his administration has been too soft on the regime.

September 2013: Mr. Obama says his oft-cited "red line" on Syria isn't a personal red line, but one established by the international community after banning the use of chemical weapons. "I didn't set a red line," he says. "The world set a red line."

October 2013: Syria officially joins the Chemical Weapons Convention, vowing to relinquish its chemical arsenal to avert threat of U.S. military action.

September 2015: Russia starts bombing raids, mostly targeting opposition rebels, across Syria in support of Mr. Assad and his beleaguered forces.

September 2016: The U.S. mistakenly strikes Syrian military personnel for the first time.

December 2016: The Syrian regime regains full control of Aleppo, stripping the opposition of its last major urban stronghold in the country in a significant symbolic and strategic blow.

April 2017: The U.S. strikes a Syrian air base with Tomahawk missiles, a retaliation for an alleged regime chemical attack in Idlib.

WHO IS WHERE IN SYRIA:

Russia: Russia's military operations in Syria are being carried out across the country by several thousand soldiers and personnel. They are based primarily at an air base at Hmeimim and a naval station at Tartus.

ISIS: Islamic State is currently facing pressure from a U.S.-backed military campaign to oust it from its stronghold of Raqqa. Last month, Syrian regime forces regained control of the ancient city of Palmyra from Islamic State for the second time. The Sunni Muslim extremist group maintains control of most of the oil-rich eastern province Deir Ezzour.

Iran: Iran has funneled arms and money to Syria in support of Mr. Assad almost from the conflict's outset, and began sending in military advisers from its Revolutionary Guard Corps in 2012. Its involvement has since increased, with thousands of Iranian troops and Shiite Muslim proxies coming to the regime's aid. Some Iranian forces withdrew in 2016 after suffering heavy battlefield losses, according to former U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry. There are no official figures on the size of its current deployment.

Hezbollah: Lebanese Shiite militant group Hezbollah, a key Iranian ally, has sent thousands of men to fight alongside Mr. Assad's forceslthough the size of its total force is uncertain. Hezbollah fighters played a major role in the regime's takeover of Aleppo late last year. Designated a terror group by Washington, Hezbollah also fights alongside Russian forces in Syria and trains some militias linked to the Assad regime.

Syrian government: The Syrian army is battling rebel groups on fronts across the country. In March, they repelled the most aggressive offensive in years by Damascus rebels on the outskirts of the capital, Mr. Assad's longtime stronghold.

Syrian opposition: Numerous rebel factionsncluding the Syrian Conquest Front, formerly known as the al Qaeda-linked Nusra Front and designated a terrorist group by the United Nations and the U.S.ppose the Assad regime. In recent months, rebels suffered losses to the regime in Aleppo, Homs and around Damascus. On some fronts, various factions have joined together to combat the Syrian army and its allies.

Asa Fitch and Thomas Grove contributed to this article.

Write to Karen Leigh at karen.leigh@wsj,com and Raja Abdulrahim at raja.abdulrahim@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170407ed4700a6p



Capital Journal
Politics
With Strike on Syria, Trump Sends a Global Message; President's action signals tough approach to leaders of North Korea, Russia and China

By Gerald F. Seib 
949 words
7 April 2017
23:21
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Syria was on the receiving end of the dozens of cruise missiles launched on President Donald Trump's orders Thursday night, but the message they sent went out to North Korea, Russia, China and Iran as well.

No international action taken by a president ever occurs in isolation. That is particularly true for a new president, whose intentions and instincts are being carefully scrutinized by other world leaders.

Mr. Trump's words, style and worldview have been especially unorthodox and difficult to read. In particular, it has been unclear which Trump persona would prevail: the America First leader, who suggested he would shrink from engaging in world hot spots to focus on America's own problems, or the tough-guy leader, who suggested he wouldn't hesitate to use American power.

The Syrian action, at least, implies that the tough guy may prevail. While the strike itself was distinctly limitednd may or may not presage a willingness to be pulled more deeply into Syria's murderous civil warhe picture of cruise missiles flying has ripple effects elsewhere.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson summarized the lesson this way: "I think it does demonstrate that President Trump is willing to act when governments and actors cross the line and cross the line on violating commitments they've made and cross the line in the most heinous of ways."

For starters, the action comes precisely as the new president is being tested by North Korea and its erratic leader, Kim Jong Un. In fact, nobody has challenged Mr. Trump more directly; the North Korean's welcome note to Mr. Trump has been a series of missile tests seemingly designed to show that his quest to develop the ability to deliver a nuclear warhead to Seoul, Tokyo or Los Angeles will continue unabated.

It's hard to imagine Mr. Trump didn't have the North Koreans in the back of his mind as he made his decision to strike, or that Mr. Kim won't think he may need to be a bit more careful.

That message likely also reached the man Mr. Trump happened to be meeting Friday, Chinese President Xi Jinping. The Chinese have more influence over North Korea than anyone, and they seem perpetually torn over how to use that influence.

On the one hand, the Chinese don't like the idea of a reckless nuclear-armed North Korea busting up the scenery on the world stage. On the other hand, they worry that confronting Mr. Kim too directly could prompt even more erratic behavior by him, chaos on the Korean Peninsula and a bigger American military presence in the region in response.

If Chinese leaders are convinced that the American administration is prepared to take dramatic action to stop North Korea's nuclear program, their incentive to move on their own to prevent such a sequence of events goes up. Perhaps that is how Mr. Xi will read his options after Mr. Trump demonstrated a willingness to act in Syria.

For Russia, the Syria move may represent a rude discovery that the new American president won't be the pliant partner that the Kremlin had hoped for. The biggest change in Syria since President Barack Obama declined to take a similar military step there was a dramatic escalation in Russia's presence on behalf of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.

The Russians and their Syrian patrons may have thought that presence would shield Mr. Assad from American hostilities. And they may have thought that doubly true after Mr. Trump, who campaigned on a platform of improving relations with Russia and skepticism about involvement in more Middle Eastern fights, took office.

Those presumptions now are, at a minimum, called into question. Mr. Assad has to recalibrate the risks he is taking in how he conducts himself in his country's civil war. He also may have to discard the idea that the new American administration would be content to leave him and his regime in place, an idea that may well have been planted by some early and careless administration comments.

Russian leader Vladimir Putin also has to reconsider whether the new American president will be a partner in Syria to fight Islamic State forces there, as often suggested during the campaign, or an obstacle in the Kremlin's efforts to prop up the Syrian regime.

Finally, Iran, Syria's other big international enabler, has to think anew about the potential costs of its own involvement in Syrias well as the consequences it might face if it breaks out of the deal it struck to curb its nuclear activities.

All these actors are capable of making big trouble for Mr. Trump if they feel threatened, but they also might choose to moderate their behavior if they think the new president isn't withdrawing from the world stage.

Write to Gerald F. Seib at jerry.seib@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base

* Syria Says Strike Kills 16, Damages Air Base

* Nikki Haley Warns U.S. Prepared to o More' in Syria

* Timeline: First Major Military Campaigns by U.S. Presidents

* Strike on Syria Angers Moscow, Shaking Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight

* Congress Backs Trump, Debates Its Own Role In Military Strikes

* U.S. Probes Possible Russian Role in Attack by Syria

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Unlikely to Endanger Assad Rule

* How the Trump Administration's Language Shifted Quickly on Assad

* Trump Shows He Is Willing to Act Forcefully, Quickly

* President Trump's Syria Statement

Document WSJO000020170407ed47004xu



Politics
Donald Trump Gets Rare Bipartisan Backing for Syria Strike; Republicans are enthusiastic and Democrats support move, though some question whether Congress was consulted

By Reid J. Epstein And Janet Hook 
1,099 words
8 April 2017
01:29
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTONor the first time since his inauguration, Donald Trump is being treated like a conventional president.

Mr. Trump's ordering of a missile strike on a Syrian air base that his administration says launched a chemical attack this week drew enthusiastic support from across the GOP spectrum and tempered praise from most Democrats.

The political reaction to Mr. Trump's military intervention against Syria marks a dramatic change from the resistance the president has faced from Democrats and skepticism from some Republicans since he assumed office in January.

"In the short run, this will clearly benefit him politically," said Karl Rove, the top political aide to President George W. Bush. "It will cause people to look at him differently, and it will cause our adversaries to see us differently."

The airstrikes Mr. Trump ordered on Syria transformed his profile, at least for now, from a president whose skepticism about foreign interventions was at odds with GOP orthodoxy, into a more conventional foreign-policy figure in the mainstream of his party.

GOP hawks such as Sens. John McCain, Lindsey Graham and Marco Rubio had been skeptical of Mr. Trump's foreign-policy leadership. Their allies said the Syria response would help him gain credibility and rally support behind his beleaguered presidency.

Even Bill Kristol, a conservative commentator who has been a relentless critic of Mr. Trump, said the move seemed to be well executed and in keeping with what other GOP presidents would do. "If you thought this White House looks like total chaos and craziness, you can say, ee, at least in this instance it looks like it's functioning,' " he said.

Mr. Kristol and other Trump critics said they were unsure how long the moment of leadership or the policy behind it would last, given Mr. Trump's record of inconsistency.

"Is this the moment where he is perceived as serious and steady, and has he made this transition?" asked Brian Katulis, an official in President Bill Clinton's administration who is a senior fellow at the liberal Center for American Progress. "Quite frankly, we don't know, and experience shows he is likely to revert to true to form, erratic and mercurial."

Still, Aaron David Miller, a Middle East expert at the Wilson Center and former adviser to Republican and Democratic secretaries of state, said that this was a "clarifying moment" for the Trump presidency, unlike any other in the first rocky, polarizing months of his time in the White House.

"He's created a moment we have not seen in the first 70 days. There is a recognition that something important has happened, something that can be described as bipartisan," he said. "It's a moment. It's not guaranteed to last, given the challenges that remain."

Democrats who have stridently opposed Mr. Trump's agenda praised the airstrikes.

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer of New York called it "the right thing to do." Sen. Dianne Feinstein of California called the military response "a limited, and I think an important strike, and it accomplished its purpose and sent a message."

Democratic National Committee Chairman Tom Perez, who has harshly criticized Mr. Trump in recent weeks, didn't denounce the attack on Syria, but raised the issue of whether Mr. Trump had consulted Congress. "Americans deserve to know Trump's broader strategy and whether or not it includes diplomacy. Congress should be consulted," he said.

Large numbers of Republicans have reversed their position on congressional approval for Syrian airstrikes since then-President Barack Obama weighed attacking the country in 2013.

At the time, Republicans such as then-House Speaker John Boehner insisted Mr. Obama lay out a fuller plan for action in Syria before launching airstrikes after the Assad regime carried out a suspected chemical attack in Damascus. Scores of Republicans said they would oppose an authorization for the use of military force. No vote was taken.

Now, many of those same Republicans praised Mr. Trump for taking action.

"This action in Syria was appropriate and just," said House Speaker Paul Ryan, who opposed Mr. Obama's 2013 Syria plan. Utah Sen. Orrin Hatch also praised Mr. Trump's action, though in 2013 he said he had "strong reservations" about authorizing force against Syria.

How much patience Democrats have with Mr. Trump as leader of an intervening America remains unclear. Mr. Rove said Mr. Trump would lose any newfound political goodwill if he didn't articulate his foreign-policy philosophy "within days."

Mr. Trump drew condemnation from his most strident nationalist supporters, who accused him of going back on his campaign promise to put "America first" and avoid Middle East conflict except to stop terror acts against the U.S.

"He told us he would be the president of America, not he world,' " Ann Coulter wrote on Twitter.

Mr. Trump's airstrikes on Syria also have had the effect of unifying anti-interventionist elements on the political far left and far right.

Sen. Rand Paul (R., Ky.) said the airstrikes are "illegal, and they're unconstitutional." Rep. Barbara Lee (D., Calif.), the lone member of Congress to vote against the post-9/11 authorization to use force against Afghanistan, said the airstrikes represent "a dangerous military escalation into the Syrian civil war and are without legal justification."

The airstrikes were also disappointing to Republicans who had hoped Mr. Trump would, as he had promised during his campaign, shift U.S. policy away from nation-building and military actions not driven by pressing national security concerns.

"I think it's a disaster," said A.J. Spiker, former chairman of the Iowa Republican Party. "It makes people question: If a photo of an incident that has occurred in another nation causes the president to drop 50 or more cruise missiles, is that a real well thought-out strategy, or is this an emotional reaction?"

Siobhan Hughes and Natalie Andrews contributed to this article.

Write to Reid J. Epstein at Reid.Epstein@wsj.com and Janet Hook at janet.hook@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base

* Syria Says Strike Kills 16, Damages Air Base

* Strike on Syria Angers Moscow, Shaking Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight

* Congress Backs Trump, Debates Its Own Role In Military Strikes

* U.S. Probes Possible Russian Role in Attack by Syria

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Unlikely to Endanger Assad Rule

* Trump Shows He Is Willing to Act Forcefully, Quickly

Document WSJO000020170407ed4700bcd



World
Trump Shows He Is Willing to Act Forcefully, Quickly; President demonstrates comfort with military action in ordering missile strikes in Syria

By Carol E. Lee                 and Louise Radnofsky 
793 words
7 April 2017
06:48
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WEST PALM BEACH, Fla.resident Donald Trump's decision to order military strikes in Syria sets his presidency on a new and unpredictable course that is likely to shape his time in office.

Faced with his first major foreign-policy test moment that confronts every new presidentr. Trump demonstrated a comfort with military action and a flexibility in approach that saw him change course not only on comments he made in the campaign but also on his policy toward Syria in just 48 hours after seeing gruesome photographic evidence from the Asssad regime's chemical-weapons attack Tuesday.

His decision drew support from Republican and Democratic lawmakers who have long called for stronger U.S. action in Syria.

But with his message delivered both in missiles and in a presidential address from behind a podium at his private resort in Florida, Mr. Trump faces the difficult choice his predecessor and other world leaders have grappled with for years: Now what? It's the question that repeatedly led President Barack Obama to decide against deeper military involvement in Syria.

Just three months into his presidency Mr. Trump will have to find his own answer. He has to confront a litany of risky unknowns.

It is unclear how the Assad regime, or its allies Russia and Iran, will react. It is unclear whether Mr. Trump intends to move the U.S. more forcefully into the Syrian conflictommitting the U.S. military to greater engagement in the Middle Eastr whether he plans to hold back beyond sending a signal that the use of chemical weapons won't be tolerated by the White House.

One message was clear: Mr. Trump is willing to use force and to make decisions swiftly when he is moved to act.

"Assad choked out the lives of helpless men, women and children. It was a slow, brutal death for so many," Mr. Trump said in a national address. "No child of God should ever suffer such horror."

It is a dramatic shift from Mr. Obama, who deliberated at length over military decisions and resisted years of calls for a deeper U.S. military involvement in Syria to help bring the conflict to an end. During his own election campaign, Mr. Trump suggested the U.S. should leave conflicts such as the one in Syria for other nations to resolve, including Russia.

The missile strikes mark an early turning point in Mr. Trump's presidency. It is his first major military order as commander in chief. But it is also the first military decision of consequence that Americans and the world have seen him make after otherwise fitful first weeks as president, which have been marred by controversy and infighting in his own party.

Mr. Trump had in many ways compelled himself to act by vowing on Wednesday to retaliate for the gas attack. He had limited other options given Mr. Obama had cut a deal with the Assad regime, brokered by Russia, to remove its chemical-weapons stockpile instead of launching military action.

On Thursday, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson denounced Russia, saying it had failed to deliver on commitments in that deal to locate, secure and destroy the weapons.

"Either Russia has been complicit or Russia has been simply incompetent in its ability to deliver on its end of that agreement," said Mr. Tillerson, also in West Palm Beach for the visit of Chinese President Xi Jinping, at a summit that hours earlier had been expected to revolve around North Korea and trade issues.

Mr. Tillerson said that Mr. Trump had reflected on the prior responses and "lack of responses" to Syria and concluded that the U.S. "could not, yet again, turn away" for fear of normalizing the use of chemical weapons.

He was flanked by Mr. Trump's national security adviser, H.R. McMaster, who also noted the significance of Mr. Trump's order.

"This was not a small strike," he said. "What it does communicate is a big shifthis is the first time that the United States has taken direct military action against that regime."

Related Coverage

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base

* Nikki Haley Warns U.S. Prepared to o More' in Syria

* Timeline: First Major Military Campaigns by U.S. Presidents

* Strike on Syria Angers Moscow, Shaking Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight

* Congress Backs Trump, Debates Its Own Role In Military Strikes

* U.S. Probes Possible Russian Role in Attack by Syria

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Unlikely to Endanger Assad Rule

* How the Trump Administration's Language Shifted Quickly on Assad

Document WSJO000020170407ed470015p



Best of the Web
Opinion
Trump's Bipartisan War Coalition; Almost everybody likes bombing Assad's airfield.

By James Freeman 
1,089 words
7 April 2017
20:51
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

President Trump's decision to launch missiles against a Syrian airfield on Thursday night is winning the support of politicians across the aisle and across the oceans. Investors also seem to like a more assertive United States. And we have here further proof that Trump foreign policy is much less kind to Russia than the Obama-Clinton variety. But what exactly is Mr. Trump's policy?

Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad horrified the world this week with his latest chemical assault on his own civilian population. He particularly horrified Mr. Trump, who ordered the U.S. action and later described Assad's atrocity as "slow and brutal death for so many." Mr. Trump added, "Even beautiful babies were cruelly murdered in this very barbaric attack. No child of God should ever suffer such horror."

Mr. Trump's new determination to intervene in Syria may also mark a change in domestic U.S. politics. The self-styled Trump "resistance"ith its implication that the winner of the 2016 election is somehow akin to an occupying armyay be losing support among liberal pols. Just a week after the head of the Democratic National Committeesaid that Mr. Trump "didn't win the election," many leading Democrats are treating Mr. Trump like the legitimate President he is and rallying around the commander-in-chief on the issue of an overseas military engagement. Last night Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumersaid: "Making sure Assad knows that when he commits such despicable atrocities he will pay a price is the right thing to do."

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi wants Congress to debate the limits of Mr. Trump's authority to make war on Assad, but she said that Thursday's attack "appears to be a proportional response to the regime's use of chemical weapons."

CNNnotes "widespread backing" for the U.S. missile barrage among traditional allies overseas. Secretary of State Rex Tillersontold the press last night that "the response from our allies in Europe, as well as the region in the Middle East, has been overwhelmingly supportive of the action we've taken."

Wall Street seems to like it too, as on Friday it has been largely shrugging off the heightened risk of war and even a lousy jobs report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Strong USA. Bullish all markets," texted a hedge fund manager this morning. One could argue that the confirmation of Neil Gorsuch to join the Supreme Court is good news for stocks because consistent rule of law and constitutional governance are good for markets.

But warfare is expensive, risky, and prone to unintended consequences. The Journal notes that the Russian government "swiftly suspended an agreement with Washington for military coordination in Syrian skies on Friday following the U.S. missile attack on a Syrian base, in a new complication for the Trump administration's key priority of fighting Islamic State."

Kicking the [expletive] out of Islamic State seemed to be about the only priority in Syria for Mr. Trump during much of his campaign. But as Mr. Tillerson noted last night, the simple idea of destroying ISIS has given way to something a bit more expansive. Here's Mr. Tillerson describing the new Trump policy on Syria:

"So it's to defeat ISIS; it's to begin to stabilize areas of Syria, stabilize areas in the south of Syria, stabilize areas around Raqqa through ceasefire agreements between the Syrian regime forces and opposition forces. Stabilize those areas; begin to restore some normalcy to them. Restore them to local governance -- and there are local leaders who are ready to return, some who have left as refugees -- they're ready to return to govern these areas. Use local forces that will be part of the liberation effort to develop the local security forces -- law enforcement, police force. And then use other forces to create outer perimeters of security so that areas like Raqqa, areas in the south can begin to provide a secure environment so refugees can begin to go home and begin the rebuilding process. In the midst of that, through the Geneva Process, we will start a political process to resolve Syria's future in terms of its governance structure, and that ultimately, in our view, will lead to a resolution of Bashar al-Assad's departure."

On Thursday the President said, "Tonight, I call on all civilized nations to join us in seeking to end the slaughter and bloodshed in Syria, and also to end terrorism of all kinds and all types." Mr. Trump added that "we hope that as long as America stands for justice, then peace and harmony will, in the end, prevail."

All Americans certainly share that hope. A lot of them also probably want to hear what exactly Mr. Trump is committing them to do in Syria, at what cost and for how long.

Bottom Stories of the Day

Sure, But Did He Dine Alone With Her? "Secret Service Agent on Pence's Detail Suspended After Prostitution Arrest," New York, April 5

Getting to Be a Habit "In January, Susan Rice Assured NPR the Obama Admin Removed Chemical Weapons From Syria," The Weekly Standard, April 6

Russian Plot to Prevent Her From Relating to Average Americans? "Hillary Clinton Explains Why She Really Lost to Trump," NBC News, April 7

If By epublicans' You Mean Jonathan Chait "Before This Is Over, Republicans Are Going to Wish Hillary Clinton Won," New York, April 5

Someone's Going to Have to Break This to Jonathan Chait "Hillary Clinton says she won't run for public office again," Chicago Tribune, April 6

If Only We Could Find a Cheap Local Energy Source "Sign of the times? Solar panels power Kentucky Coal Museum," ABC News, April 6

You Can Outsource That? "Facebook Demands That Its Outside Law Firms Meet 33% Diversity Target That Facebook Does Not Meet," TaxProf Blog, April 4

Mullahs vs. Mothers "No women allowed to run in Iran's first marathon," Times of Israel, April 7

Because The DNC Won't Acknowledge He's the Duly-Elected President? "The real reasons Trump can't work with Democrats," Vox, April 4

Follow James Freeman on Twitter.

Subscribe to the Best of the Web email with one click.

To suggest items, please email best@wsj.com.

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web. Thanks to Irene DeBlasio, Ethel Fenig, Tony Lima, and Wes Van Fleet.)

Document WSJO000020170407ed47007vd



REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
Trump's Syria Opportunity

964 words
7 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A16
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

President Trump inherited the Syrian catastrophe from Barack Obama, and his initial instincts were to accept the awful status quo. But Bashar Assad's latest chemical attack has galvanized his Administration to think anew, and Mr. Trump's decision Thursday to launch a retaliatory missile strike is an important first step to save lives, enforce global order, and improve the strategic outlook for the U.S. and its allies.

Mr. Trump starts with the reality that Mr. Obama's long abdication has left the U.S. with far less leverage than it had when the civil war began in 2011. Iran has become Mr. Assad's protector on the ground via arms supplies and Hezbollah, and Russia has moved in as a military patron and patroller of the skies. The Muslim opposition the U.S. has been feebly trying to train and arm has been degraded while Mr. Assad and the Russians leave Islamic State to the Kurds and the U.S.-led coalition.

As recently as last week Mr. Trump seemed willing to surrender to this circumstance and do nothing beyond defeating ISIS in Syria's east. This was reflected in Secretary of State Rex Tillerson's comments last week that Mr. Assad was here to stay and the future of Syria would be "decided by the Syrian people." That's John Kerry-speak for capitulation, and it may have led Mr. Assad to believe he could unleash more chemical hell.

Mr. Trump also seemed to be courting an accommodation with Russia in Syria, but that road leads to more strategic retreat. Vladimir Putin's price for restraining Mr. Assad would be steep: U.S. recognition of his conquests in Ukraine and the end of sanctions. This would erode the U.S.-Europe alliance and make Mr. Putin look like a hero back home. Iran might not cooperate in any case, and its goal is an arc of Shiite power from Tehran through Iraq and Syria to the Mediterranean.

The alternative to this surrender is to reassert U.S. influence with diplomacy and military force, and Mr. Assad's chemical attack is the opening. Mr. Trump may understand this as he ordered an attack on the air base from which the chemical attack was launched, and Mr. Tillerson said Thursday that Mr. Assad has no future in Syria.

The quickest way to punish Mr. Assad for his aerial chemical attacks, and to ensure they won't happen again, is to destroy his air power. This is the plan that Mr. Obama flinched at in 2013 when he let Mr. Assad cross his "red line." He has now crossed that line again -- this time after having promised to destroy his chemical stockpiles.

On Thursday the U.S. struck only a single airfield, though Mr. Assad has six active airfields used in the war. The U.S. used cruise missiles from outside Syrian air space, which avoided engagement with Russian-manned air defenses. The Pentagon provided the firepower, though we wish Arabs and Europeans could have been included to show the international rejection of Mr. Assad's war crimes.

Mr. Putin could escalate and engage U.S. forces. But Mr. Obama used that excuse to talk himself into doing nothing, and our guess is that Mr. Putin would shrink from fighting the U.S. lest he risk the humiliation of major losses. As for Russians on the ground, a U.S. source told the press they were forewarned about the attack to avoid casualties.

A stronger attack would have destroyed Syria's entire air force, and another good step would be for the U.S. and its allies to create "safe zones" inside Syria that Mr. Trump promised during the campaign. This would be enforced by U.S. and allied air sorties plus renewed military supplies for the opposition. The humanitarian effort would show the U.S. purpose includes protecting the Syrian people. An international force could provide support for havens in multiple locations near the Turkish and Jordanian borders.

---

Every military operation carries risks but this one could also have major political and strategic benefits if Mr. Trump follows the air strike with some forceful diplomacy. The demonstration of renewed U.S. purpose in the region could have an electrifying impact across the Middle East. The Saudis, the Gulf Sunni states and Turkey would begin to rethink their accommodation to the Russia-Assad-Iran axis of dominance that none of them wants.

Mr. Trump also needs to make Russia and Iran begin to pay a price for their support for Mr. Assad's depredations. They have had no incentive to negotiate an end to the civil war because they see themselves on the road to a relatively cost-free victory. That calculus may change if it looks like the costs of intervening are rising and Mr. Assad is no longer a sure winner.

The Trump Administration has to think about the kind of long-term solution it would like in Syria -- perhaps a partition into ethnic enclaves -- but the chances of getting there are better if the opposition has safe zones and Mr. Assad can't maraud with impunity.

The larger point for Mr. Trump to recognize is that he is being tested. The world -- friend and foe -- is watching to see how he responds to Mr. Assad's war crime. His quick air strike on the evening he was having dinner with Chinese President Xi Jinping makes clear that the Obama era is over. If he now follows with action to protect Syrian civilians and construct an anti-Assad coalition, he may find that new strategic possibilities open up to enhance U.S. interests and make the Middle East more stable.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170407ed4700021



World News:  ISIS  Hits Iraqi City It Lost

By Tamer El-Ghobashy in Erbil, Iraq, and Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad 
422 words
6 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

An overnight attack by Islamic State gunmen and suicide bombers disguised as police officers killed at least 35 people and wounded 40 others in the Iraqi city of Tikrit, officials said Wednesday.

The episode underlines the security challenge faced by Iraq's government even after it reclaims cities like Tikrit from the militants, who have proven capable of staging deadly attacks even in territory no longer under their control.

Tikrit was reclaimed from the group by the Iraqi military and allied militias in 2015, and has since been touted by both Iraqi and American officials as a model for repopulating, rebuilding and securing areas once held by Islamic State.

The gunmen were waved through a security checkpoint because they were wearing police uniforms, said provincial council member Mounir Hussein. They headed to the city's crowded Zuhour Street shopping district at about 10 p.m., killing four police officers before turning their weapons on civilians.

At least two Islamic State gunmen exploded suicide belts they were wearing, Mr. Hussein said. Three other militants were killed by responding police.

Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack.

Its scale indicates the militant group could still maintain cells within cities lost to government forces, and is increasingly falling back on traditional guerrilla-style terror tactics as it adapts to the loss of its power centers.

Iraqi forces have since October been engaged in a fierce battle to expel Islamic State from Mosul, the extremists' remaining urban stronghold in the country.

Iraqi officials estimate they have reclaimed some 75% of the city. Holding reclaimed ground and preventing security breaches have been key concerns for the Iraqi government as it continues to win back cities from Islamic State.

Recent attacks on such territory -- including suicide bombings in Fallujah since last summer, when it was declared liberated -- have raised questions from lawmakers about whether Islamic State is taking advantage of corruption among security officials to breach checkpoints.

Mr. Hussein said the attackers in Tikrit identified a weakness at some checkpoints: police officers waving through anyone wearing a military or police uniform without properly checking their identity.

Iraqi officers do a thorough job checking civilians and should apply the same standards to people in uniform, he added.

"Once they see someone in uniform, they relax and never check," he said. "This is something being used by terrorists to breach security lines."



License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170406ed460001v



For Syria, Words Won't Be Enough

By Paul Wolfowitz 
674 words
6 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A19
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Among the many unintentionally profound comments attributed to Yankee great Yogi Berra, one of the best known is, "When you come to a fork in the road, take it."

President Trump may have initially believed that he could avoid the fork in the road presented by the Assad regime's use of chemical weapons in Syria by simply blaming the crime on Barack Obama's failure to enforce his "red line" four years ago. Fortunately it seems he has reconsidered.

Mr. Trump initially responded on Tuesday by condemning the attacks as "heinous" and "reprehensible." He added correctly that little children in Syria would not be dying such gruesome and painful deaths, gasping for breath, if Mr. Obama had followed through on his warnings against the use of chemical weapons in that civil war.

That made it briefly appear as though the president might use Mr. Obama's failure as an excuse to avoid action. In a joint press conference Wednesday with Jordan's King Abdullah, however, Mr. Trump said the attacks on Syrian civilians, "innocent little babies" in particular, crosses "many, many lines for me." He continued, "I now have responsibility," and will "carry it very proudly."

Mr. Obama's temporizing has admittedly taken some options away from Mr. Trump. What former Secretary of State John Kerry once described as an "unbelievably small, limited kind" of military strike probably was never sufficient to fulfill its stated purpose: to "hold Bashar Assad accountable." Certainly something more substantial is needed now. And Russia's presence in Syria makes the situation much more problematic. Escaping this crisis through yet another agreement to eliminate Syria's horrific weapons peacefully is no longer feasible.

Let us hope Mr. Trump will reassess the impact of recent statements by members of his administration indicating that the U.S. is prepared to live with the Assad regime. The Syrians -- and their Russian and Iranian backers -- might well have interpreted this as a signal that they could continue terrorizing the population. Ominously, doctors and activists in the Idlib area, where Tuesday's attacks took place, say there has been an upswing in the use of chemical weapons since the end of 2016.

The large numbers of Syrians who see Mr. Assad as no better than ISIS probably believe that the Trump administration has given him a green light. Their seeming acceptance of Mr. Assad must have come as a dash of cold water for our many allies and potential allies who thought the new American president was a strong, bold leader who would stand up to Iran in a way his predecessor did not.

Mr. Trump now needs to back up Wednesday's strong words with leadership. As president, his statements carry weight that they didn't previously. World leaders make life-or-death decisions based on what they believe the American president's words signify about U.S. intentions. If his actions don't match his rhetoric, critical allies will conclude that Mr. Trump is weak, like his predecessor, which will have a damaging ripple effect for U.S. interests throughout the region and the world.

As with most such situations, the facts of the case are not yet completely clear. The Russians are claiming that Syrian warplanes targeted rebels who were producing toxic projectiles -- an unconvincing story, but the facts do need to be investigated.

While the investigation is under way, the Trump administration should not spend the time hoping that the problem will go away. Instead, they should use it to prepare a bold course of action to end these barbaric attacks and restore peace to Syria. That is no small task.

Indeed, the Trump administration foreign policy is facing its first serious fork in the road. The president seems ready to take on the burden. All Americans should hope that he does not fail.

---

Mr. Wolfowitz, an American Enterprise Institute scholar, has served as deputy defense secretary and ambassador to Indonesia.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170406ed460001i



REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
Terror Returns to Russia

342 words
6 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

An explosive device tore through a St. Petersburg subway train Monday, killing 14 people and wounding 49. On Tuesday intelligence agencies in Russia and Kyrgyzstan identified the suspect as Akbarzhon Jalilov, a Kyrgyzs-born Russian citizen.

If true -- and Kremlin claims can't be taken at face value -- this would be the second attack by a Central Asian suspect in recent months, after the gun rampage at an Istanbul nightclub over New Year's. Turkish authorities blamed Abdulkadir Masharipov, an Uzbek national, for that massacre. Islamic State claimed responsibility.

No group had taken credit for the St. Petersburg subway bombing as we went to press. But thousands of Central Asian Muslims have traveled to the Middle East to fight with jihadist groups since the Syrian civil war broke out in 2011. Islamic State has become the most popular because it's easy to join and its brutality and prowess made it the strong Islamist horse.

In the coming days the Kremlin is likely to use the attack to whip up nationalist sentiment and burnish its credentials as a stalwart asset in the global war against Islamist terror. So it's worth noting that in Syria, the most important battlefield of that war, the Russian government has gone out of its way to avoid hitting Islamic State as it seeks to prop up the regime of Bashar Assad.

As the Atlantic Council concluded in an exhaustive study last year, the Russian air campaign in Syria that began in fall 2015 and lasted until the following spring "caused only peripheral damage to ISIS" and had a "limited effect" on al Qaeda. The U.S. concluded in 2015 that more than 90% of Russian sorties targeted non-Islamic State, non-al Qaeda positions.

The deaths in St. Petersburg are a tragedy and outrage, no matter who the culprit turns out to be. The cynicism with which the Putin regime has used the threat of terrorism to its own advantage is no less ugly.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170405ed460000p



Opinion
For Syria, Words Won't Be Enough; Trump says attacking civilians crosses any lines.' Will he back it up?

By Paul Wolfowitz 
679 words
6 April 2017
01:20
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Among the many unintentionally profound comments attributed to Yankee great Yogi Berra, one of the best known is, "When you come to a fork in the road, take it."

President Trump may have initially believed that he could avoid the fork in the road presented by the Assad regime's use of chemical weapons in Syria by simply blaming the crime on Barack Obama's failure to enforce his "red line" four years ago. Fortunately it seems he has reconsidered.

Mr. Trump initially responded on Tuesday by condemning the attacks as "heinous" and "reprehensible." He added correctly that little children in Syria would not be dying such gruesome and painful deaths, gasping for breath, if Mr. Obama had followed through on his warnings against the use of chemical weapons in that civil war.

That made it briefly appear as though the president might use Mr. Obama's failure as an excuse to avoid action. In a joint press conference Wednesday with Jordan's King Abdullah, however, Mr. Trump said the attacks on Syrian civilians, "innocent little babies" in particular, crosses "many, many lines for me." He continued, "I now have responsibility," and will "carry it very proudly."

Mr. Obama's temporizing has admittedly taken some options away from Mr. Trump. What former Secretary of State John Kerry once described as an "unbelievably small, limited kind" of military strike probably was never sufficient to fulfill its stated purpose: to "hold Bashar Assad accountable." Certainly something more substantial is needed now. And Russia's presence in Syria makes the situation much more problematic. Escaping this crisis through yet another agreement to eliminate Syria's horrific weapons peacefully is no longer feasible.

Let us hope Mr. Trump will reassess the impact of recent statements by members of his administration indicating that the U.S. is prepared to live with the Assad regime. The Syriansnd their Russian and Iranian backersight well have interpreted this as a signal that they could continue terrorizing the population. Ominously, doctors and activists in the Idlib area, where Tuesday's attacks took place, say there has been an upswing in the use of chemical weapons since the end of 2016.

The large numbers of Syrians who see Mr. Assad as no better than ISIS probably believe that the Trump administration has given him a green light. Their seeming acceptance of Mr. Assad must have come as a dash of cold water for our many allies and potential allies who thought the new American president was a strong, bold leader who would stand up to Iran in a way his predecessor did not.

Mr. Trump now needs to back up Wednesday's strong words with leadership. As president, his statements carry weight that they didn't previously. World leaders make life-or-death decisions based on what they believe the American president's words signify about U.S. intentions. If his actions don't match his rhetoric, critical allies will conclude that Mr. Trump is weak, like his predecessor, which will have a damaging ripple effect for U.S. interests throughout the region and the world.

As with most such situations, the facts of the case are not yet completely clear. The Russians are claiming that Syrian warplanes targeted rebels who were producing toxic projectilesn unconvincing story, but the facts do need to be investigated.

While the investigation is under way, the Trump administration should not spend the time hoping that the problem will go away. Instead, they should use it to prepare a bold course of action to end these barbaric attacks and restore peace to Syria. That is no small task.

Indeed, the Trump administration foreign policy is facing its first serious fork in the road. The president seems ready to take on the burden. All Americans should hope that he does not fail.

Mr. Wolfowitz, an American Enterprise Institute scholar, has served as deputy defense secretary and ambassador to Indonesia.

Document WSJO000020170405ed45002pu



REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
Terror Returns to Russia

342 words
5 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

An explosive device tore through a St. Petersburg subway train Monday, killing 14 people and wounding 49. On Tuesday intelligence agencies in Russia and Kyrgyzstan identified the suspect as Akbarzhon Jalilov, a Kyrgyzs-born Russian citizen.

If true -- and Kremlin claims can't be taken at face value -- this would be the second attack by a Central Asian suspect in recent months, after the gun rampage at an Istanbul nightclub over New Year's. Turkish authorities blamed Abdulkadir Masharipov, an Uzbek national, for that massacre. Islamic State claimed responsibility.

No group had taken credit for the St. Petersburg subway bombing as we went to press. But thousands of Central Asian Muslims have traveled to the Middle East to fight with jihadist groups since the Syrian civil war broke out in 2011. Islamic State has become the most popular because it's easy to join and its brutality and prowess made it the strong Islamist horse.

In the coming days the Kremlin is likely to use the attack to whip up nationalist sentiment and burnish its credentials as a stalwart asset in the global war against Islamist terror. So it's worth noting that in Syria, the most important battlefield of that war, the Russian government has gone out of its way to avoid hitting Islamic State as it seeks to prop up the regime of Bashar Assad.

As the Atlantic Council concluded in an exhaustive study last year, the Russian air campaign in Syria that began in fall 2015 and lasted until the following spring "caused only peripheral damage to ISIS" and had a "limited effect" on al Qaeda. The U.S. concluded in 2015 that more than 90% of Russian sorties targeted non-Islamic State, non-al Qaeda positions.

The deaths in St. Petersburg are a tragedy and outrage, no matter who the culprit turns out to be. The cynicism with which the Putin regime has used the threat of terrorism to its own advantage is no less ugly.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170405ed450000u



Opinion
Terror Returns to Russia; Vladimir Putin propped up Bashar Assad instead of fighting Islamic State.

342 words
5 April 2017
01:15
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

An explosive device tore through a St. Petersburg subway train Monday, killing 14 people and wounding 49. On Tuesday intelligence agencies in Russia and Kyrgyzstan identified the suspect as Akbarzhon Jalilov, a Kyrgyzs-born Russian citizen.

If truend Kremlin claims can't be taken at face valuehis would be the second attack by a Central Asian suspect in recent months, after the gun rampage at an Istanbul nightclub over New Year's. Turkish authorities blamed Abdulkadir Masharipov, an Uzbek national, for that massacre. Islamic State claimed responsibility.

No group had taken credit for the St. Petersburg subway bombing as we went to press. But thousands of Central Asian Muslims have traveled to the Middle East to fight with jihadist groups since the Syrian civil war broke out in 2011. Islamic State has become the most popular because it's easy to join and its brutality and prowess made it the strong Islamist horse.

In the coming days the Kremlin is likely to use the attack to whip up nationalist sentiment and burnish its credentials as a stalwart asset in the global war against Islamist terror. So it's worth noting that in Syria, the most important battlefield of that war, the Russian government has gone out of its way to avoid hitting Islamic State as it seeks to prop up the regime of Bashar Assad.

As the Atlantic Council concluded in an exhaustive study last year, the Russian air campaign in Syria that began in fall 2015 and lasted until the following spring "caused only peripheral damage to ISIS" and had a "limited effect" on al Qaeda. The U.S. concluded in 2015 that more than 90% of Russian sorties targeted non-Islamic State, non-al Qaeda positions.

The deaths in St. Petersburg are a tragedy and outrage, no matter who the culprit turns out to be. The cynicism with which the Putin regime has used the threat of terrorism to its own advantage is no less ugly.

Document WSJO000020170404ed4400ayk



Politics
Battle Over Neil Gorsuch Supreme Court Confirmation to Hit Senate Floor; Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has votes to limit debate, which could lead to uclear option'

By Byron Tau 
780 words
4 April 2017
23:42
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

Republicans have 59 votes, at most, to end debate on Judge Neil Gorsuch's nomination, given that 41 senators have said they would vote "no" on a procedural motion to advance the nomination. An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated that Republicans have 50 votes at most. (April 4, 2017)

WASHINGTONhe Senate is barreling toward a bitter showdown over the confirmation of Supreme Court nominee Neil Gorsuch, as Republican Leader Mitch McConnell said Tuesday he has enough votes to change the Senate rules and eliminate the filibuster on Supreme Court nominations.

Mr. McConnell, a Kentucky Republican, was set to launch the procedural fight over Senate rules by filing for "cloture" Tuesday evening procedural tool used to wrap up Senate debate and move toward a final vote.

Republicans are expected to fall short of the 60 votes needed to end debate, however, and are likely to lean on a change in Senate rules to confirm Judge Gorsuch, President Donald Trump's nominee to fill the Supreme Court vacancy created by the death last year of Justice Antonin Scalia. The rule change will likely happen on Thursday.

Such a change would permanently eliminate the filibuster, a stalling tactic used by a legislative minority, on presidential nominees. Democrats eliminated the procedure for executive-branch nominees and lower-court judges in 2013 in response to what they said was GOP obstruction preventing confirmation of former President Barack Obama's nominees.

Republican leaders this week said they had the votes to do the same with Supreme Court nominees after Democrats successfully cobbled together enough votes to sustain a filibuster of Judge Gorsuch.

"We're moving forward with the Gorsuch nomination for the Supreme Court," Mr. McConnell told reporters Tuesday. "It appears as if cloture will not be invoked, but we'll find out on Thursday. But either way, we'll be moving toward confirming Judge Gorsuch on Friday."

Asked if he had the votes to change the Senate rules on Supreme Court nominees, Mr. McConnell said, "Yes."

Democrats have portrayed their stance against Judge Gorsuch, who sits on the federal 10th Circuit Court of Appeals, as a matter of principle. Democratic senators have raised concerns about his rulings, his judicial philosophy and his stance on corporate political speech.

"Every time in the history of this country that a Supreme Court nominee has failed to earn the necessary votes to pass the Senate, the answer has been to change the nominee, not the rules," said Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.). "We believe that is exactly what should happen now."

Underlying the Democrats' arguments is continuing anger that Republicans last year refused to consider Mr. Obama's nominee for the same Supreme Court vacancy, Circuit Court Chief Judge Merrick Garland. Mr. Garland was nominated in March 2016, and Republicans argued that the next president should be able to fill the slot.

Institutionalists on both sides have expressed their dismay about the state of the Senate, once known for its collegiality and its preference for giving the party in the minority extensive input on legislation and nominees. But few senators see a way out of the showdown.

"I find it ironic and sad that we're going to change the rules over somebody that's lived such a good life, who's been such a good judge for such a long time," Sen. Lindsey Graham (R.,S.C.) said this week. "It says more about the Senate than it does Judge Gorsuch."

Mr. Graham was the only Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee to vote for Mr. Obama's nominees to the Supreme Court, Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan.

Democrats agreed on the damage likely caused by this fight. "This fallout will be dangerously and perhaps disastrously radioactive for the Senate in years to come," said Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D., Conn.).

Mr. Blumenthal, who is joining the filibuster against Mr. Gorsuch, added, "To eliminate the 60-vote threshold will be a disaster not only for the United States Senate but for the court itself, because it will drag it into the muck and mire of partisanship that has been so repugnant to the majority of American people."

Write to Byron Tau at byron.tau@wsj.com

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* Trump Administration Considers Far-Reaching Steps for xtreme Vetting'

* Democrats Say Window for Bipartisan Action Is Closing

* What Is the Senate's uclear Option'?

* Trump Administration Reopens H-1B Program, With a Twist

* Jared Kushner Flies to Iraq for Briefing on Anti-\b ISIS\b0  Strategy

* Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner's Rent in Washington: $15,000 a Month

* Jerry Seib:A New Tribalism Spreads in Trump's Washington

* Trump Gains With Rural Supporters, Slips With Military Communities

Document WSJO000020170404ed44001s1



Politics
Trump Urges Scrutiny of Alleged Spying on His Transition Team; eal story' is alleged improper monitoring by Obama administration, president says

By Paul Sonne     and Shane Harris 
1,142 words
4 April 2017
06:44
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTONresident Donald Trump and his supporters in Congress said they hoped investigators scrutinize whether Obama administration officials improperly spied on members of his team during the transition and requested that the identities of Trump staff members be revealed, or "unmasked," in intelligence reports chronicling the surveillance.

Mr. Trump said on Twitter Monday that the "real story" is improper surveillance of his team by the Obama administration during the transition.

White House press secretary Sean Spicer said on Monday that the administration's concerns about the Obama administration's role in unmasking identities in the intelligence reports is moving in a "troubling direction." He declined to comment further.

Mr. Spicer declined to comment specifically on allegations published by a Bloomberg News columnist and by Fox News that former President Barack Obama's national security adviser, Susan Rice, requested to unmask the names of Mr. Trump's associates caught up in incidental surveillance collection.

Ms. Rice declined to comment.

Mr. Trump is facing two congressional investigations into Russia's alleged meddling in the electionne that has faltered amid partisan acrimony in the House and another that is proceeding apace in the Senate. The Federal Bureau of Investigation is also conducting its own investigation.

Russia has repeatedly denied meddling in the election. Mr. Trump and his aides have denied any collusion with Russia. And a representative for Mr. Obama has declined to comment on the White House's allegation that Mr. Obama's team engaged in efforts to leak sensitive intelligence information for political purposes.

FBI Director James Comey has said there is no evidence backing an allegation last month by Mr. Trump, a Republican, that Mr. Obama, a Democrat, ordered surveillance of Trump Tower. But Rep. Devin Nunes, a California Republican and chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, has alleged that Trump associates were subject to incidental surveillance while talking to foreign officials and in certain cases had their names unmasked improperly.

Mr. Trump said in a tweet in early March that his campaign was ordered "wiretapped" by Mr. Obama. After the allegation was criticized as baseless, White House staffer Ezra Cohen-Watnick began examining policies on surveillance and started to "stumble on stuff," said a person familiar with the matter.

Mr. Cohen-Watnick told White House colleague Michael Ellis and others, this person said, but White House general counsel Don McGahn told them to stand down and to give anything they found to Congress, said a second person familiar with the matter.

Soon after, Mr. Nunes went to the White House to examine what he has called new evidence of improprieties under Mr. Obama. He hasn't produced any of the evidence, while infuriating committee Democrats, who said he undermined the probe. Mr. Nunes has apologized to Democrats, while refusing calls to recuse himself.

The first person familiar with the matter said the documents showed "a lot of incidental information that was unmasked" and seemed to have been done "for only one reason."

Mr. Nunes has denied White House staffers were his source for the material.

On Monday, Mr. Trump promoted a report on the Fox News morning show "Fox & Friends" saying that Mr. Trump and people close to him were surveilled for up to a year before the end of the Obama administration.

"Such amazing reporting on unmasking and the crooked scheme against us by @foxandfriends," Mr. Trump tweeted. "'Spied on before nomination.' The real story."

Jennifer Palmieri, who was director of communications for Democrat Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign, accused Mr. Trump's administration on Twitter of engaging in "such absurd kabuki." The White House should just release the allegations itself, she suggested.

OP members of the House Intelligence Committee are pushing to find out what role top Obama administration officials played in requesting that names of Trump associates be unmasked from U.S. intelligence reports, according to a Republican lawmaker familiar with the committee's deliberations.

Names of U.S. citizens end up in intelligence reports when their conversations with foreign targets are recorded or when two foreign targets mention them in conversation. In such cases, names of the Americans are removed and replaced with general designations such as "U.S. Official 1."

Certain national security leaders, however, have the authority to request the identity of an American be unmasked, for example if they feel it is necessary to understand the context of a report and whether it is relevant.

Mr. Nunes has said he reviewed sensitive documents at the White House that showed evidence of Americans involved in the Trump transition having their names unmasked improperly after they were caught in incidental surveillance.

Neither Mr. Nunes nor the White House has made any evidence public to substantiate the allegations that the Obama administration unmasked names in intelligence reports improperly.

Unmasking is a routine action and is overseen by individual intelligence agencies, according to former U.S. intelligence officials who have been involved in the process.

A government official can't unmask a name unilaterally, these people said. First, an official with the authority to make the requesthe national security adviser is one of themust contact the agency that wrote the intelligence report and has the final say on whether the name can be revealed.

If an Obama administration official in the White House, for example, wanted to know the identity of a U.S. person included in a report from the National Security Agency, he or she would have to ask NSA officials to unmask it, the former officials said.

At the NSA, about 20 officials, including the agency's director, have the authority to approve unmasking requests, NSA Director Adm. Mike Rogers told the House Intelligence Committee last month.

The NSA, which routinely intercepts the conversations of foreign official overseas, uses two criteria when deciding whether to approve an unmasking request, Adm. Rogers said. First, does the official making the request have a need to know the name for official purposes, Adm. Rogers said. And second, "Is the identification necessary to truly understand the context of the intelligence value that the report is designed to generate?" he said.

Carol E. Lee contributed to this article.

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* Trump Administration Considers Far-Reaching Steps for xtreme Vetting'

* Trump Administration Reopens H-1B Program, With a Twist

* Battle Over Gorsuch Confirmation Is Set to Hit Senate Floor

* Jared Kushner Flies to Iraq for Briefing on Anti-\b ISIS\b0  Strategy

* Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner's Rent in Washington: $15,000 a Month

* Jerry Seib:A New Tribalism Spreads in Trump's Washington

* Trump Gains With Rural Supporters, Slips With Military Communities

Document WSJO000020170404ed440005l



World News: Trump Son-in-Law Visits Iraq for Anti- ISIS  Briefing

By Gordon Lubold 
566 words
4 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

BAGHDAD -- President Donald Trump's senior adviser and son-in-law Jared Kushner made a surprise visit to Baghdad on Monday to meet U.S. and Iraqi officials and to receive military briefings on the fight against Islamic State.

Mr. Kushner is the first member of Mr. Trump's inner circle to visit Iraq, currently engaged in a fight to drive the militant group from Mosul and other areas. He was invited here by the chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Joe Dunford, who is meeting with U.S. and Iraqi commanders and troops.

The visit comes as the Trump administration is assessing the U.S. strategy to combat Islamic State in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere.

Mr. Kushner, 36, a newcomer to foreign-policy issues, has taken an active role as an adviser to Mr. Trump on national security and foreign policy.

Last month, Mr. Kushner made, for a White House official, a rare appearance at the Pentagon, where he met Saudi Arabia's Deputy Crown Prince and Minister of Defense Mohammed bin Salman during his meeting with Defense Secretary Jim Mattis.

He has also been influential with his father-in-law on issues pertaining to Mexico and other countries, and he has been given broad authority by his father-in-law to attempt to broker a peace deal between Israel and the Palestinians.

Mr. Kushner, a multimilliionaire businessman and developer interested in how technology can reform organizations, launched an innovation office for the White House last week that intends to help reform government.

Mr. Kushner didn't speak with reporters on the trip to Iraq, his first ever here, which was preceded by an overnight stay at a U.S. military base in Germany.

He is accompanied by Tom Bossert, a former administration official under President George W. Bush who is serving as Mr. Trump's homeland security adviser.

Mr. Mattis and Gen. Dunford are completing a review of the strategy to fight the group. Mr. Trump signaled during the campaign and since assuming office that he had a plan to accelerate the fight against Islamic State, offering no details about what it might be.

No plan has emerged, and it now falls to Mr. Mattis and Gen. Dunford to come up with a new strategy. Gen. Dunford declined to discuss what the new strategy would look like. But, according to numerous U.S. officials, the strategy may largely resemble the old one, initiated under President Barack Obama, with tweaks and additions in the margins, U.S. officials said.

Gen. Dunford said he invited Messrs. Kushner and Bossert to join him on the trip some weeks ago so they could see the work troops are doing here, since they will be part of the decision on strategy.

"I think anyone who's involved in the discussion on where we go strategically -- having good situational awareness about what's happening tactically and hear it first hand and unfiltered, how our advisers assess the Iraqi security forces, both the opportunities and the challenges -- will feed into somebody's strategic view," Gen. Dunford told reporters traveling with him on a military jet.

The new strategy, or a refinement of it, may include additional U.S. troops for both Iraq and Syria.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170404ed440000i



Kushner In Iraq For  ISIS  Briefing

By Gordon Lubold 
697 words
4 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- President Donald Trump's senior adviser and son-in-law Jared Kushner arrived in Baghdad on Monday on a surprise visit to meet U.S. and Iraqi officials and to receive military briefings on the fight against Islamic State.

Mr. Kushner is the first member of Mr. Trump's inner circle to visit the country, currently engaged in a fight to drive the militant group from Mosul and other areas. He was invited here by the chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Joe Dunford, who is on a visit to meet with U.S. and Iraqi commanders and troops.

The visit comes as the Trump administration is assessing the current strategy to combat Islamic State in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere.

Mr. Kushner, 36, a newcomer to foreign-policy issues, has taken an active role as an adviser to Mr. Trump on national security and foreign policy.

Last month, Mr. Kushner made, for a White House official, a rare appearance at the Pentagon, where he met Saudi Arabia's Deputy Crown Prince and Minister of Defense Mohammed bin Salman during his meeting with Defense Secretary Jim Mattis.

He has also been influential with his father-in-law on issues pertaining to Mexico and other countries, and he has been given broad authority by his father-in-law to broker a peace deal between the Israelis and the Palestinians.

Mr. Kushner, a multimilliionaire businessman and developer interested in how technology can reform organizations, launched an innovation office for the White House last week that intends to help reform government.

Mr. Kushner didn't speak with reporters on the trip into Iraq, his first ever trip here, which was preceded by an overnight stay at a U.S. military base in Germany.

He is accompanied by Tom Bossert, a former administration official under President George W. Bush who is now serving as Mr. Trump's homeland security adviser.

Mr. Mattis and Gen. Dunford are completing a review of the strategy to fight the group. Mr. Trump signaled during the campaign and since assuming office that he had a plan to accelerate the fight against Islamic State, offering no details about what it might be.

No plan has emerged, and it now falls to Mr. Mattis and Gen. Dunford to come up with a new strategy. Gen. Dunford declined to discuss what the new strategy would look like. But, according to numerous U.S. officials, the strategy may largely resemble the old one, initiated under President Barack Obama, with tweaks and additions in the margins, U.S. officials said.

Gen. Dunford said he invited Messrs. Kushner and Bossert to join him on the trip some weeks ago so they could see for themselves the work troops are doing here, since they will be part of the decision on strategy.

"I think anyone who's involved in the discussion on where we go strategically -- having good situational awareness about what's happening tactically and hear it first hand and unfiltered, how our advisers assess the Iraqi security forces, both the opportunities and the challenges -- will feed into somebody's strategic view," Gen. Dunford told the small group of reporters traveling with him on a military jet.

The new strategy, or a refinement of it, may include additional U.S. troops for both Iraq and Syria, possible changes that could put American soldiers closer to the front lines, and an accelerated airstrike campaign.

Under Mr. Obama last fall, the U.S. military had already been given additional authorities which essentially delegated decision making closer to the battlefield.

The visit comes as American and Iraqi troops fight to evict Islamic State militants from the northern Iraqi city of Mosul and prepare for a fight against the group in Raqqa, its self-declared de facto capital in Syria.

Meanwhile, the U.S. military is investigating a series of airstrikes in recent weeks that officials believe may be partly responsible for the deaths of scores of civilians in both Iraq and Syria. There was no new assessment from those investigations, Gen. Dunford said Sunday.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170403ed440001g



Politics
Trump Administration Reopens H-1B Program, With a Twist; Outsourcing companies could face more pressure under revised program

By Laura Meckler 
704 words
3 April 2017
23:52
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTONhe federal government on Monday began accepting visa applications for a fresh round of high-skilled foreign workers, without the wholesale changes President Donald Trump promised in his campaign. His administration did, though, announce one shift that could put pressure on outsourcing companies that typically win a large share of the coveted visas.

The U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service said it would direct more inspectors in the H-1B program to the controversial outsourcing companies, many of them based in India. Those firms have drawn scrutiny because their U.S. subsidiaries sometimes import employees to do work once performed by Americans.

The companies say they are adhering to the program's rules and only hire foreigners because they can't find Americans for the jobs, but they are under substantial political scrutiny.

Demand for the program badly outstrips the supply so, as in past years, the government plans a lottery to decide which companies get them.

Last year, the government received more than 236,000 applications for the 85,000 visas, of which 20,000 are reserved for people with advanced degrees. That exceeded the previous year's record and was the fourth year in a row in which the cap was reached within five days.

During his presidential campaign, Mr. Trump promised to reduce legal as well as illegal immigration, saying foreign workers drive down wages and threaten American jobs. At times, he was particularly critical of the H-1B program, though at other times he praised it.

"These are temporary foreign workers, imported from abroad, for the explicit purpose of substituting for American workers at lower pay," he said in a statement last March. "I remain totally committed to eliminating rampant, widespread H-1B abuse."

There is also pressure in Congress for changes. One bipartisan bill pending in the House, for instance, would punish companies seeking H-1B visas by imposing burdensome requirements if they don't pay workers at least $100,000 a year. The current threshold to avoid those requirements is $60,000.

With no major changes to the program announced, the administration instead said it would work to better detect fraud and abuse in the program by changing how it targets companies for inspection.

Under the new rules, companies will be prioritized when they have a high ratio of H-1B workers employed and when the employees work off-site at another company's location. Both of those criteria would lead to targeting of outsourcing companies. The agency said it also would prioritize companies where business information can't be validated through commercially available data.

The immigration agency also said it was establishing a new email address for people to report allegations of fraud or abuse. It said it would continue random inspections, too, which has been past practice.

Also Monday, the Justice Department issued a statement cautioning employers participating in the program against discriminating against American workers. "U.S. workers should not be placed in a disfavored status, and the department is wholeheartedly committed to investigating and vigorously prosecuting these claims," acting Assistant Attorney General Tom Wheeler of the Civil Rights Division said in a statement.

At the White House, press secretary Sean Spicer cast the announcement as a change in policy. But he also nodded to the fact that the administration hasn't announced any significant administrative changes or legislative proposals that would change the visa allocation system.

"The White House acknowledges that there are issues with the program as it currently stands," he said. "However, there are several laws that are on the books that went unenforced in the previous administration."

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* Trump Administration Considers Far-Reaching Steps for xtreme Vetting'

* Battle Over Gorsuch Confirmation Is Set to Hit Senate Floor

* Jared Kushner Flies to Iraq for Briefing on Anti-\b ISIS\b0  Strategy

* Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner's Rent in Washington: $15,000 a Month

* Jerry Seib:A New Tribalism Spreads in Trump's Washington

* Trump Gains With Rural Supporters, Slips With Military Communities

Document WSJO000020170403ed43009ki



World
Jared Kushner Flies to Iraq for Briefing on Anti- ISIS  Strategy; Trump's son-in-law to meet with U.S. and Iraqi officers, get briefed on the fight against Islamic State

By Gordon Lubold 
892 words
3 April 2017
23:10
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDADresident Donald Trump's senior adviser and son-in-law Jared Kushner paid a surprise visit to Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi and other officials here Monday, receiving military briefings on the fight against Islamic State.

Mr. Kushner is the first member of the president's inner circle to visit Iraq, a key ally in the fight against Islamic State, since Mr. Trump took office. He was invited here by the chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Joe Dunford, who is on a routine visit to meet with U.S. and Iraqi commanders and troops.

The visit comes as the Trump administration is assessing the U.S. strategy to combat Islamic State in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere.

According to a statement from Mr. Abadi's office, the two sides discussed the battle in Mosul, international support for Iraq, as well as training and equipment issues.

The U.S. delegation also met with Irfan al-Hayali, the defense minister, and Gen. Othman al-Ghanimi, the chief of staff of the Iraqi forces.

They were joined in those meetings by Tom Bossert, a former administration official under President George W. Bush, now serving as Mr. Trump's homeland security adviser. The men arrived midafternoon and proceeded to a number of back-to-back meetings with Iraqi and U.S. officials, including Lt. Gen. Stephen Townsend, who is the commander of the coalition effort against Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

"As well as receiving briefings and updates, Mr. Kushner is traveling on behalf of the president to express the president's support and commitment to the government of Iraq and U.S. personnel currently engaged in the campaign," said Capt. Greg Hicks, a spokesman for Gen. Dunford.

Later in the evening, Messrs. Kushner, Bossert and Gen. Dunford dined with U.S. Ambassador Douglas Silliman at the sprawling U.S. embassy compound in Baghdad.

Mr. Kushner, 36, a newcomer to foreign-policy issues, has taken an active role as an adviser to Mr. Trump on national security and foreign policy.

Last month, Mr. Kushner made, for a White House official, a rare appearance at the Pentagon, where he met Saudi Arabia's Deputy Crown Prince and Minister of Defense Mohammed bin Salman during his meeting with Defense Secretary Jim Mattis.

He has also been influential with his father-in-law on issues pertaining to Mexico and other countries, and he has been given broad authority by his father-in-law to attempt to broker a peace deal between Israel and the Palestinians.

Mr. Kushner, a multimillionaire businessman and developer interested in how technology can reform organizations, launched an innovation office for the White House last week that intends to help reform government.

Mr. Kushner didn't speak with reporters on the trip to Iraq, his first ever here, which was preceded by an overnight stay at a U.S. military base in Germany.

Mr. Mattis and Gen. Dunford are completing a review of the strategy to fight the group. Mr. Trump signaled during the campaign and since assuming office that he had a plan to accelerate the fight against Islamic State, offering no details about what it might be.

No plan has emerged, and it now falls to Mr. Mattis and Gen. Dunford to come up with a new strategy. Gen. Dunford declined to discuss what the new strategy would look like. But, according to numerous U.S. officials, the strategy may largely resemble the old one, initiated under President Barack Obama, with tweaks and additions in the margins, U.S. officials said.

Gen. Dunford said he invited Messrs. Kushner and Bossert to join him on the trip some weeks ago so they could see the work troops are doing here, since they will be part of the decision on strategy.

"I think anyone who's involved in the discussion on where we go strategicallyaving good situational awareness about what's happening tactically and hear it first hand and unfiltered, how our advisers assess the Iraqi security forces, both the opportunities and the challengesill feed into somebody's strategic view," Gen. Dunford told reporters traveling with him on a military jet.

The new strategy, or a refinement of it, may include additional U.S. troops for both Iraq and Syria, possible changes that could put American soldiers closer to the front lines, and an accelerated airstrike campaign.

Under Mr. Obama last fall, the U.S. military had already been given additional authorities which essentially delegated decision making closer to the battlefield.

The visit comes as American and Iraqi troops fight to evict Islamic State militants from the northern Iraqi city of Mosul and prepare for a fight against the group in Raqqa, its self-declared de facto capital in Syria.

Meanwhile, the U.S. military is investigating a series of airstrikes in recent weeks that officials believe may be partly responsible for the deaths of scores of civilians in both Iraq and Syria. There was no new assessment from those investigations, Gen. Dunford said Sunday.

Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad contributed to this article.

Write to Gordon Lubold at Gordon.Lubold@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170403ed43002xl



Opinion
A Health-Care Defeat; A transcript of the weekend's program on FOX News Channel.

7,689 words
2 April 2017
18:08
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

House Speaker Paul Ryan : Moving from an opposition party to a governing party comes with growing pains, and, well, we're feeling those growing pains today. We came really close today, but we came up short. I spoke to the president just a little while ago, and I told him that the best thing I think to do is to pull this bill, and he agreed with that decision.

Paul Gigot: Welcome to "The Journal Editorial Report." I'm Paul Gigot.

A stunning defeat for President Donald Trump and Speaker Paul Ryan Friday as the Republican bill to repeal and replace Obamacare was pulled from the House floor just moments before a vote was to take place. The dramatic reversal followed a frantic effort to bring members of the conservative House Freedom Caucus along, while not alienating more moderate Republicans, an effort that ultimately failed. What does the defeat mean for President Trump and the GOP agenda?

Let's ask "Wall Street Journal" deputy editor, Dan Henninger; Washington columnist, Kim Strassel; editorial board member, Joe Rago; and columnists, Mary Anastasia O'Grady and Bill McGurn.

Joe, why did this fail?

Joe Rago: Well, they came very close to getting a majority as recently as Wednesday. Then what happened was you had HFC, House Freedom Caucus, keep upping their demands, keep moving the goalpost in a way that alienated the moderate members.

Gigot: They tried the get concessions out for their agenda, and that pulled apart the coalition for the bill.

Rago: Right. You had a fragile balance and it just sort of all unraveled. They said we want to repeal more of Obamacare's insurance regulations. Now, there's been a running debate in Congress about whether that can get through the Senate and whether it qualifies under Senate procedures, so they were saying let's err on the side of caution. They got a little -- they got a little bit of a concession, but not as much as they wanted, but still couldn't get --

Gigot: But even the Freedom Caucus, there's, what, 25, 30 of these people, Bill? Some of these people got what they wanted or a good chunk of what they wanted from Trump, and they said, oh, sorry, I want total repeal now.

Gigot: Will they ever say yes to anything?

Bill McGurn: Right. Did they want a bill or not want a bill?

Gigot: I think a lot of them didn't want a bill.

McGurn: Look, the argument is that I hear from a lot of people is this was a bad bill, we want something better. Look, I would like something better. The reality is --

Gigot: This is called legislation.

McGurn: -- are we going to get anything? Are we going to get anything? I think the reality is we're going to get nothing right now. I do not see how that is an improvement over what we have, to get nothing. So in the push to get more, we're coming up empty handed.

Gigot: And what happened, Joe, is because they kept demanding more, the moderates said, look, this is falling apart, I'm not going to vote for this. And ultimately, in the end, everybody started to run away from it.

Rago: Yeah. You had a pointless fight about insurance coverage for pregnant women or cancer patients or whatever --

Gigot: Which wouldn't have changed.

Rago: It was a pointless fight. But you just had a complete stampede away from the bill. If they'd put it on the floor, it would have gotten maybe 100 votes. It was a total collapse.

Gigot: Here's what I find puzzling. You run against this for four elections, you vote 90 times to repeal Obamacare. Finally, you get a president who's willing to sign it, and you say, well, I'm not for it after all.

Mary Anastasia O'Grady: It's really hard to explain, except I will say that this idea of some people in Congress being such purists that they won't accept anything else is old. Ronald Reagan was once criticized for making compromises, and he said, you know, there are those people who think that when you don't get everything you want, you should just jump off a cliff with a flag flying. And then he went on to say, I believe half a loaf is better than none, and this is a Democratic country, and that means you have to make compromises. They should have known better.

Gigot: So, Dan, the way I see this right now, the -- who would have thought that you have to elect -- Hillary Clinton has to lose in order for Obamacare to be preserved.

I mean, what we have here is, the Freedom Caucus now, I think they own Obamacare lock, stock and barrel. They are now the preservers of Obamacare.

Dan Henninger: Yeah. Let's call them the Obamacare Republicans, you know? There's a legend out there that no Republicans ever voted for Obamacare. Well, these 25 guys just did.

And Barack Obama 's got to be rolling on the floor laughing. He didn't lift a finger, and yet his law is now the law of the land. There's no Plan B. They're not going back to change this. And it does make you -- it does raise the question, as Speaker Ryan was saying, we're having, you know, growing pains here. Growing pains? I mean, some of these people have been in Congress for four years. Any major piece of legislation, whether it was the 1965 Civil Rights Act or the 1986 Tax Reform Act, is a delicate balance among factions. And what these guys did was pull out the props and open a Pandora's box, and it collapsed quickly. That's apolitical.

Gigot: All right, Kim, is there a Plan B for health care, or is this all she wrote until the next Congress?

Kim Strassel: One of the hard problems here, Paul, is that the compromises that we've been talking about that were in this bill are ones that are going to have to be a general framework if you ever want to get 215 or 216 or 217 votes. So, I mean, there'll be discussions about how you start over. This has been the demand of the Freedom Caucus and others, is just do this all from scratch again. But you end up in the same place in the end. If you want to bring together the moderates and conservatives in the caucus, some of these trade-offs are going to have to exist.

Gigot: Joe, is health care dead for this Congress?

Rago: Totally dead.

There is no chance. Look, they can't get the votes for the compromise. It was going to have problems in the Senate anyways. There are absolutely no incentives for President Trump to return to this subject because he's seen that there are not the votes for it on Capitol Hill.

Gigot: What about the Freedom Caucus argument that you can just do repeal only?

McGurn: Yeah, I don't think they can do it. Look, I agree with Dan up to a point. This Freedom Caucus is responsible for this. I wish there'd been a vote so people would know. It's not only dead, it's dead in the worst way, where there's not accountability.

Gigot: Oh, there's going to be accountability. We're going to make them accountable, OK?

Gigot: Mark Meadows is not going to be forgotten at the "Wall Street Journal," OK?

McGurn: Yeah, that's why we need to have votes to make people accountable for what they do. And the thing politicians always want to do is strangle something without a vote.

Gigot: Well, and the repeal, they didn't have the votes for repeal. That's why they stopped it. Paul Ryan wanted to do a quick repeal and then work on replace but they didn't have the votes for it.

All right, much more to come on the GOP's health care defeat. What the setback means for President Trump's agenda going forward and the future of tax reform.

President Donald Trump : I think Paul really worked hard. And I would say that we will probably start going very, very strongly for the big tax cuts and tax reform. That'll be next.

Gigot: The defeat of Paul Ryan 's health care bill putting President Donald Trump 's legislative agenda in jeopardy as he promised to forge ahead with his tax reform plan.

We're back with Dan Henninger, Kim Strassel, Joe Rago, Mary Anastasia O'Grady and Bill McGurn.

So, Kim, let's start out, how damaged is Speaker Ryan's leadership here in terms of being able to put together a new coalition for anything else?

Strassel: Look, it's -- it is a problem in many ways. As we just mentioned, when you spend six years and 90 times promising that you're going to replace something and then you fail before you even get to a vote, that's obviously not a good mark on your record.

Now, that being said, tax reform, there are many people in the Republican conference who always thought it ought to be first because you have a lot more unanimity among Republicans about how it should shake out. And you also even have some potential to get maybe some Democratic backing, a little bit of bipartisan work, especially on things like corporate tax reform. So --

Gigot: Kim, I'm going to have to disagree with you a bit on that because I think tax reform is going to be harder. Here's why it's going to be harder, because all these special interest groups in Washington are lined up to protect their favorite iron rice bowl, and they are going to fight tooth -- they're just going to really fight to do that. It's going to be very hard to get tax reform, which is one of the hardest things to get through Congress.

Strassel: No, I mean, I suppose that that is possible, although there seem to be more willingness on many Republicans' side to get to an ending here, at least more willingness and cohesion on the ideas behind it than there was on health care.

Gigot: OK, Dan, what about Donald Trump 's reputation as the dealmaker, the closer, "The Art of the Deal." Took a hit here?

Henninger: Took a hit. He's going to -- you know, he'll be treated brutally as he has been in the press over this. But I think he did everything he could, he and Paul Ryan . He actually negotiated in good faith. He gave a lot to the House Republicans.

Gigot: Right.

Henninger: So I don't think he's been damaged so much here.

But they do have a real problem. I mean, just before the bill was pulled, a lot of Republicans in the House were indicating that they were going to vote "no." Most of these were moderate Republicans. 23 of them are up for re-election in two years in districts that were carried by Hillary Clinton . So they're going to be -- the Democrats will be totally energized by what's happened here. And they're going to be under a lot of pressure on the tax bill to try to do the sort of things you were saying, cave in to the special interests, make sure the tax rates aren't too low, that they don't benefit the rich. So I think it's going to be a very heavy lift now.

Gigot: Mary?

O'Grady: I think there's no way that they're going to do the tax reform after this. What they have basically telegraphed to the entire world is that they can't govern. I mean, they're wearing -- these Freedom Caucus people are treating this as a badge of honor, that they refused to budget on this. And, in fact, it's a big disaster for the party. And I think it means they are not capable of what's required --

Gigot: Any hints of optimism from you gentlemen?

McGurn: You're looking at me?

O'Grady: You talking to me?

O'Grady: I'm a cloud in every silver lining.

Look, I think Donald Trump really has taken a hit. And I agree with Dan that he did everything possible and actually behaved, you know, very well, making compromises and listening to people. But the image of Donald Trump before this was the guy that was written off and was a juggernaut just running over everyone, running over everyone in the primaries, and in the election, and never having -- and now, that's taken a big hit that he is going to win all the time.

The second thing for Republicans, they're going to go into 2018 saying we have the House, the Senate and the Oval Office, and we didn't do anything on health care. I think this is a problem not just because they didn't get the Obamacare stuff done. The biggest promise of Donald Trump was that a lot of people who were struggling are going to feel my life is getting better, and I think this is a big hit to that.

Gigot: Well, and that's why I think, Joe, he's got -- the Republicans, as difficult as -- I think Mary is correct -- it's going to have to be -- they have to, at the very least, do a tax cut to help the economy. I think this is going to make tax reform, serious tax reform harder, but I think the tax cut is something they're going to have to do.

Rago: Yeah. I think you might see a tax relief package, for example, but not the kind of pro-growth, structural change that we really need to get the economy on a better trajectory.

Gigot: Because that's going to be harder because nobody's going to want to -- this suggests Republican dysfunction. It's going to be harder to make difficult votes. They're going to be more risk averse.

Rago: And I'm with you. This is one industry. When you get to tax reform, it's all of them.

Gigot: Yeah. That's exactly right.

What about you, Dan? We don't have a lot of time.

Henninger: Yeah, I know.

Henninger: I'll find a silver lining, sure. Kevin Brady said right after they pulled the bill, we're going to get that tax reform done by August. Well, maybe they will. They've got a lot of time. They just through health care out the window.

Gigot: Well, they have to get it done. If they don't, they might as well start turning over the gavel right now to Nancy Pelosi because they'll be running on nothing except saying no.

So we'll leave it at that.

When we come back, Judge Neil Gorsuch faces a three-day grilling on Capitol Hill. So did Democrats lay to glove on President Trump's Supreme Court nominee?

Judge Neil Gorsuch:I have offered no promises on how I'd rule in any case to anyone. And I don't think it's appropriate for a judge to do so no matter who's doing the asking.

Gigot: President Trump's Supreme Court nominee, Neil Gorsuch, faced a three-day grilling on Capitol Hill this week as Democrats tried to pin him down on controversial issues, like abortion, and attempted to paint him as an enemy of the little guy.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

Sen. Dianne Feinstein : I'm just looking for something that would indicate that you would give a worker a fair shot.

Gorsuch: I participated in 2,700 opinions over 10 and a half years. And if you want cases where I've ruled for the little guy as well as the big guy, there are plenty of them, Senator. The bottom line, I think, is that I'd like to convey to you, from the bottom of my heart, is that I'm a fair judge. And, Senator, I can't guarantee more than that, but I can promise you absolutely nothing less.

Gigot: Senate minority leader, Chuck Schumer, announced Thursday he would vote against Gorsuch and urged his fellow Democrats to join him in blocking an up-or-down vote on the nominee.

Sen. Chuck Schumer : After careful deliberation, I have concluded that I cannot support Judge Neil Gorsuch's nomination to the Supreme Court. His nomination will have a cloture vote. He will have to earn 60 votes for confirmation. My vote will be "no," and I urge my colleagues to do the same.

Gigot: We're back with Dan Henninger, "Wall Street Journal" editorial board member, Colin Levy; and editorial page features editor, James Taranto.

Colin, you covered this. What -- how do you think Neil Gorsuch did?

Colin Levy: I mean, Paul, Neil Gorsuch did exceptionally well during these hearings. There's no question that, from start to finish, he showed himself to be a fair-minded judge. He also really showed a lot of intellectual depth and rigor in his conversations with the Senators. And, you know, I think the clip you played earlier was very informative because this is a situation where when you've ruled in as many cases as he has, of course, there's going to be decisions for the little guy, of course, there's going to be decisions for the big guy. If you follow the law where it leads, which is what we want out of our judges, then you're going to go both ways. And, no question --

Gigot: Colin, Democrats were looking here, most of them want to find a way, a reason to oppose him. So they were looking for Gorsuch to make a mistake, to maybe say something about a hot-button issue that they could then say, aha, I can vote against you. Did he fall into that trap?

Levy: No, not at all, Paul. That's the funny part here. The one case they kept coming back to was this case of a trucker who left his truck when it was frozen in the snow, and they kept coming back and saying, you know, you said it was OK that this guy got fired. Judge Gorsuch said, look, I'm not against truckers who are frozen in the snow. The law said he had to be frozen, and I followed the law. I'll be the first to line up in going the other way as soon as the law is changed. So he kept coming back to that theme, saying, Senators, if you don't like what the law is, then you're the ones in the position to change the law. So that was a very strong message as well.

Gigot: OK, Dan, what about this issue that Schumer, Chuck Schumer kept getting at, which is, oh, he's not going to be independent of Donald Trump . Does that have any carry with you?

Henninger: No carry whatsoever. I thought that was actually gratuitous. A pretty insulting thing to say to a judge like Neil Gorsuch, who has proved his independence, as he said, through more than 2,000 rulings.

And I think what we learned here in these hearings, Paul, is just how far left the Democratic Party has gone. It isn't just Neil Gorsuch. I don't think any nominee of a Republican president could pass muster with them unless, of course, it was the second coming of Sonia Sotomayor .

But if you don't agree with them, you're simply not going to be supported by any Democrats. And so the partisanship -- especially with a judge. I mean, anybody would want to appear before Neil Gorsuch if their life were in the balance. If he can't pass muster, it's pretty clear that nobody can.

Gigot: The tragedy, I think, for American democracy in these hearings, James, is they've become something of a farce. And I don't mean that to discredit Neil Gorsuch. It's just that the Senators are trying to trip him up so they can defeat him. Gorsuch's response, every nominee's response, Democrat, Republican, is, make no mistakes, be very cautious. That's a legacy of the Robert Bork hearing where Bork had a really free-flowing discussion intellectually with them, and the Democrats nailed him for it and defeated him.

James Taranto: Yeah. And so what we've seen in Republican Supreme Court nominee hearings since then -- not so much when Democrats are nominating - is, as you say, the Democrats are looking for a reason to oppose them. Really, what they're looking for is a rationalization.

They know that they're going to oppose them. All but a few are certain "no" votes. Dianne Feinstein , when she said, you know, I'm looking for a reason to think you might side with the little guy, no, she's not. Come on. She's looking to make him look foolish so she looks better by voting against him. The people who do the best are the nominees like Gorsuch -- and John Roberts is another example -- who are just cool as a cucumber and put on an air of judiciousness.

Gigot: Did you learn anything new this week about Gorsuch's jurisprudence, how he thinks about the law?

Taranto: Not really. I learned that he wants to be a fair judge and that he follows precedent, which, of course, he's obliged to do as a circuit court nominee. I don't know that we want to necessarily learn all that much before they go on the court.

Gigot: How about you, Colin? Did you learn anything else new about him? I know you have read just about every opinion this fellow has written, certainly as a majority. And I credit you for that, because it's more than I've read, I'll tell you that.

But did you learn anything new?

Levy: I didn't learn so much new about judge Gorsuch as I really learned that what the Senators are doing here is turning the filibuster into sort of an everyday tool of partisan obstruction. And I think that's what's really going to be interesting here. If they go through with this, if they require the 60 votes for cloture, then it's going to be so easy for Republicans to get rid of it, because with such a mainstream nominee, with someone the American people have seen now for three, four days in front of everyone, there was nothing there. There was nothing to catch him on. So if they're going to use it against him, they'd use it against anyone.

Gigot: Do you think they have the votes to go ahead and break the filibuster, following the lead that Harry Reid , the precedent that he set for the appellate courts, and change the rules for the Supreme Court?

Levy: Yes, I do think that they will have the votes. And it's good to remember, you know, Democrats said they would break the filibuster for Supreme Court nominees as well. Harry Reid said he would do it. And also, Hillary Clinton 's running mate, Tim Kaine, said that they would do it for a Supreme Court nominee. So this is, you know, very much following precedent.

Gigot: Could this be a mistake for the Democrats, to try to use -- to filibuster Gorsuch if the Republicans are so determined to break it?

Taranto: Yes, I think Harry - sorry -- Chuck Schumer is not thinking strategically here. He's just reacting to his base. We had quotes from John McCain and Lindsey Graham , both of whom are thought to be weak on this question --

Gigot: Right.

-- and both of them said if it's necessary -- you know, we'll cross that bridge when we get to it. But McCain said none of us wants to do it, but we're going to confirm Gorsuch.

Gigot: And if he doesn't -- if they break it this time --

Taranto: Then it's gone.

Gigot: Then it's gone.

All right. Still ahead, a new twist in the House Intelligence Committee's Russia probe as the Republican chair says the Trump transition team may have been caught up in post-election surveillance. Do his claims vindicate President Trump's wiretap tweets?

Reporter: Do you feel vindicated by Chairman Nunes?

President Trump: I somewhat do. I must tell you, I somewhat do.

Rep. Devin Nunes : It's recently been confirmed that on numerous occasions the intelligence community incidentally collected information about U.S. citizens involved in the Trump transition. Details about U.S. persons associated with the incoming administration, details with little or no apparent foreign intelligence value, were widely disseminated in intelligence community reporting.

Gigot: House Intelligence Committee Chairman Devin Nunes igniting a firestorm Wednesday with claims that the communications of President Donald Trump and his associates may have been picked up by intelligence agencies conducting post-election surveillance of foreign targets. That announcement coming just todays after FBI Director James Comey said he had no information to support President Trump's claims that he was wiretapped by his predecessor, President Barack Obama .

We're back with Dan Henninger, Joe Rago, Bill McGurn and Kim Strassel.

So, Bill, there are two real things here going on here. There's the investigation into the Russian ties to the Trump campaign that Adam Schiff, the Democratic Intelligence ranking member, talks about. And then there's a story about this wiretapping, listening in, if that's what it was, on Trump people from U.S. government agencies,

McGurn: Right. Right.

Gigot: Let's break them down first. Go to what Adam Schiff said. Is there more than circumstantial evidence to --

McGurn: Right, that's --

Gigot: -- support collusion between the Russians and Trump?

McGurn: That's what he said this week. He started out Sunday saying there was circumstantial evidence, then later he went on TV and said there's more than circumstantial evidence --

Gigot: That's an incendiary charge.

McGurn: It's absolutely an incendiary charge, but he gave no evidence.

McGurn: He says that the fact that the FBI is looking into it, it means more than circumstantial. But he gave no evidence. What Adam Schiff wants is an independent panel to work like an independent prosecutor and cast a cloud over the Trump administration for the entirety of administration.

Gigot: Kim, that really does cast a pall over a lot of people who are going to be investigated. You want to be vindicated here if your name's been thrown to the press and nothing happened. How long could this go on?

Strassel: Well, it's absolutely appalling, what he's done, too, because it's not only that he didn't offer any evidence, but it's in direct contradiction to the statements of people who are in a position to know, including former Obama director of National Intelligence James Clapper, the former acting CIA director under the Obama administration, and the heads of Intelligence Committees, essentially saying, other ones, the other heads saying that there is no evidence of collusion. But you put this out there, you put it in the public mind, you cloud this up, and you continue what has, so far, been a storyline that is just a whole lot of nothing.

Gigot: But just, Kim, to follow up, James Comey said -- basically indicated when he appeared before the committee, this is a counterintelligence probe. And those kinds of things aren't necessarily aimed at criminal indictments. They're just -- and they can go on for years.

Strassel: They can go on for years, which is why what we should be hoping for is that the House and Senate Intelligence Committees, which are conducting their own investigation --

Gigot: Right.

Strassel: -- do so in a timely fashion and then get some conclusions and information out to the public. Even if that means declassifying some materials so that people can see what's really going on.

Gigot: Dan, let's shift to these Devin Nunes , the Devin Nunes remarks, because if, in fact -- well, we know for a fact that the former National Security adviser, Michael Flynn , his conversations with the Russian ambassador were listened to. If Devin Nunes is right, he said they were legal, but when you listen to somebody when's a foreign agent and incidentally collect conversations from an American, that name is supposed to be in the parlance of the intelligence services "minimized," right? They're supposed to hide the name and not share it. In this case, Mike Flynn 's wasn't. How serious is this?

Henninger: It's very serious. In the parlance of the law, it's called "unmasking" somebody whose identity was concealed inside those intelligence reports. And in his press conference Friday morning, Chairman Nunes really kind of raised the stakes in this investigation by saying that he was aware that there was not just Mr. Flynn, but others as well, who had been unmasked in these reports. And he wants to know how that happened and who did it. So he is, next week, going to call Director Comey and NSA Director Rogers back to another session, a closed session, to talk about this in private.

As well, he made clear at that press conference, explicitly invited other whistleblowers, other sources in the Intelligence Committee to get in touch with him to talk about this. He said, "We will protect their anonymity." In other words, he knows something's going on beyond what has been reported in the press the past several weeks, and he's going to press the intelligence community to tell him exactly what it is in closed sessions.

Gigot: And, Joe, there's another element here, which is that we learned through the press -- and hasn't been denied by anybody -- that Barack Obama , when he was president, in his final days, basically changed the rules on who could have access to this kind of raw intelligence. It could be spread more -- far and wide within the government.

Rago: Right. According to "The New York Times " report, the president feared that his successor would try to destroy evidence or something, so it needed to be spread very widely through non-regular channels. This is, I think, pretty disturbing. I mean, when we had the Edward Snowden debate, it was about spying on Americans. Here you have an administration using the intelligence apparatus to undermine the opposing political party.

Gigot: Now, Bill, President Trump said this vindicates him on the tweets.

McGurn: Right.

Gigot: We were critical of him last week, quite, quite hard. Does this vindicate him?

McGurn: No. It doesn't vindicate his literal statement that President Obama ordered wiretaps, which Chairman Nunes made clear.

Gigot: Clear.

McGurn: But what it does is try to get the real story here. You have Congressman Schiff and you have Congressman Nunes. Congressman Schiff has no evidence that he offers, right? Congressman Nunes has obviously seen some documents and is asking the community for other documents. He says he has real evidence, real papers and so forth that's not just conjecture. And a lot of people don't want that to come out.

Gigot: All right. Thank you all.

When we come back, a terror attack in central London, just the latest reminder of the wide-reaching threat from ISIS and al-Qaeda and the continuing need for surveillance at home and abroad.

British Prime Minister Theresa May : Yesterday, an act of terrorism tried to silence our democracy. But today, we meet as normal, as generations have done before us and as future generations will continue to do, to deliver a simple message: We are not afraid. And our resolve will never waver in the face of terrorism.

Gigot: British Prime Minister Theresa May addressing parliament Thursday one day after a terror attack in central London that left four victims dead, including one American and dozens of others injured. The attacker, identified as 52-year-old British-born citizen, Khalid Masood, drove a car into pedestrians on Westminster Bridge and then attempted to enter parliament, stabbing a police officer before being shot and killed. Wednesday's attack came on the one-year anniversary of the Islamic State assault on the airport and subway station in Brussels, and also follows last year's truck rampages in Nice and Berlin.

"Wall Street Journal" columnist and editorial page writer, Sohrab Ahmari, joins us now from London.

Welcome, Sohrab.

Sohrab Ahmari: Hi, Paul.

Gigot: OK. So Islamic State has claimed credit for this a day after the attack. Do authorities agree this was Islamic State, at least inspired?

Ahmari: I think that's still something they're still investigating. They've made a number of arrests in Birmingham and elsewhere where Khalid Masood had links. The Islamic State, through its media channel, has claimed responsibility through media channels and said Khalid Masood was a, quote-unquote, "soldier of the caliphate." But that remains to be seen, because the organization has a tendency to do that, where people who are inspired by its message, who are lone-wolf characters, after the fact, when they go out, then the organization takes credit for them. And it really doesn't matter in a way because they had no -- they may never have had any direct contact with the organization and may not have been plugged into the official jihadist networks, but nevertheless, drew inspiration from it and then Islamic State can point to the fact afterwards and feed this to its supporters as a success.

Gigot: One thing we haven't heard so far is a lot of evidence from his computers or literature he was reading, anything like that, which typically in the United States, with these kinds of attacks, it does come out pretty quickly. We haven't seen that in this one, but we have seen arrests in Birmingham and a couple more on Friday. That suggests this could be a broader network.

Ahmari: It could be. And I think one thing to make note of is the fact is that Khalid Masood himself had a background as a petty criminal. He'd come into contact with law enforcers for other types of non-terror offenses. And the prime minister pointed to out that he had been a "peripheral," quote-unquote, character in other terrorist instances. But wasn't picked up, which recalls the Omar Mateen case in the U.S. --

Gigot: Right.

Ahmari: -- where the authorities suspected something but, ultimately, concluded he wasn't a threat. Unfortunately, it turned out to be the case. And this just goes to show how difficult this new model of terrorism is, where it's these people with petty criminal backgrounds radicalized somehow, and then with just a car and a knife, they can unleash havoc on a major metropolitan area.

Gigot: And Birmingham is a particular source of concern for British security agencies. Explain why that is.

Ahmari: Well, it's three areas that are -- where most of the British jihadis come from. Right now, there's 3,000 jihadis that the British authorities are looking at. Not all jihadis, but extremist cases, extremists, radicals --

Gigot: People who are under suspicion.

Ahmari: Exactly. So you have Birmingham and you have east London, and you have a suburb of London called Luton. These are areas where there are pockets of Muslim communities, a vast majority of them perfectly law- abiding, but it's where these radical mosques, radical imams operate, and where most of the foreign fighters, for example, who go off to Syria and Iraq, may originate from these types of neighborhoods. And you see these patterns all across Europe, specific neighborhoods around Brussels, specific suburbs of Paris, where you have typically unassimilated Muslim communities. Doesn't mean all of them are ticking time bombs, but they're these ecosystems that breed jihadism.

Gigot: One of the things that really interesting, this is the first big attack in Britain since, I think, the subway bombings in 2005, so the British intelligence services, security agencies, have a pretty good record here. And yet, they've been warning now for some weeks that there could be a lot more attacks. Is there any particular reason they've been saying that? Is this partly Syrian related, for example?

Ahmari: Paul, I think this has been something that we should have been alert to in the sense that, as Islamic State is losing territory in Iraq and Syria, that it may attempt to radicalize more people. Now, again, it's not clear in this case whether Khalid Masood was directly radicalized or plugged in. He may not have been. But the fact that these organizations feel squeezed in their terrorist homeland, so to speak, may result in more attacks abroad just for them to be able to say that they're still in the game. I've heard from Middle Eastern security analysts and officials where they say, you know, watch out for -- the next wave might be ISIS 2.0 trying to prove itself, whatever that organization is, being extremely brutal. And then the remnants of ISIS 1.0 just trying to show that it's still in the game by staging brutal attacks.

Gigot: OK, Sohrab, thanks very much for staying up late for us.

When we come back, opponents of the Keystone XL Pipeline promising a long fight ahead as President Trump gives the green light for the $8 billion project.

President Trump: It's a great day for American jobs and a historic moment for North America and energy independence.

President Trump:Today I am pleased to announce the official approval of the presidential permit for the Keystone XL Pipeline. TransCanada will finally be allowed to complete this long-overdue project with efficiency and with speed.

Gigot: That was President Trump on Friday announcing that TransCanada has been given a permit to start construction on the Keystone XL Pipeline, the $8 billion project that had been blocked by the Obama administration.

We're back with Dan Henninger, Kim Strassel, Mary Anastasia O'Grady and Joe Rago.

So, Mary, is this thing finally going to get built. lo these many years?

O'Grady: I think it will, but the way is not completely clear yet. because the state of Nebraska still has a say in it. They have a Public Service Commission that has to approve the path of the pipeline through the state of Nebraska.

Gigot: But in terms of the federal barriers, those are now gone.

O'Grady: They're gone. And, in fact, another bit of good news is that the president has said that they do not have to buy American steel for this. They've already bought a lot of the pipes, and they're sitting there, so --

Gigot: There sitting, waiting to be laid.

O'Grady: Yeah, exactly. So he said, OK, they can go ahead with those, too.

Gigot: All right. What are we talking in magnitude of jobs? You use the figure $8 billion dollars. But what about jobs? And I assume these are pretty good union jobs.

O'Grady: Yeah, they are good union jobs. There are thousands of them, depending on who you talk to. And, of course, there are direct jobs and there are indirect jobs. The indirect jobs can go up to 100,000. But, you know, critics of the pipeline will say, well, those jobs are only temporary, they're not -- well, for heaven sakes, all construction jobs are temporary.

Gigot: That's right.

O'Grady: Unless you work for the federal government making a highway, then that goes on forever.

Gigot: Right. But every project finishes.

O'Grady: Yeah, of course. So they're temporary.

But I think the more important thing here really is this rule-of-law issue. You know, TransCanada went in, in good faith, on this project in 2008. There were three environmental impact statements from the State Department that said there was absolutely no impact to the environment. And, you know, they operated all along clearing all the hurdles that were required of them. And for the U.S. government to suddenly pull the rug out from under them the way they did is a very bad message to investors more broadly. I mean, it basically says that we're capable of arbitrary decisions. And that is not what makes for a good economy.

Gigot: Yeah. The political risk in the United States is much higher than anybody would have imagined. And you can kill a project like this because somebody doesn't like the politics of it.

O'Grady: Right. And, you know, what really happened here was when the environmental lobbyists descended on President Obama, he, both, you know, felt the pressure, but he also saw an opportunity. And this pipeline was a big fundraiser for Democrats over the period when that battle was going on.

Gigot: Joe, what does this process tell us about building, the length of this? Tell us about what it takes to build an infrastructure project in the United States now?

Rago: Well, I mean, it's crazy. You've got a very long process, just the legal part of it. This became a cause celebre for the environmental left. They dragged it out even further by appealing to the president himself. I think there's a certain rough justice in Trump overturning the previous order with an Oval Office ceremony.

Gigot: What about, Kim, the infrastructure plans that President Trump -- the other plans he has? He's talking about a trillion dollars in public/private financing, but that hasn't been moving fast. Is it going to go anywhere?

Strassel: Well, it's been delayed because of other debates, especially over health care. But, look, to get to the importance of just how much Donald Trump cares about this, I think it's important that not only in the opening weeks of his administration did he green light some of these pipelines and tell the State Department to reevaluate Keystone, but, you know, he also had an order to make sure that we try to figure out an expedited way to move infrastructure projects in this country. Because that's been a problem as well, not just a lack of money, but the fact that there's so much uncertainty that nobody is willing to try these big-stakes projects.

Gigot: Right. That could be --

Strassel: So --

Gigot: Go ahead.

Strassel: Congress is moving to this. And this is going to be potentially another big piece of legislation and maybe something that can get some bipartisan cooperation, too. But you've got to get the permitting side and the federal regulatory side sorted out as well.

Gigot: Without the permitting side, it's a waste of time.

We have to take one more break. When we come back, our "Hits Misses" of the week.

Gigot: Time now for our "Hits Misses" of the week.

Colin, start it off.

Levy: Paul, this is a hit to Mississippi Governor Phil Brandt, who this week signed a bill to crack down on civil forfeiture, which is the law that law enforcement uses to confiscate property without filing any charges. Under the new law, the law enforcement will have to post the information on a publicly searchable website and get a warrant if they want to keep it. This is something that a lot of states should take on. This is a good start.

Gigot: Terrific.

Bill?

McGurn: Paul, a hit to the First Circuit Court of Appeals. In a case that received national attention, the court made a stand for the Oxford comma or serial comma, the last coma in a list of three or more things. In the case, the court allowed the lawsuit by Gary Drivers to go ahead, because there was an ambiguity in the law that could have two different meanings depending on the comma. A serial comma would have clarified what the law meant. Of course, there are cases where a serial comma could confuse. Anyway.

McGurn: The judges made the point that the third-grade English teachers, all made. If your grammar isn't clear, it could cost you.

Gigot: James?

Taranto: A miss to the Internal Revenue Service which claims to have ended the ideological targeting of non-profit organizations. But as the Cause of Action Institute points out, the rule that enabled this targeting is still on the books. It tells agents to investigate any non-profit that might, and I quote, "attract media or congressional attention," which suggests the IRS is more interested in protecting its image than the rights of Americans.

Gigot: All right.

Dan?

Henninger: Paul, I'm giving a hit to the suburbs, which are those places that urban sophisticates continue to mock. Well, guess what? New estimates out from the Census Bureau say that, for the first time since the 2008 recession, cities are losing population while the suburbs are gaining population. It looks to me like it just proves that a place with a house, a lawn and a two-car garage has a lot more allure than a one-bedroom apartment.

Gigot: As long as they keep letting us drive.

Thank you, Dan.

And remember, if you have your own hit or miss, be sure to tweet it to us @JERonFNC.

That's it for this week show. Thanks to my panel. Thanks to all of you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. Hope to see you right here next week.

Document WSJO000020170402ed4200105



World
Trump, Reshaping Syria Policy, Sets Aside Demand for Assad's Ouster; White House, State Department deliver parallel messages emphasizing U.S. focus in Syria is on fighting Islamic State

By Felicia Schwartz 
680 words
1 April 2017
18:16
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTONenior Trump administration officials, reshaping U.S. policy in the Middle East, have declared formally in recent days that Washington no longer is focused on the ouster of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad as a priority.

The White House and State Department have delivered parallel messages emphasizing that Mr. Assad's fate is up to the Syrian people and that the U.S. focus in Syria is primarily on fighting Islamic State. The stance reinforces the position voiced by President Donald Trump during his presidential campaign and formalizes a turn away from Obama administration policy, which had shifted over the years.

Former President Barack Obama for several years called for Mr. Assad's immediate ouster. But that approach was frustrated as the Syrian civil war dragged on, Russia's role expanded and the war against Islamic State picked up. By the end of Mr. Obama's second term, as U.S. diplomatic efforts faltered, his administration acknowledged that Mr. Assad likely would remain in power, possibly through a political transition. But even then, they said Mr. Assad couldn't be part of a new, post-transition, government in Syria.

By contrast, the Trump administration's policy, articulated by top officials, has excluded any judgment on Mr. Assad's future role.

Following statements over the past week by Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley, White House press secretary Sean Spicer said Friday said the Trump administration's policy was shaped by "political reality."

"We lost a lot of opportunity [in] the last administration with respect to Assad and I think that our statement that both U.N. Ambassador Haley gave yesterday and Secretary of State Tillerson reflects the reality," Mr. Spicer said. "We need to focus on now defeating ISIS."

During a visit Thursday to Turkey, Mr. Tillerson said: "I think the status and the longer-term status of President Assad will be decided by the Syrian people."

Ms. Haley said later at the United Nations that the U.S. priority is "no longer to sit there and focus on getting Assad out."

"Our priority is to really look at how do we get things done, who do we need to work with to really make a difference for the people in Syria." she said.

Mr. Tillerson and Ms. Haley both were critical of Mr. Assad during their confirmation hearings, and Ms. Haley, speaking earlier this week at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, highlighted the brutality of Mr. Assad's assault on Aleppo, his forces' destruction of hospitals, and his use of chemical weapons. Still, she described the question of Mr. Assad's ouster as "been there, done that."

"This is hardly a surprise," said Phil Gordon, a former Obama White House aide on the Middle East now at the Council on Foreign Relations. "Trump has made clear for a long time that he thought the U.S. trying to change regimes is a bad idea."

He added: "Trump has aligned himself with Russia's views that the way you defeat terrorists in Syria is through force and bombing them."

European officials have said they are seeking clarity from the Trump administration about ongoing talks in Geneva on a Syrian political transition. Mr. Tillerson hasn't gotten involved in the Syria diplomacy the way former Secretary of State John Kerry.

Rep. Eliot Engel (D., N.Y.), the senior Democrat on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said he was disappointed by the Trump administration's apparent shift.

"At a time when the United States seeks to push back on Iran in the region, the Trump administration is empowering Tehran's most useful friend and ally," he said. "Assad, along with his partners in Moscow and Tehran, are cheering America's new policy, while the people of Syria are denied justice."

Write to Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170401ed410015p



WSJ Japanese
IS; 

By NED LEVIN 
1,192 words
31 March 2017
02:22

WSJOJP
Japanese
Copyright 2017. Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

ISNATO

IS



YPG2016

YPGPKK

PKKYPG









IS

7156



* IS

* IS

* 

* \b ISIS\b0 

* 

Document WSJOJP0020170331ed3v0005l



World
U.S., Turkey Set on a Collision Course; American support for Kurdish forces in Syria is a major flashpoint between the NATO allies

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
1,042 words
30 March 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ISTANBULurkey expected a honeymoon with President Donald Trump. Instead, it increasingly looks like Ankara and Washington are heading for a squabble, if not a divorce.

For now, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has bitten his tongue and avoided attacking the Trump administration with the kind of inflammatory statements that he routinely hurls at European and regional leaders. The White House, too, has kept largely mum about Turkish affairs. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson is holding meetings in Turkey on Thursday, aiming to maintain a bond that U.S. officials continue describing as vital.

Yet, on several key issues of this complicated relationship between the two North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies, a head-on collision with potentially unpredictable consequences seems more and more possible.

These flashpoints include Washington's handling of Mr. Erdogan's Pennsylvania-based nemesis, cleric Fethullah Gulen. Even more important is the growing American support for Syrian Kurdish forces affiliated with the PKK, or Kurdistan Workers' Party, a group designated as terrorist by Ankara and Washington alike.

Mr. Trump, during last year's U.S. presidential campaign, praised Mr. Erdogan for resisting the failed July coup attempt. Former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn wrote an op-ed last November that largely echoed Ankara's talking points. Mr. Erdogan, usually a fierce defender of Muslim causes who faces a critical referendum April 16, for his part maintained an unusual silence even when Mr. Trump promulgated a travel ban on citizens of seven majority-Muslim nations.

Now, however, a new dynamic has emerged. Mr. Flynn has had to resign over his contacts with the Russian ambassador, and recently reported that he had been a lobbyist for Turkish interests. On Monday, a senior Turkish banker was arrested in New York as part of a probe into violating sanctions against Iran.

Mr. Trump's attention in the Middle East, meanwhile, has focused mostly on the military operations against Islamic Stateperations in which the Syrian Kurdish group, known as PYD, has become the Pentagon's favored partner, Turkish objections notwithstanding. The PYD is the dominant force in a military alliance that also includes Arab fighters and that is known as the Syrian Democratic Forces.

"There had been enthusiasm in Ankara, and hope that a reset [with Washington] can be envisioned," said Sinan Ulgen, a former Turkish diplomat who heads the Edam think tank in Istanbul. "Today there is an awakening that the relationship with Trump and the Trump administration may not unfold the way Ankara had initially hoped for."

Rep. Devin Nunes (R-Calif.), the head of the House intelligence committee, put it less diplomatically in an appearance this month on Fox News. "Our relationship with Turkey is strained and I think it's going to become even more complicated as we begin to try to get ISIS out of Iraq and Syria," Mr. Nunes said.

It's unclear just how serious a breakdown could bend whether it would involve the U.S. losing access to Turkey's Incirlik air base. Mr. Erdogan has recently suggested that Moscow could become an alternative ally, and mulled the purchase of Russia's S-400 air and missile defense system. However, no matter how much he may disagree with Washington, even Mr. Erdogan would likely balk at becoming significantly more dependent on Russia as his only remaining friend.

"It would be more of the samen unhappy marriage, but without a divorce," predicted Aydin Selcen, a Turkish analyst who served as a senior diplomat in Iraq and Washington.

More than anything, it's the disagreements over Syria under former President Barack Obama that severely strained the U.S.-Turkish relationship. In Ankara's view, Mr. Obama, by initially encouraging an uprising and then backing off his threats to use force against the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, left Turkey exposed to the falloutnd forced to absorb three million Syrian refugees.

Over the past two years, Ankara also seethed at the U.S. aid for PYD in northern Syria. Instead of reversing that policy, as Ankara had expected, Washington appears to be doubling down on support for the Syrian Kurdish group. In early March, the Pentagon went as far as deploying American forces between PYD and Turkish lines near the northern Syrian town of Manbij, effectively blocking a planned offensive by Turkey and its Syrian allies. Then, in recent days, the U.S.n its most high-profile military operation in Syria so farirlifted the PYD and its allied Arab fighters across the Euphrates, to the strategic Tabqa Dam near Raqqa.

The PYD-led Kurdish and Arab fighters in the Syrian Democratic Forces "have been quite effective on the ground, and we're obviously going to continue to support them," a senior State Department official said ahead of Mr. Tillerson's trip. "But we are, of course, very mindful of Turkey's concerns."

That's not something Ankara wants to hear. Yasin Aktay, the deputy chairman of Mr. Erdogan's ruling party, didn't disguise his dismay about the Trump administration's Syria moves.

"It is very disappointing but we are still trying to keep our hope," Mr. Aktay said in an interview. "The U.S. is a very serious ally of Turkey, and we expect from our ally and from our friend to see the truth and to change their policy in accordance with the truth."

For now, Turkey hasn't acted on its frustrations, hoping that a broader deal can still be negotiated with the Trump administration. Both countries have interests beyond Syria, another Turkish official noted, and the Trump administration can't hope to deliver on its goal of limiting Iran's regional power if it doesn't have Ankara on its side.

"We still expect the Trump administration to realize that there is no difference between PKK and PYD and Daesh," Mr. Aktay added, using another term for Islamic State. "PYD is the extension of Assad's and Assad means Iran, so when you help PYD, it means that you help Iran, indirectly."

Write to Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170330ed3u001up



World News: In Raqqa, Signs of Faltering  ISIS  Rule --- Warning about a dam's collapse sparked a chaotic exodus of citizens and militants

By Maria Abi-Habib, Raja Abdulrahim and Nour Alakraa 
724 words
29 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Hundreds of Islamic State loyalists in recent days have fled the group's de facto Syrian capital of Raqqa, where emptying streets and a lack of water and electricity point to the extremists' crumbling control.

Raqqa residents said Islamic State's feared religious police is gone. Fewer fighters patrol the streets, and there are fewer military checkpoints, they said.

The departures began when Islamic State warned Sunday that the nearby Tabqa Dam would collapse under U.S.-led airstrikes. The warning sparked a chaotic exodus in which militants and residents alike fled for higher ground.

Some fighters who left with their families later returned alone, and Islamic State appears to have sent some reinforcements to Raqqa from elsewhere. But their overall forces on the ground in the city remain depleted, residents said.

It isn't clear whether the departures are the first signs that Islamic State is abandoning Raqqa, which a U.S.-led coalition is preparing to attack as part of the campaign to defeat the group, or whether it is regrouping to defend the city.

"ISIS high-level leadership will revert to places where they believe they are more safe and leave low-level fighters and mid-level leaders to manage the battle," the coalition said in an emailed statement.

Many Islamic State fighters had already fled Raqqa in recent months to a remote militant outpost to the south in Syria's Deir Ezzour province. Local activists speculated that Sunday's warning about the dam was intended to provide cover for Islamic State fighters and their families to flee among civilians. A spokesman for the coalition said Islamic State could be looking to blow up the dam to prevent the coalition from advancing.

Residents said the situation in Raqqa has changed significantly in recent days.

Oday, a Raqqa resident, said a handful of pregnant wives of Islamic State fighters had visited his sister, a midwife, on Monday asking if she could induce labor before they head off to Deir Ezzour.

The pregnant women were worried they would be stuck giving birth during the journey, according to Oday, who asked to be identified only by his first name because of safety concerns.

Residents said grocery stores are charging wildly inflated prices, now that the religious police are no longer there to enforce price controls.

Conditions are dire, residents said. Hospitals in the city are shuttered and there is no running water or electricity, which are supplied by the Tabqa Dam.

Raqqa was once a symbol of Islamic State's strength and a crucial part of the terror group's self-declared caliphate, which spread across swaths of Syria and Iraq. But the U.S.-led coalition and other forces have steadily eroded the group's territory over the past year or so.

Now, Raqqa is increasingly under intense pressure from the coalition. U.S. troops and members of the Syrian Democratic Forces, comprised of Kurdish and Arab fighters, have continued to advance around Tabqa city.

By Monday, the coalition had taken the strategic Tabqa air base from Islamic State, as well as Hama-Raqqa highway, a main thoroughfare used by the militants to reinforce its positions in Raqqa. The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a U.K.-based monitoring group, reported Tuesday that Islamic State sent 900 fighters from Raqqa to shore up its troops in Tabqa.

Islamic State said shelling by the U.S.-led coalition has ruined the control room at the Tabqa Dam.

A spokesman for the coalition denied that the Tabqa Dam was in any structural danger from coalition bombardment. A group of local engineers and technicians -- some of whom currently service the dam or have done so in the past -- have called for a pause in fighting to repair the dam, claiming it is structurally unsound.

A Western diplomat said Islamic State may have lost the manpower to administer the dam, leading to the lack of running water and electricity that Raqqa's residents reported. The militants could be looking to blame the dam's failure on the coalition, the diplomat said.

---

Noam Raydan contributed to this article.



License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170329ed3t0000z



Page One
What's News: World-Wide

210 words
29 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

 Trump took steps to begin unraveling the centerpiece of the Obama environmental agenda, signing an order to reverse rules aimed at pushing U.S. utilities to shift from coal plants to cleaner-burning fuels. 

 A House panel's probe into alleged Russian meddling in the 2016 U.S. election ground to a halt amid increasing discord. 

 Republican leaders signaled that they were likely to exclude the most contentious provisions from legislation needed to keep the government running past April. 

 More states are considering expanding their Medicaid programs under the ACA following the collapse of the GOP health bill. 

 More than half the Democrats in the Senate now say they will vote against Trump nominee Gorsuch's Supreme Court bid. 

 Hundreds of \b ISIS\b0  loyalists have fled the group's de facto Syrian capital of Raqqa in recent days amid signs its rule there is faltering. 

 American airstrikes in Mosul likely played some part in civilian deaths earlier this month, the top U.S. commander in Iraq said. 

 Iran and the Gulf states are trying to repair their relationship as the U.S. takes a more confrontational stance toward Tehran. 

 Malaysian police are investigating allegations that North Korea is violating international sanctions through Malaysian businesses. 

Document WSJO000020170329ed3t001md



World-Wide
What's News
World-Wide

216 words
29 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Trump took steps to begin unraveling the centerpiece of the Obama environmental agenda, signing an order to reverse rules aimed at pushing U.S. utilities to shift from coal plants to cleaner-burning fuels.

---

A House panel's probe into alleged Russian meddling in the 2016 U.S. election ground to a halt amid increasing discord.

---

Republican leaders signaled that they were likely to exclude the most contentious provisions from legislation needed to keep the government running past April.

---

More states are considering expanding their Medicaid programs under the ACA following the collapse of the GOP health bill.

---

More than half the Democrats in the Senate now say they will vote against Trump nominee Gorsuch's Supreme Court bid.

---

Hundreds of ISIS loyalists have fled the group's de facto Syrian capital of Raqqa in recent days amid signs its rule there is faltering.

--

American airstrikes in Mosul likely played some part in civilian deaths earlier this month, the top U.S. commander in Iraq said.

---

Iran and the Gulf states are trying to repair their relationship as the U.S. takes a more confrontational stance toward Tehran.

---

Malaysian police are investigating allegations that North Korea is violating international sanctions through Malaysian businesses.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170329ed3t0002d



World
In Raqqa, Signs of Faltering Islamic State Rule; Hundreds of loyalists have fled the militant group's de facto capital in Syria

By Maria Abi-Habib, Raja Abdulrahim and Nour Alakraa 
1,161 words
29 March 2017
00:02
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Hundreds of Islamic State loyalists in recent days have fled the group's de facto Syrian capital of Raqqa, where emptying streets and a lack of water and electricity point to the extremists' crumbling control.             

Raqqa residents said Islamic State's feared religious police is gone. Fewer fighters patrol the streets, and there are fewer military checkpoints, they said.             

The departures began when Islamic State warned Sunday that the nearby Tabqa Dam would collapse under U.S.-led airstrikes. The warning sparked a chaotic exodus in which militants and residents alike fled for higher ground.             

Some fighters who left with their families later returned alone, and Islamic State appears to have sent some reinforcements to Raqqa from elsewhere. But their overall forces on the ground in the city remain depleted, residents said.              

It isn't clear whether the departures are the first signs that Islamic State is abandoning Raqqa, which a U.S.-led coalition is preparing to attack as part of the campaign to defeat the group, or whether it is regrouping to defend the city.              

"ISIS high-level leadership will revert to places where they believe they are more safe and leave low-level fighters and mid-level leaders to manage the battle," the coalition said in an emailed statement.              

Many Islamic State fighters had already fled Raqqa in recent months to a remote militant outpost to the south in Syria's Deir Ezzour province. Local activists speculated that Sunday's warning about the dam was intended to provide cover for Islamic State fighters and their families to flee among civilians. A spokesman for the coalition said Islamic State could be looking to blow up the dam to prevent the coalition from advancing.                          

Residents said the situation in Raqqa has changed significantly in recent days.             

Oday, a Raqqa resident, said a handful of pregnant wives of Islamic State fighters had visited his sister, a midwife, on Monday asking if she could induce labor before they head off to Deir Ezzour.             

The pregnant women were worried they would be stuck giving birth during the journey, according to Oday, who asked to be identified only by his first name because of safety concerns.             

Residents said grocery stores are open but charging wildly inflated prices, now that the religious police are no longer there to enforce price controls.                                       

Dozens of prisoners who had been detained for minor offenses like smoking had been freed, according to an activist group, Raqqa Is Being Slaughtered Silently. A representative of the group said thousands of people remain in the city.             

Conditions are dire, residents said. Hospitals in the city are shuttered and there is no running water or electricity, which are supplied by Tabqa Dam.              

Raqqa was once a symbol of Islamic State's strength and a crucial part of the terror group's self-declared caliphate, which spread across broad swaths of Syria and Iraq. But the U.S.-led coalition and other forces have steadily eroded the group's territory over the past year or so, and Iraqi forces have recaptured much of the northern city of Mosul from Islamic State.             

Now, Raqqa is increasingly under intense pressure from the coalition. U.S. troops and members of the Syrian Democratic Forces, comprised of Kurdish and Arab fighters, have continued to advance around Tabqa city.             

By Monday, the coalition had taken the strategic Tabqa air base from Islamic State, as well as Hama-Raqqa highway, a main thoroughfare used by the militants to reinforce its positions in Raqqa from its areas of control in the west.             

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a U.K.-based monitoring group, reported Tuesday that Islamic State sent 900 fighters from Raqqa to shore up its troops in Tabqa.             

Islamic State said shelling by the U.S.-led coalition has ruined the control room at Tabqa Dam.             

A spokesman for the coalition denied that Tabqa Dam was in any structural danger from coalition bombardment. A group of local engineers and techniciansome of whom currently service the dam or have done so in the pastave called for a pause in fighting to repair the dam, claiming it is structurally unsound.             

A Western diplomat said Islamic State may have lost the manpower to administer the dam, leading to the lack of running water and electricity that Raqqa's residents reported. The militants could be looking to blame the dam's failure on the coalition, the diplomat said.              

"The battle for Raqqa embodies Islamic State's many dilemmas for its future strategy and image," said Aymenn Jawad Al-Tamimi, a fellow at the Middle East Forum. "A retreat from Raqqa might make sense in the hope of consolidating what remains of its state-building project but a lack of a fight for its de facto [Syrian] capital will surely hurt its credibility as a fighting force."             

The warning about the dam on Sunday was distributed both via the internet and by loudspeaker on Raqqa's streets, according to residents.             

One resident watched Sunday's exodus from her balcony but decided that she didn't want to leave the city and risk dying as a refugee. "What else do we have? Whether we die here in our place or leave to a different place, it's death in the end," the woman said, according to a relative.             

She and other residents described mayhem that day, with cars speeding through checkpoints and causing traffic accidents and families yelling at each other to pack up their belongings. Residents who fled Raqqa say the price of tents has shot up from $60 to more than $300, with many living in the open air of Raqqa province's high deserts.             

Residents who remained have stocked up on dwindling supplies of food and other goods. One resident said he was trying to move his family out of the city for their safety, but friends and distant relatives had no space in their cars, which were packed with their own loved ones and personal belongings.             

Acknowledging the group's territorial defeats and its increasing inability to wage conventional war with its dwindling forces, Islamic State has implored followers to launch guerrilla-style attacks both in the Middle East and abroad.             

But in statements this month, the group has admitted a crackdown on immigration has curbed its capacity to carry out attacks in Europe. Still, extremists are exploiting civilian casualties from U.S.-led military operations in Iraq and Syria to justify attacks on civilian targets abroad.             

"Notice in the land of the warrior crusaders there is nothing known as innocents or civilians and they do not guard their blood," read an Islamic State statement on Monday. "Move on the [infidels] wherever you can find them."             

Noam Raydan and Tamer El-Ghobashy contributed to this article.             

Document WSJO000020170328ed3s006sh



World
White House Formally Announces Sisi Visit; Egyptian President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi will meet with President Trump in Washington on April 3

By Felicia Schwartz 
212 words
28 March 2017
22:48
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Donald Trump will host Egyptian President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi at the White House on April 3 to discuss the fight against Islamic State and regional peace and stability, White House press secretary Sean Spicer said.

Mr. Sisi's visit is the first official meeting between the leaders since Mr. Trump took office. They met during the campaign last fall and officials said earlier in March that they expected the Egyptian leader to visit.

"President Trump and President Al Sisi will use the visit to build on the positive momentum they have built for the United States-Egypt relationship," Mr. Spicer said. "They will discuss a range of bilateral and regional issues, including how to defeat ISIS and pursue peace and stability in the region. "

The meeting would come ahead of a summit between Mr. Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping in Florida, likely later in the week. A senior State Department official said Tuesday the meeting would be held late next week and that Secretary of State Rex Tillerson will join Mr. Trump.

Write to Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170328ed3s0086h



'We Were Never Brothers': Iraq's Divisions May Be Irreconcilable

By Aziz Ahmad 
926 words
27 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A17
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Erbil, Iraq -- 'I swear by God we are not brothers," the Sunni Arab sheik shouted from the audience in response to a conservative Shiite lawmaker's plea for brotherhood. The occasion was a conference last summer at the American University of Kurdistan, in Duhok. It was the two men's first encounter since the fall of Mosul, Iraq's second largest city, to Islamic State in June 2014.

Conference organizers had hoped for reconciliation, but there was little sign of it. "We were never brothers," the sheik said. "We've always been afraid of each other." His candor drew nods from the Sunni men seated in front rows. The speakers and audience members condemned one another as failures and exchanged blame for the army's flight, for embracing Islamic State, and for perpetrating massacres.

Sectarian distrust -- a problem that has plagued Iraq for much of its modern history and has been amplified since Saddam Hussein's fall in 2003 -- was laid bare that day. A country that should have been brought together under the adversity of Islamic State's rampage seemed to be further apart than ever, with divisions extending far beyond Mosul.

Almost a year later, a fragile coalition of Kurdish, Arab and American forces is slowly advancing in Islamic State's primary stronghold in Mosul. But retaking the city will not unify Iraq. The current Shiite-led political discourse in Baghdad is synonymous with the denial of rights to minorities, including Kurds. Conversely, in Mosul a Sunni Arab majority marginalizes minorities, who in turn accuse Sunnis of supporting ISIS.

Sinjar, west of Mosul, is a case in point. When I visited last year I saw no sign of peaceful coexistence. The local security chief, a Yazidi, told me that Sunni Arabs from his village, Kojo, had joined ISIS's brutal terror against the Yazidis, a religious minority. Men from the al-Metuta tribe helped kill "hundreds," he said, including 68 members of his own family. "Of course I remember them," he said. "Those Arab men had a hand in the honor of our women. It's not possible to live together again."

In meetings with Iraqi officials and community leaders, I've seen how Islamic State's campaign has aggravated animosity across tribal, ethnic and religious lines. Without a political track to address tensions between Sunnis and Shiites or Kurds and Arabs, the day-after scenario remains perilous.

Addressing the problems begins by restoring trust. For Mosul, Baghdad is already on the wrong foot. The offensive against ISIS includes a coalition of Shiite militias, despite strong protests from Mosul's predominantly Sunni provincial council. The new formula must tackle minorities' fears of marginalization by granting local autonomy, including to Christians persecuted by ISIS militants, and by implementing laws already in place to give Sunnis a stake and isolate extremists.

We Kurds can help. We make up a third of the province's population. For over a year, our Peshmerga fighters were poised for an assault on Mosul, but our persistent calls for a political agreement were ignored. An agreement during the military campaign is still necessary to prevent intercommunal conflict.

Such an agreement should outline a path toward governance and offer more than a Shiite-centric alternative. In parallel, there must be an effort to demobilize Shiite militias formed in the aftermath of the war by engaging the Iraqi Shiite spiritual leader, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, for a religious decree. It should also call for the groups' withdrawal from areas liberated by the Peshmerga.

Baghdad should not impose solutions. It should instead lead talks with Turkey and Iran to defuse regional tensions that intersect in Mosul. Iraq's problem with Turkey can be solved by ending Baghdad's payments to the anti-Ankara Kurdistan Workers' Party, known as PKK, in Sinjar and demanding the group's withdrawal, in line with calls from local officials and the provincial council.

More broadly, once the fight is over, there needs to be a political reckoning by Kurds and Arabs about how the Iraqi state can go forward. It's too late to salvage the post-2003 project; the country has segregated itself into armed enclaves. The Kurdish people suffered a litany of abuses, including genocide, under successive Sunni regimes. More recently, despite a shared history, the Shiite-led government reneged on promises for partnership and revenue sharing. It suspended Kurdistan's budget and prevents us still from buying weapons. Given that experience, Kurdish loyalty to an Iraqi identity remains nonexistent.

For us, complete separation is the only alternative. Our pursuit of independence is about charting a better course from Iraq's conceptual failure. The path forward should begin from a simple truth: Iraq has already fallen apart, and the country will be better off realigned on the parties' own terms.

A central goal for the U.S. should be to empower the Kurdistan Region. We are a stable, longstanding U.S. ally amid a sea of unrest. We've proved to be a valuable partner in the war on terrorism and share common values and a commitment to democracy.

The advance on Mosul represents the turn of a chapter that transcends Iraq's three-year war. It represents a moment of reckoning and an opportunity to consolidate the Kurdistan Region on terms that will de-escalate conflict and safeguard its peoples.

---

Mr. Ahmad is an assistant to the chancellor of the Kurdistan Region Security Council.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170327ed3r0000z



World-Wide
What's News
World-Wide

203 words
27 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

British officials criticized tech firms in the wake of the rampage outside Parliament for profiting from terrorists' propaganda and offering them secret places to communicate.

---

The White House is signaling it may be time to work with Democrats following the collapse of the GOP's health bill.

---

Thousands took part in anticorruption demonstrations across Russia, the most significant challenge to Putin in years.

---

Iran sanctioned 15 U.S. firms in response to restrictions imposed by the Trump administration.

---

Hong Kong's electoral committee picked a staunchly pro-China candidate to lead the city.

---

Pakistan said it has begun building a fence along its border with Afghanistan, a move that could further inflame tensions.

---

Flynn, while serving as a Trump campaign adviser, is said to have met with Turkish officials and discussed removing a Muslim cleric from the U.S.

---

Iraq's military said a deadly blast in Mosul was triggered by an ISIS booby trap, contradicting claims that a U.S.-led coalition airstrike caused it.

---

Russia's role in Libya is causing growing concern at the NATO with the Kremlin appearing to throw its support behind Gen. Khalifa Haftar.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170327ed3r0001k



World News: Iraq Military Blames  ISIS  for Civilian Deaths

By Tamer El-Ghobashy and Ali A. Nabhan 
659 words
27 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

HAMAM AL-ALIL, Iraq -- The Iraqi military said Sunday a blast that killed scores of civilians in western Mosul was triggered by an Islamic State booby trap, contradicting local officials and residents who claimed a U.S.-led coalition airstrike caused the deaths.

The Iraqi military statement, based on an initial assessment, came a day after the U.S.-led coalition acknowledged it carried out an airstrike on March 17 at the request of Iraqi security forces against Islamic State fighters in western Mosul. The location corresponded to allegations of mass casualties.

The coalition, which is backing Iraqi troops that are engaged in fierce fighting to retake the entire city from Islamic State, said it is investigating to determine if the strike caused several houses to collapse, trapping what local officials said could be up to 200 people.

It wasn't possible to independently verify the cause of the blast.

On Sunday, an official with Iraq's civil-defense authority said it had recovered 172 victims so far from a cluster of collapsed homes in the Mosul al-Jadeeda neighborhood that is at the center of the blast probe.

The blast, and the possible U.S.-led coalition role in it, has brought into focus the extreme dangers the latest push to root out Islamic State from Mosul poses to an estimated half million people believed to be trapped by the combat. Civilians face increasingly harrowing conditions -- with dwindling food, clean water and fuel supplies -- and those who flee often dodge crossfire between Islamic State and Iraqi forces.

After reaching a muddy field designated as a receiving center outside Mosul, Ahmed Khadim, from the Wadi Hajar district, spoke of hunger and the constant blasts that ruined his hearing.

"We were running out of food supplies day after day," said the 33-year-old motorcycle mechanic. "The whole family at some point shared just one loaf of bread."

Some 201,000 people have managed to escape western Mosul, according to the Iraqi government. Many have emerged with stories of leaving behind relatives buried under rubble from blasts -- whether militant bombs or mortars or government-allied strikes.

Iraqi troops have been battling Islamic State in western Mosul since mid-February, after wresting back eastern Mosul from the extremist group in late January. The overall campaign to recapture Mosul began in mid-October.

Iraq's government has refused to release casualty figures, but statistics compiled by independent groups have shown the battle for western Mosul has been far deadlier for civilians than in eastern Mosul. The Iraqi Observatory for Human Rights said since February 19, 3,864 civilians have been killed in the west, compared with 2,190 killed in the three months of fighting in the east.

Iraqi politicians have raised questions over the military tactics Iraq's security forces and their U.S.-led coalition advisers have employed in the heavily populated city. Iraq's speaker of parliament said the Mosul al-Jadeeda incident would be the subject of a special session this week. Iraq's defense ministry said it had launched a probe.

According to a U.S. military news release from March 17, the coalition conducted four strikes in Mosul targeting numerous Islamic State positions, weapons systems, vehicles and a car bomb.

The coalition's Saturday statement didn't specify which of those strikes was found to have taken place in Mosul al-Jadeeda. Local residents and officials said the civilian deaths were clustered in four homes, but the level of destruction made it difficult to determine which house was apparently targeted.

If confirmed that the strike killed the civilians, it would represent the largest death toll by a U.S.-led coalition airstrike since its air campaign against Islamic State began in August 2014.

---

Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170327ed3r0001e



Mobile
What's News: World-Wide

196 words
27 March 2017
04:54
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

 British officials criticized tech firms in the wake of the rampage outside Parliament for profiting from terrorists' propaganda and offering them secret places to communicate. 

 The White House is signaling it may be time to work with Democrats following the collapse of the GOP's health bill. 

 Thousands took part in anticorruption demonstrations across Russia, the most significant challenge to Putin in years. 

 Iran sanctioned 15 U.S. firms in response to restrictions imposed by the Trump administration. 

 Hong Kong's electoral committee picked a staunchly pro-China candidate to lead the city. 

 Pakistan said it has begun building a fence along its border with Afghanistan, a move that could further inflame tensions. 

 Flynn, while serving as a Trump campaign adviser, is said to have met with Turkish officials and discussed removing a Muslim cleric from the U.S. 

 Iraq's military said a deadly blast in Mosul was triggered by an \b ISIS\b0  booby trap, contradicting claims that a U.S.-led coalition airstrike caused it. 

 Russia's role in Libya is causing growing concern at the NATO with the Kremlin appearing to throw its support behind Gen. Khalifa Haftar. 

Document WSJO000020170327ed3r00106



World-Wide
What's News
World-Wide

207 words
27 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Hong Kong's electoral committee chose a pro-China candidate to lead the city, a sign of Beijing's influence there.

---

The White House is signaling it may be time to work with moderate Democrats to enact Trump's agenda.

---

Police in the U.K. released two more people who had been questioned in connection with the Westminster attack.

---

Iraq's military said a deadly blast in Mosul was triggered by an ISIS booby trap, contradicting claims that a U.S.-led coalition airstrike caused it.

---

Iran sanctioned 15 U.S. firms in response to restrictions imposed by the Trump administration.

---

Dubai's airport is banning most carry-on electronics on flights to the U.S.

---

Flynn, while serving as a Trump campaign adviser, is said to have met with Turkish officials and discussed removing a Muslim cleric from the U.S.

---

Thousands took part in anticorruption demonstrations across Russia, the most significant challenge to Putin in years.

---

Pakistan said it is building a fence along the Afghan border, a move that could worsen tensions.

---

The UK Independence Party is losing its only member of Parliament, a blow to the upstart anti-Europe party.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170326ed3r0001k



Mobile
What's News: World-Wide

149 words
27 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

 Hong Kong's electoral committee chose a pro-China candidate to lead the city, a sign of Beijing's influence there. 

 The White House is signaling it may be time to work with moderate Democrats to enact Trump's agenda. 

 Police in the U.K. released two more people who had been questioned in connection with the Westminster attack. 

 Iraq's military said a deadly blast in Mosul was triggered by an \b ISIS\b0  booby trap, contradicting claims that a U.S.-led coalition airstrike caused it. 

 Iran sanctioned 15 U.S. firms in response to restrictions imposed by the Trump administration. 

 Flynn, while serving as a Trump campaign adviser, is said to have met with Turkish officials and discussed removing a Muslim cleric from the U.S. 

 Thousands took part in anticorruption demonstrations across Russia, the most significant challenge to Putin in years. 

Document WSJO000020170326ed3r002mh



Opinion
e Were Never Brothers': Iraq's Divisions May Be Irreconcilable; Liberating Mosul won't bring the country together, and the Kurds want complete separation.

By Aziz Ahmad 
933 words
26 March 2017
22:11
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Erbil, Iraq

 swear by God we are not brothers," the Sunni Arab sheik shouted from the audience in response to a conservative Shiite lawmaker's plea for brotherhood. The occasion was a conference last summer at the American University of Kurdistan, in Duhok. It was the two men's first encounter since the fall of Mosul, Iraq's second largest city, to Islamic State in June 2014.

Conference organizers had hoped for reconciliation, but there was little sign of it. "We were never brothers," the sheik said. "We've always been afraid of each other." His candor drew nods from the Sunni men seated in front rows. The speakers and audience members condemned one another as failures and exchanged blame for the army's flight, for embracing Islamic State, and for perpetrating massacres.

Sectarian distrust problem that has plagued Iraq for much of its modern history and has been amplified since Saddam Hussein's fall in 2003as laid bare that day. A country that should have been brought together under the adversity of Islamic State's rampage seemed to be further apart than ever, with divisions extending far beyond Mosul.

Almost a year later, a fragile coalition of Kurdish, Arab and American forces is slowly advancing in Islamic State's primary stronghold in Mosul. But retaking the city will not unify Iraq. The current Shiite-led political discourse in Baghdad is synonymous with the denial of rights to minorities, including Kurds. Conversely, in Mosul a Sunni Arab majority marginalizes minorities, who in turn accuse Sunnis of supporting ISIS.

Sinjar, west of Mosul, is a case in point. When I visited last year I saw no sign of peaceful coexistence. The local security chief, a Yazidi, told me that Sunni Arabs from his village, Kojo, had joined ISIS's brutal terror against the Yazidis, a religious minority. Men from the al-Metuta tribe helped kill "hundreds," he said, including 68 members of his own family. "Of course I remember them," he said. "Those Arab men had a hand in the honor of our women. It's not possible to live together again."

In meetings with Iraqi officials and community leaders, I've seen how Islamic State's campaign has aggravated animosity across tribal, ethnic and religious lines. Without a political track to address tensions between Sunnis and Shiites or Kurds and Arabs, the day-after scenario remains perilous.

Addressing the problems begins by restoring trust. For Mosul, Baghdad is already on the wrong foot. The offensive against ISIS includes a coalition of Shiite militias, despite strong protests from Mosul's predominantly Sunni provincial council. The new formula must tackle minorities' fears of marginalization by granting local autonomy, including to Christians persecuted by ISIS militants, and by implementing laws already in place to give Sunnis a stake and isolate extremists.

We Kurds can help. We make up a third of the province's population. For over a year, our Peshmerga fighters were poised for an assault on Mosul, but our persistent calls for a political agreement were ignored. An agreement during the military campaign is still necessary to prevent intercommunal conflict.

Such an agreement should outline a path toward governance and offer more than a Shiite-centric alternative. In parallel, there must be an effort to demobilize Shiite militias formed in the aftermath of the war by engaging the Iraqi Shiite spiritual leader, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, for a religious decree. It should also call for the groups' withdrawal from areas liberated by the Peshmerga.

Baghdad should not impose solutions. It should instead lead talks with Turkey and Iran to defuse regional tensions that intersect in Mosul. Iraq's problem with Turkey can be solved by ending Baghdad's payments to the anti-Ankara Kurdistan Workers' Party, known as PKK, in Sinjar and demanding the group's withdrawal, in line with calls from local officials and the provincial council.

More broadly, once the fight is over, there needs to be a political reckoning by Kurds and Arabs about how the Iraqi state can go forward. It's too late to salvage the post-2003 project; the country has segregated itself into armed enclaves. The Kurdish people suffered a litany of abuses, including genocide, under successive Sunni regimes. More recently, despite a shared history, the Shiite-led government reneged on promises for partnership and revenue sharing. It suspended Kurdistan's budget and prevents us still from buying weapons. Given that experience, Kurdish loyalty to an Iraqi identity remains nonexistent.

For us, complete separation is the only alternative. Our pursuit of independence is about charting a better course from Iraq's conceptual failure. The path forward should begin from a simple truth: Iraq has already fallen apart, and the country will be better off realigned on the parties' own terms.

A central goal for the U.S. should be to empower the Kurdistan Region. We are a stable, longstanding U.S. ally amid a sea of unrest. We've proved to be a valuable partner in the war on terrorism and share common values and a commitment to democracy.

The advance on Mosul represents the turn of a chapter that transcends Iraq's three-year war. It represents a moment of reckoning and an opportunity to consolidate the Kurdistan Region on terms that will de-escalate conflict and safeguard its peoples.

Mr. Ahmad is an assistant to the chancellor of the Kurdistan Region Security Council.

Document WSJO000020170326ed3q0038p



World
U.S. Coalition Acknowledges It Carried Out Airstrike in Area of Civilian Deaths; Death toll may reach up to 200 people, according to local officials and residents

By Tamer El-Ghobashy 
884 words
25 March 2017
22:50
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraqhe U.S.-led coalition in Iraq said Saturday it carried out airstrikes against Islamic State positions in western Mosul, where scores of civilians were allegedly killed, as it assists Iraqi troops engaged in fierce fighting to retake the entire city from the extremist group.

An initial review of airstrikes over the past few days indicates that, at the request of the Iraqi Security Forces, the coalition struck Islamic State fighters and equipment on March 17 in West Mosul at the location corresponding to allegations of civilian casualties, the U.S.-led coalition said in a statement. It didn't provide further details but said it would continue to assess the allegations.

Local Iraqi officials and residents said the death toll may reach up to 200 people, centering around the Mosul al-Jadeeda district, where residents and rescue workers were still recovering bodies buried under mounds of concrete. It wasn't possible to independently verify this number.

A member of Mosul's local council said most of the victims were women, children and the elderly, some of whom were forced into a cluster of homes that Islamic State fighters were using as sniper positions against advancing Iraqi troops.

Late on Saturday, Iraq's minister of defense, Erfan al-Hayali, said he had also launched an inquiry into the allegations of mass civilian casualties in Mosul al-Jadeeda, following mounting pressure from mostly-Sunni politicians who voiced outrage over the incident.

If confirmed that the strike killed the civilians, it could represent the largest death toll by a U.S.-led coalition airstrike since its air campaign against Islamic State began in August 2014. The allegations come just days after the U.S. said it was also investigating two recent reports of mass civilian casualties caused by U.S.-led coalition airstrikes in Syria targeting Islamic State and al Qaeda.

The U.S. military's pace of operations has increased considerably in both countries, raising questions about effects of a higher tempo of operations.

Military officials have said there has been no change in the rules of engagement governing military strikes. At the same time, U.S. military commanders have been operating under new authorities shifting more authority for "battlefield decisions" to ground commanders. Some of the changes began last year under the Obama administration.

A U.S. military official said Friday that it was far from clear if the incidents in Iraq and Syria were related. "Of course we are looking into it but so far we think these are coincidental," the official said.

Airwars, an independent organization that monitors reports of civilian casualties in Iraq and Syria, has reported allegations that more than 1,000 people have died in both countries this month, with the largest spike coming from airstrikes in western Mosul.

Iraqi troops, assisted by coalition airstrikes and U.S. military advisers on the ground, have been engaged in fierce fighting in western Mosul since Feb. 19. In late January, the forces wrested back eastern Mosul from Islamic State after a battle that began in mid-October.

While eastern Mosul's infrastructure and civilians survived with relatively little damage, the fight for western Mosul has been marked by higher levels of destruction, and residents have steadily fled the city by the tens of thousands under increasingly desperate conditions.

Senior Iraqi military officers said part of the destruction in Mosul al-Jadeeda was caused when a missile hit a truck rigged by Islamic State with explosives, triggering a massive blast that destroyed four homes and burying dozens of people sheltering inside the basements.

"We are stunned by this terrible loss of life," Lise Grande, the United Nations' humanitarian coordinator for Iraq, said in a statement.

Ghazwan Ahmed, a member of the provincial council for Mosul, said Islamic State has been using residents as human shields as a strategy to slow down advancing Iraqi forces and a propaganda tool to claim that "security forces are deliberately targeting civilians."

He said militants had herded residents of Mosul al-Jadeeda into homes that were hit and began using the rooftops as sniper positions and to fire mortars.

Mr. Ahmed said it wasn't clear if the airstrike originated from Iraqi or coalition aircraft, but that the incident in Mosul al-Jadeeda was a stark example of why western Mosul's older infrastructure and densely populated neighborhoods required a rethinking of the military strategy to evict Islamic State.

"Such incidents are very worrying for us," he said. "We need a change in the plans there and we need accurate and clean targeting of terrorists in order to prevent civilians from dying in such big numbers."

The U.S.-led coalition and the Iraqi air force both conduct airstrikes in Mosul but Iraqi ground forces in Mosul al-Jadeeda almost exclusively coordinate strikes with the coalition.

Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad contributed to this article.

Write to Tamer El-Ghobashy at tamer.el-ghobashy@wsj.com

Related

* Islamic State Drones Terrorize Iraqi Forces as Mosul Battle Rages

* Foreign \b ISIS\b0  Fighters Increasingly Isolated in Mosul Battle

* Iraqis Tell of Islamic State Brutality in Mosul

Document WSJO000020170325ed3p0012x



World
London Attacker Khalid Masood Led Itinerant Life Punctuated by Violence; Born Adrian Elms, he used multiple names, changed addresses often, and served time for knifing a man

By Stu Woo,   Jenny Gross and Max Colchester 
1,463 words
24 March 2017
23:57
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Khalid Masood was born Adrian Elms. The headline on an earlier version of this article incorrectly stated he was born Adrian Alms. (March 25)

BRIGHTON, Englandn Tuesday, Khalid Masood ate a takeout kebab for dinner and spent his last night alive alone in a small, budget hotel in this English seaside town. He checked out before 8 a.m. the next morning, like anyone else with plans for the day. "He just put the key on the counter and left," the hotel's receptionist said.

Hours later, police say, Masood went on a rampage 50 miles to the north in Londonowing down pedestrians with his car, killing three, before leaping from the vehicle and stabbing an unarmed policeman to death outside the British Parliament. Police then shot and killed Masood.

In the days before the attacks, Masood, a 52-year-old British convert to Islam, crisscrossed the country, traveling from Brighton on the south coast to the central city of Birmingham and back before aiming himself at the heart of the capital to undertake the last acts in an itinerant life punctuated with violence.

On Friday, police and intelligence officers were still trying to assemble the elements of Masood's confusing story and decipher his motives. Born Adrian Elms in southeast England, he used multiple names and aliases, police said.

He changed addresses regularly, appearing in recent years to move among places that have had connections to extremist plots. He had multiple criminal convictionshe first when he was still a teenagernd served jail time.

Since Wednesday's terrorist assault, the worst in Britain since a series of coordinated bombings in 2005 killed 52 people, hundreds of detectives have worked to trace Masood's movements and associates.

After a series of raids on locations connected to Masood, police on Friday were holding four people on suspicion that they were preparing terrorist acts. A fifth person was released from custody on bail.

"Our determination is to find out if either he acted totally alone, inspired by perhaps terrorist propaganda, or if others have encouraged, supported or directed him," said Mark Rowley, deputy commissioner of the London Metropolitan Police.

A British intelligence official said authorities were looking into whether Masood became radicalized while in prison, an increasingly common path to terrorism. The official also said it was unclear what role several trips Masood made to Saudi Arabia had played.

"We're trying to piece together what we can," the official said. "The big question is at what point did he decide to do this and why, and who else is involved."

Extremist group Islamic State this week said Masood was one of its "soldiers" and claimed responsibility for the attack. But the intelligence official said authorities had found no evidence Masood was linked to or had communicated with Islamic State.

It wasn't clear when he became a Muslim. Prime Minister Theresa May said earlier this week that Masood had been investigated years ago in connection with extremism, but had been deemed a "peripheral figure."

Long stretches of Masood's life are difficult to account for. He was born on Christmas Day in 1964, according to police. He attended high school in Kent, southeast of London. By the late 1990s, when Masood was in his 30s, he had landed in the quiet village of Northiam in nearby East Sussex.

At the time, he was still using the name Adrian Elms. People who knew him said he worked at a small family-owned business called Aaron Chemicals and went by the nickname Aidy. He wasn't known to practice Islam. But amid these signs of a conventional life, there were signs of internal turmoil.

"He was a normal guy until he had a couple of drinks," said Nigel Gill, who runs a local convenience store and used to sell beer to Masood. Mr. Gill said Masood once attacked a woman's car with a baseball bat after an argument.

In 2000, Masood lashed out again. Heather Mott said her late husband, Piers, the owner of a local cafe, was in a pub then called the Crown and Thistle when Masood started an argument with another customer. Mr. Mott stepped in.

An angry Masood attacked her husband with a knife, Mrs. Mott said. The assault left a 3-inch gash on Mr. Mott's face, according to a report of the court proceedings published that year in the local newspaper, the Argus.

A lawyer for Masood argued there were "racial overtones" to the dispute, the Argus said. Masood's mother is white, his father black. Masood was sentenced to two years in prison.

Adrian Baker, who owns a carpet shop next to the pub where the attack took place, said he would cross the road to avoid walking past Masood. "You could tell he was a bit of a troublemaker," he said. After the knife attack, Masood "just disappeared," Mr. Gill said.

Masood went to Saudi Arabia after he was released from prison. The Saudi Embassy in London said Masood was in Saudi Arabia on a work visa to teach English from November 2005 to November 2006 and again from April 2008 to April 2009.

In 2015, he obtained a pilgrimage visa through a travel agent and was in the country in March of that year, the embassy said. "During his time in Saudi Arabia, Khalid Masood did not appear on the security services' radar and does not have a criminal record in the kingdom of Saudi Arabia," the embassy said.

Katie Garricques, who lives in Luton on the outskirts of London, said she recognized Masood from a police photo as her neighbor for a couple of years around 2010 and 2011. He lived there with his wife, who wore African attire, and two children, she said, adding he worked frequently in the garden. She said they would exchange hellos.

"He was very fatherly and loving and I was quite shocked. There was never any indication that he'd be radicalized or aggressive," she said. "I felt sickened."

Masood's time in Luton, home to a large population of Muslims, coincided with bursts there of political and sectarian ferment. At around that time, a man named Junead Khan was also living in Luton. Mr. Khan was later convicted of preparing a terror attack in connection with a plan to kill Royal Air Force personnel. Mr. Khan posted a video on YouTube in those years showing himself listening to music that features in some ISIS propaganda while driving across the Westminster Bridge, scene of Masood's attack this week.

Later, Masood seems to have moved to Birmingham, a city with a history of connections to terror. Since the Wednesday attack, police have searched a series of addresses in the city and detained two people there.

Ciaran Molloy and other neighbors said they recognized Masood as a previous occupant of one of the houses being searched from a photo circulated in the media. They said he lived there with a woman and small children and rarely spoke to other residents on the quiet street.

Several neighbors said that Masood occasionally dressed in traditional Muslim attire white robe and a skullcaphile his wife always wore a head scarf but didn't cover her face.

Fernando Costa, a 46-year-old auto mechanic from Portugal, said his interactions with Masood amounted to regular neighborly banteruestions of lawn mowing, driveway parking, and the weather. "I'd never think this guy could do something like this," Mr. Costa said.

Masood and his family lived on the street for at least three years, several neighbors said, and left just before Christmas. "It was pretty sudden," Mr. Molloy said.

Last Friday, St. Patrick's Day, Masood checked into the Preston Park Hotel in Brighton late in the evening, according to the hotel receptionist, and left early the next morning.

By the start of the week, Masood was back in Birmingham, where he rented a gray Hyundai Tucson compact SUV at an Enterprise Rent-A-Car in a dingy industrial park about a mile from the house where neighbors said he once lived.

He drove it back to Brighton and returned to the Preston Park. The receptionist said he spent most of Tuesday in his room. He paid by credit card and didn't make any phone calls, before leaving the next morning, bound for London and mayhem.

Joshua Robinson, Margot Patrick, Joanna Sugden, Wiktor Szary, Mike Bird, Laurence Fletcher and Justin Scheck

Related Stories

*

* Police Seize Computer Data in London Terror Probe

* London Attacks Highlight Balancing Act for Big Cities

* Financial Markets Grow More Resilient in Wake of Terror Attacks

* How the Attack Unfolded Outside British Parliament

Document WSJO000020170324ed3o009yd



A New Role for America's No. 1 Ally

By Bill Lane 
550 words
24 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A13
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

On July 4, 1918, Pvt. Thaddeus Sylvester Lewandowski of Chicago was wounded near the village of Le Hamel, France. By World War I standards, it was a modest affair. In 93 minutes, at a cost of 1,400 men killed and wounded, the allies captured the town, killed 2,000 German soldiers, and took another 1,600 prisoner.

The Battle of Hamel had two lasting legacies. The allies, led by Australia's Gen. John Monash, conducted a coordinated, combined-arms operation that included smoke and gas diversions, creeping artillery, robust assaults by Mark V tanks and infantry, plus the first ever air drops to resupply infantry. The successful model would later be applied to bigger battles that eventually breached the Hindenburg Line and won the war.

Hamel also set in motion a remarkable military alliance. Ten green Illini companies had been attached to the British Expeditionary Force to gain experience. Four joined the battle, making it the first time Americans and Australians fought side by side. It was also the first time Americans fought under foreign command.

If one measures U.S. allies by dependability, Australia is No. 1. Americans and Australians have fought together in every major conflict of the past century: World War I, the Russian Civil War, World War II, the Cold War, Korea, Vietnam, the Gulf War, Afghanistan and Iraq. We are both engaged in the fight against al Qaeda and ISIS. No other U.S. ally can match that record.

World War I was also the start of America's wider role as a defender of democracy. Since the end of the World War II, the president has often been referred to as the leader of the Free World.

That appears to be changing. President Trump reportedly had harsh words for Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull during their first official conversation. Counterproductive dust-ups followed with Mexico, Britain and Germany.

To be fair, we were warned. In his recent address to Congress, Mr. Trump declared: "My job is not to represent the world. My job is to represent the United States of America." That's a stark contrast with President Kennedy's proclamation: "Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, to assure the survival and the success of liberty."

Surely there's a middle ground. Time will tell if Mr. Trump will continue pushing toward protectionism and isolationism, or whether he will pivot toward open markets and engagement.

Nearly a century ago, Australia showed the world how to win World War I and proved it stood ready to be a reliable ally to America. My grandfather, Pvt. Lewandowski, was part of that history. My hope is that during the next four years Australia will keep steady, demonstrating the importance of multilateral cooperation, mutual defense and international trade. By doing so it may show our new president that interdependence, not just independence, makes Americans safe, strong and prosperous.

If it does, Australia may earn the title leader of the Free World.

---

Mr. Lane is a retired director of global government affairs at Caterpillar Inc.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170324ed3o00013



REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
Terror on the Thames

613 words
24 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

British authorities have warned for years that another terror attack is "highly likely," and they were proven right on Wednesday with a bloody assault in Britain's administrative center amid crowds of tourists. Violence and murder for their own sake are still the jihadist calling card.

Police say the attacker, 52-year-old Khalid Masood, drove a car into pedestrians on Westminster Bridge, a site popular for views of Parliament and barely two blocks from Downing Street and the government offices along Whitehall. Masood is alleged to have left the car armed with a knife and then tried to enter Parliament, stabbing a police officer before being shot.

Three victims and Masood were confirmed dead, with 29 injured, some severely. One of the dead was the police officer. Most of the victims were pedestrians on the bridge that spans the River Thames.

Islamic State (ISIS) on Thursday claimed responsibility for the attack, using language suggesting Masood had been inspired by, but not explicitly directed by, the group. Wednesday was the first anniversary of the ISIS attack on the Brussels airport and subway station that killed 32 and injured hundreds.

ISIS has long said it is targeting Britain, and the use of vehicles as deadly weapons has become one of the group's hallmarks, with the truck rampages in Nice in July and Berlin in December. Those attacks also were carried out under ISIS inspiration but not its direct control, and were deadlier than the London attack. It is no longer useful to describe such terrorists merely as "lone wolves" when ISIS and other groups can so easily inspire violence over the internet.

Mark Rowley, Britain's counterterrorism chief, said earlier this month that authorities have thwarted 13 planned attacks of various scales since 2013. Considering that hundreds of Brits have traveled to the Middle East to join Islamic State, the U.K.'s relative safety to date is a credit to its intelligence services.

New details about the attacker raise questions for British counterterror authorities, however. Officials say Masood was born in Britain and had been investigated years ago but was not believed to be a threat. No dragnet is foolproof, but security services owe an account of whether theirs needs refining in light of new evidence and experience.

The attack appears to have originated in Birmingham, around 120 miles northwest of the capital, where the perpetrator rented the car. Residents of that city have been tied to other terror cases, and in 2014 a government investigation uncovered an attempt by some groups to impose extremist teaching in state-run schools. Police rely on members of local communities to tip them to potential threats, and the concern should be whether pockets of Birmingham's community are prone to radicalization. Eight people were arrested in raids in Birmingham, London and elsewhere after Wednesday's attack.

After weeks of calm in Europe -- and years in which the ISIS threat on Britain went unfulfilled -- it was tempting to feel safer. Wednesday's attack is a warning against complacency, as is the U.K. and U.S. ban on electronic devices on flights from certain countries, arising from new information about potential threats.

The terror threat remains far-reaching, and the need continues for surveillance, interrogation and the disruption of terror networks abroad to keep the jihadists on defense. Counterterrorism officials know that more attacks may come as ISIS is forced out of its sanctuaries in Mosul in Iraq and Raqqa in Syria. Amid the political recriminations in the U.S. over election-related wiretapping, keep in mind that intelligence is crucial to public safety.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170323ed3o00015



Opinion
A New Role for America's No. 1 Ally; Australia has fought alongside us since World War I. What now in the Trump era?

By Bill Lane 
558 words
24 March 2017
00:03
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

On July 4, 1918, Pvt. Thaddeus Sylvester Lewandowski of Chicago was wounded near the village of Le Hamel, France. By World War I standards, it was a modest affair. In 93 minutes, at a cost of 1,400 men killed and wounded, the allies captured the town, killed 2,000 German soldiers, and took another 1,600 prisoner.

The Battle of Hamel had two lasting legacies. The allies, led by Australia's Gen. John Monash, conducted a coordinated, combined-arms operation that included smoke and gas diversions, creeping artillery, robust assaults by Mark V tanks and infantry, plus the first ever air drops to resupply infantry. The successful model would later be applied to bigger battles that eventually breached the Hindenburg Line and won the war.

Hamel also set in motion a remarkable military alliance. Ten green Illini companies had been attached to the British Expeditionary Force to gain experience. Four joined the battle, making it the first time Americans and Australians fought side by side. It was also the first time Americans fought under foreign command.

If one measures U.S. allies by dependability, Australia is No. 1. Americans and Australians have fought together in every major conflict of the past century: World War I, the Russian Civil War, World War II, the Cold War, Korea, Vietnam, the Gulf War, Afghanistan and Iraq. We are both engaged in the fight against al Qaeda and ISIS. No other U.S. ally can match that record.

World War I was also the start of America's wider role as a defender of democracy. Since the end of the World War II, the president has often been referred to as the leader of the Free World.

That appears to be changing. President Trump reportedly had harsh words for Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull during their first official conversation. Counterproductive dust-ups followed with Mexico, Britain and Germany.

To be fair, we were warned. In his recent address to Congress, Mr. Trump declared: "My job is not to represent the world. My job is to represent the United States of America." That's a stark contrast with President Kennedy's proclamation: "Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, to assure the survival and the success of liberty."

Surely there's a middle ground. Time will tell if Mr. Trump will continue pushing toward protectionism and isolationism, or whether he will pivot toward open markets and engagement.

Nearly a century ago, Australia showed the world how to win World War I and proved it stood ready to be a reliable ally to America. My grandfather, Pvt. Lewandowski, was part of that history. My hope is that during the next four years Australia will keep steady, demonstrating the importance of multilateral cooperation, mutual defense and international trade. By doing so it may show our new president that interdependence, not just independence, makes Americans safe, strong and prosperous.

If it does, Australia may earn the title leader of the Free World.

Mr. Lane is a retired director of global government affairs at Caterpillar Inc.

Document WSJO000020170323ed3n009vm



World News:  ISIS -Safe Zones Planned

By Felicia Schwartz 
529 words
23 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said the U.S. would work to establish "interim zones of stability" to protect refugees in Syria and Iraq as the international coalition against Islamic State works to retake territory from the extremist group.

Mr. Tillerson, speaking at a conference of the 68-member coalition against Islamic State, held at the State Department on Wednesday, said the coalition would intensify its efforts to confront the extremist group and called on other members to do more as the fight continues.

"The United States will increase our pressure on ISIS and al Qaeda and will work to establish interim zones of stability through cease-fires to allow refugees to return home," Mr. Tillerson said, using an acronym for the group.

The Trump administration has been exploring proposals for establishment of protected areas, sometimes called safe zones, in Syria.

The idea has been pushed by Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, but the Pentagon has long opposed the idea of creating heavily guarded zones because of the cost and military commitment required.

There is growing receptiveness among U.S. and international officials to the idea of setting up unofficial Syrian safe zones, which some officials have dubbed "interim de-escalation areas," along Syria's borders with Turkey and Jordan.

French Foreign Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault, who participated in the meeting, said he wasn't sure what Mr. Tillerson meant by "zones of stability," but thought they would cover areas retaken from Islamic State and help people to return to their homes.

A joint statement released at the end of the day's events by the participants included no mention of the zones.

Mr. Ayrault said he pressed Mr. Tillerson, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and other U.S. officials on specifics and a timeline for the fight, but the officials told him they need more time.

Mr. Mattis told Mr. Ayrault that the campaign to retake Raqqa, Islamic State's de facto Syrian capital, must move quickly but the administration was still figuring out its strategy, Mr. Ayrault said.

"We've been asking for specific answers for a couple of weeks," Mr. Ayrault said. "I wish it went faster."

Mr. Tillerson said the coalition generally would intensify efforts as it moves from military operation to a stabilization phase in the fight against Islamic State, and urged greater intelligence sharing and law-enforcement cooperation as well as renewed focus on confronting the militant group online -- efforts that the Obama administration also emphasized.

Other than his suggestion of zones of stability, his policy prescriptions mostly tracked the Obama administration's playbook.

"We must increase the intensity of our efforts and solidify our gains," Mr. Tillerson said. "Soon our efforts in Iraq and Syria will enter a new phase."

Mr. Tillerson said the coalition would help to restore water and electricity and to clear land mines. He urged coalition members to contribute more militarily and financially.

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi also spoke at the session. Mr. Mattis joined meetings in the afternoon and deputy national security adviser KT McFarland was also present.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170323ed3n00012



World News: World Watch

785 words
23 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

SOUTH KOREA

Salvaging Begins

Of Sunken Ferry

Workers began the difficult process of raising a 6,800-ton ferry that sank in 2014, killing more than 300 people and triggering a public uproar.

The salvaging operation began after hours of preparations and tests, an official from the Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries said.

Workers on two barges have slipped 66 cables beneath the Sewol ferry, which had been lying on its left side in about 130 feet of water. The cables are connected to a frame of metal beams divers have spent months putting in place.

The bodies of 295 passengers -- most of whom were students on a high-school trip -- were recovered after the sinking on April 16, 2014, but nine are still missing. Relatives are hoping that those remains will be found inside the ferry.

The ministry believes workers will be able to lift the upper side of the ferry about 42 feet above the surface by Thursday morning if water and weather conditions remain stable.

Workers will then begin loading it onto a semisubmersible, heavy-lift vessel that will carry it to a mainland port. That process, including emptying the ferry of water and fuel, is expected to take days.

The ferry disaster touched off an outpouring of national grief and triggered anger over what was seen as a botched rescue job by the government.

The ferry's captain is serving a life sentence after a court found him guilty of committing homicide through "willful negligence" because he fled the ship without issuing an evacuation order.

-- Associated Press

---

CHINA

Beijing Denies Plan

For Offshore Station

Beijing denied having plans to build on a disputed South China Sea outcrop also claimed by the Philippines, days after a Chinese mayor triggered alarm in Manila by raising the prospect in an interview.

Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said reports about Chinese plans to construct an environmental-monitoring station on Scarborough Shoal "are mistaken," citing checks with relevant Chinese authorities.

Her denial followed an unusual sequence of events last week, when a state-owned newspaper quoted Xiao Jie, mayor of Sansha, a Chinese outpost in the South China Sea, as saying local authorities would build environmental-monitoring stations on several reefs and maritime features, including Scarborough Shoal -- only to later delete the remark from the interview on its website.

Mr. Xiao's remark prompted Manila to ask clarification from Beijing over its intentions. Philippine officials say China has promised no construction on the uninhabited outcrop -- a pledge that facilitated the recent rapprochement between the two countries.

The Philippine Department of Foreign Affairs didn't respond to a request to comment.

-- Chun Han Wong

---

ISLAMIC STATE

U.S. Sets Out Goals

For Protected Areas

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said the U.S. would work to establish "interim zones of stability" to protect refugees in Syria and Iraq as the international coalition against Islamic State works to retake territory from the extremist group.

"The United States will increase our pressure on ISIS and al Qaeda and will work to establish interim zones of stability, through cease-fires, to allow refugees to return home," Mr. Tillerson said, addressing the first meeting under the Trump administration of the 68-member coalition against Islamic State at the State Department.

The Trump administration has been exploring various proposals for establishment of protected areas, sometimes called safe zones, in Syria. The idea has been pushed by Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan but the Pentagon has long opposed the idea of creating heavily guarded zones because of the cost and military commitment required.

There is growing receptiveness among U.S. and international officials to the idea of setting up unofficial Syrian safe zones, which some officials have dubbed "interim de-escalation areas," along Syria's borders with Turkey and Jordan.

-- Felicia Schwartz

---

BELGIUM

A Year On, Concerns

Of New Attack Grow

U.S. and Belgian officials have grown increasingly worried about the prospect that a key figure behind the 2016 Brussels bombings is plotting a new terror attack, people briefed on the investigation said.

The Brussels bombings -- which killed 32 people and injured hundreds more, some with life-altering injuries -- took place one year ago. As the anniversary approached, anxiety has grown among some officials about a follow-up attack.

Investigators see Oussama Atar, a Belgian national who served time in Iraq's Abu Ghraib prison, as having the motivation and possibly the means to organize a new attack or carry one out himself.

Mr. Atar is believed to be in Syria and is likely to grow more desperate as pressure mounts on Islamic State there, officials said.

-- Julian E. Barnes

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170322ed3n0000h



US
Egyptian President Sisi to Visit Trump in April; Egypt has been intent on closer ties with the U.S.; the meeting will be the first between the two leaders

By Carol E. Lee  and Felicia Schwartz 
273 words
22 March 2017
19:32
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTONgyptian President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi will visit the White House on April 3 for a meeting with President Donald Trump, an administration official said Wednesday.

It will be the first meeting between the two leaders, who spoke days after Mr. Trump took office and agreed then on setting up a visit. They also spoke during the presidential transition after Mr. Trump won the November election, and met last fall during the presidential campaign.

Mr. Sisi has been intent on closer U.S. ties under the Trump administration, committing his help in countering terrorism. Mr. Trump in the January conversation pledged his full backing for Egypt.

Egypt is one of the largest recipients of U.S. military and foreign aid, getting about $1.5 billion a year Mr. Trump in his first federal budget has proposed a 31% cut in State Department and U.S. Agency for International Development funding, which stands to affect recipients.

State Department officials said the cuts, if approved by Congress, wouldn't affect funding to Israel, but that aid to other countries is being reviewed.

Write to Carol E. Lee at carol.lee@wsj.com and Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* \b ISIS\b0  Violence, Intimidation Escalate in Egypt's Sinai (March 1)

* Egypt Risks Middle-Class Ire as Cost of Living Soars (Feb. 12)

* Egypt Juggles Its Friendships as Russian Influence Surges (Oct. 13, 2016)

Document WSJO000020170322ed3m002mo



World
U.S. Increases Support for New Anti- ISIS  Operation in Syria; Pentagon provides airlift and artillery assistance, adding to advisory mission, but isn't conducting combat operations

By Gordon Lubold in Washington, Noam Raydan in Beirut and Ben Kesling in Washington 
832 words
22 March 2017
23:03
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. forces are providing airlift and artillery support for a newly launched operation in Syria, Pentagon officials said Wednesday, deepening American involvement in the conflict.

The U.S. has increased support for operations in and around the city of Tabqa, which includes the nearby Tabqa Dam, adding to the train-and-advise mission U.S. special operations forces have been providing for many months.

U.S. troops aren't conducting combat operations, a senior U.S. military official said, but operations like this one leave them more exposed to the dangers of combat.

A local antigovernment network said hundreds of U.S. troops and U.S.-backed Syrian fighters were observed arriving in the area, although U.S. military officials declined to say how many Americans are contributing to the mission.

Islamic State fighters have used Tabqa as a headquarters and held hostages there in the past, making the area a significant strategic gain, according to a Pentagon official. Planning for terrorist attacks elsewhere took place in Tabqa, and the area was home to terrorist training camps in the past, the official said.

The dam is also an important power source for northern Syria, home to a significant number of the country's agricultural resources, officials said, making the dam a linchpin for the area both strategically and economically.

"We are taking steps to ensure the integrity of the dam," the official said.

The operation, which began Tuesday, reflects another piece of the plan by U.S. and coalition forces to encircle the city of Raqqa, the de facto capital of Islamic State and the next major target, once control of the Iraqi city of Mosul is wrested from the Sunni extremist group.

The effort to take back Raqqa itself, which Islamic State has held for a number of years, likely won't begin for at least another month or two. Pentagon officials are still deliberating the best approach to take there, including whether to directly support Kurdish fighters.

Arming the Syrian Kurds, known as the YPG, and letting them take part in coming fights in Syria could come with a high political cost from Turkey, whose president, Recep Erdogan, views them a threat and considers them a terrorist group.

"He is adamantly opposed to them [Kurds] being a part of the retaking of Raqqa," said Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.), chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, at an event in Washington on Wednesday, adding that if the U.S. empowers the Kurds, "you have enormous challenge as far as relations with Turkey is concerned."

The costs could include access to the Incirlik Air Base in Turkey, which is used by the U.S. to launch operations in both Iraq and Syria and which Mr. Erdogan can use as a bargaining chip in any negotiations.

On Capitol Hill, U.S. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis appeared before a Senate panel and said he would like to see Congress update the Authorization for Use of Military Force, the law that allows operations in Syria and Iraq. He advocated for a renewed authorization with no time limit and no geographical limit on confronting groups like Islamic State.

The move in Syria came as international officials met in Washington to review their anti-Islamic State strategy. The U.S. is moving to increase the tempo of the fight, including through new authority for ground commanders and possibly additional troops. There now are about 5,000 U.S. service members in Iraq and about 500 in Syria.

Separately, Syrian opposition monitoring groups said Wednesday that coalition airstrikes struck a school sheltering homeless Syrians near Raqqa, killing at least 33 people.

The airstrike Monday represented a "new massacre committed by the U.S.-led coalition," said the U.K.-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. It didn't detail its claim.

The U.S.-led coalition said that it had "no indication" that its aircraft hit civilians near Raqqa on Monday, adding that a civilian casualty team would investigate the claim.

Last week, the Pentagon denied claims that U.S. manned aircraft and drones killed civilians in a strike targeting al Qaeda operatives near Aleppo.

Some 116 civilians have been killed in coalition airstrikes since March 8, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said, as the air campaign in support of U.S.-backed Kurdish rebels seeking to cut off Raqqa intensifies and President Donald Trump allows more aggressive strikes in Syria.

Tamer El-Ghobashy in Erbil, Iraq, contributed to his article.

Write to Gordon Lubold at Gordon.Lubold@wsj.com and Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Related

* \b ISIS\b0 -Safe Zones Planned

* Egypt President to Visit Trump in April

* Anti-\b ISIS\b0  Coalition Accused of Airstrike on Civilian Shelter in Syria

Document WSJO000020170322ed3m005eh

